THE SACRIFICE. A TRAGEDY.

By the Honorable Sir FRANCIS FANE, Knight of the BATH.

The Second Edition.

Quae poterunt unquam satis expurgare cicutae
Ni melius dormire putem, quam scribere Versus.
Hor. LONDON, Printed by I. R. for John Weld at the Crown between the Temple
Gates in Fleetstreet, MDCLXXXVII.

Licensed,

May 4. 1686. To. L'Estrange.

To the Right Honorable CHARLES EARL of Dorset and Middlesex, etc. Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Sussex.
My Lord,
HAving long since devoted my self to a Country Life, and wanting Patience to
attend the leisure of the Stage, I have adventured to exposed this Tragedy,
without Action; but I shall never be much ashamed of it, since it has had the
Honor of your Lordships Approbation, whose admirable Genius in Poetry, has long
since given you a just Title to preside over all Causes of that kind, and whose
Judgment never Errs, but when it is seduced by your Extraordinory Candor. Yet
to have a share in your Lordship's Mercy, rather than all the Clamorous
Applauses of the Vulgar, shall ever be esteemed a greater Honor to,

My Lord, Your Lordships most Obliged and Humble Servant, FRANCIS FANE.

TO THE AUTHOR.
WHen o'r the World the mild Augustus Reigned,
Wit's Empire too the Roman Poets gained:
So when the first auspicious James possessed
Our British World, and in Possessing blessed;
Our Poets wore the Laurels of the Age,
While Shakespeare, Fletcher, Johnson Crowned. the Stage
And tho our Caesar's since have raised the State,
Our Poetry sustains the Roman Fate.
In less Essays successful we have been,
But lost the Nobler Province of the Scene:
Perverters, not Reformers of the Stage,
Depraved to Farce, or more fantastic Rage.
How therefore shall we Celebrate thy Name,
Whose Genius has so well retrieved our Fame?
Whose happy Muse such Wonders can impart,
And temper Shakespeare's Flame with Johnson's Art.
Whose Characters set just Examples forth;
Mix Humane Frailties with Heroic Worth:
Shunning the Extremes in Modern Heroes seen,
Than God's more perfect, or more frail than Men.
With Reason, Nature, Truth our Minds you treat,
And show a Prince irregularly Great.
A generous Soul stormed by impetuous Love,
Which yet from Virtue's Center scorns to move.
Thus while the Hero does himself defeat,
Your Tamerlane is rendered truly GREAT,
When by his Troops whole Empires were o'rthrown,
'Twas Fortune's Work, this Conquest was his own.
Your Monarch rages in Othello's Strain,
Iago in Ragalzan lives again.
Not Hecuba like your Despina Raged,
Like Her, for Empire and a Monarchs Fate engaged*
With Iphigene your Fair Irene vies,
And falls a more lamented Sacrifice.
Your Style, tho just, subservient to the Thought;
Your Numbers in Majestic Plainness wrought.
Methinks I see the Pyrat-Wits of France
Already to this Noble Prize Advance:
An Artifice in which they most excel,
But still, the Sense they steal, they Husband well*
Thus Sir, they will melt your Oar, tho not Refine;
While each rich Thought of yours, each massey Line,
Drawn to French Wire shall through whole Volumes shine*
Accept our Thanks, tho you decline the Stage,
That yet you condescend the Press t'engage:
For while we thus possess the precious Store,
Our Benefit's the same, your Glory more;
Thus, for a Theater the World you find;
And your Applauding Audience, All Mankind.
N. TATE.
To Sir FRANCIS FANE, on his Admirable Play, the SACRIFICE.
WE have of late with heedless Scenes been fed,
With Plays fit only to be seen, not read,
As tho with Rochester all Sense were dead;
But when that Prince of Wit did yield to death,
As his best Legacy, he did bequeath
To you, his Friend, his great Poetic Power,
And in it named you for his Successor.
Strait Wit's great Council sat, that Critic Tribe,
Who did your Title to the Gift subscribe;
And by their Heralds did aloud declare
To all the World you were his lawful Heir*
And now to satisfy pretending Men,
You have confirmed your Title by your Pen.
For by your charming measures you have taught,
You do inherit that dear thing called Thought.
Cease then ye Factious Wits, and never dare
Attempt the Laurel from his Head to tare;
For whilst he does Wit's Glorious Scepter sway,
Ye cannot happier be than to obey;
And if against his Laws ye never rebel,
Both Italy and France,
We shall in Wit as well as Arms excel.
Then Sir, how much is due t'you from the Age
That you your Learned Thoughts should thus engage
Once more to send a Pattern to the Stage?
A Play correct, where Art and Nature's shown,
That Is self Existent, and depends on none;
Where Wit, like Souls in Bodies, by your Art
Is all in all, and all in every part.
Should Traitorous Whiggs but view the lasting Dress
That you have put on Ragalzan's Wickedness,
Tho hatred to the best of Kings they wear,
Yet all designs against him they would forbear,
Lest you should make them your next Character.
For well it is known that whatsoever you write
Will see the Sun till all things end in Night.
And tho these Villains Rope nor Ax do fear,
Yet everlasting Shame they cannot bear.
If happy Souls above can view the State
Of things below, Despina for her Fate
Will thank the Gods, now to her Virtuous Name,
Your well wrought Lines have given a happy Fame:
Irene too, that Pious Beauteous Prize
No more would blame the Effects of her dear Eyes,
Since by it she is become your Sacrifice.
JOHN ROBINS.
To the Honorable Sir FRANCIS FANE, On his Excellent Play, The Sacrifice.
LOng have our Priests condemned a Wicked Age
And every Little Critick's senseless rage,
Damned a forsaken, self-declining Stage.
Great, it is confessed, and many are our Crimes;
And no less profligate the Vicious Times.
But yet no wonder both prevail so Ill,
The Poets Fury, and the Preachers Skill.
While to the World it is so plainly known,
They blame our Faults, and never mind their own.
Let their Dull Pens flow with unlearned Spite,
And weakly Censure what the Skilful Write:
You, Learned Sir, a Nobler Pattern show
Our best of Rules, and best Example too.
Precepts and grave Instructions dully move;
The brave Performer better does Improve.
Thus in the truest Saryr you Excel,
And show how ill we Write, by Writing well.
This Noble Piece which well deserves your Name,
I Read with Pleasure, tho I Read with Shame.
The tender Laurels which my Brows had dressed,
Flag'd like young Flowers by too much Heat oppressed:
The Generous Fire I felt in every Line,
Showed me the cold, the feeble Force of mine.
Henceforth I Will you for Imitation choose,
Your Nobler Flights will wing my Callow Muse.
So the young Eagle is informed to fly,
Seeing the Monarch Bird ascend the Sky,
And tho with less Success, her Strength she will try.
Spreads he^ soft Wings, and his vast Tract pursues,
Tho far above the Towering Prince she views.
Where the whole Work is so Divinely wrought,
The Rules so just, and so sublime each Thought,
With such strict Art your Scenes in order placed,
With Wit so new, and so uncommon Graced;
In vain, Alas! I should attempt to tell
Where, or in what, your Muse does most excel.
Each Character performs its Noble Part,
And stamps its Image on the Readers Heart.
In Tamerlane you a true Hero dressed:
A Generous Conflict wars within his Breast:
It Is there the Mightiest Passions you have showed:
By turns confessed the Mortal and the God!
VVhene're his steps approach the haughty Fair,
He bows indeed, but like a Conqueror;
Compelled to Love, yet scorns his servile Chain,
And spite of all you make the Monarch Reign.
But who without resistless Tears can see?
The Bright, the Innocent Irene dye.
Axalla's Life a Noble Ransom paid,
In vain to save the dear Loved Charming Maid.
Naught surely could, but your own Flame inspire
Your happy Muse to reach so soft a Fire.
Yet with what Art you turn the powerful Stream,
When Treacherous Ragalzan is the Theme!
Youmix our different Passion with such skill,
We feel'em All, and all with Pleasure feel:
We love his Mischiefs, tho the Harms we grieve,
And for his Wit, the Villain we forgive.
In your Despina all those Passions meet,
Which Woman's Frailties perfectly complete:
Pride, and Revenge, Ambition, Love, and Rage
At once her wilful haughty Soul Engage:
And while her Rigid Honor we Esteem,
The dire Effects as justly must condemn.
She shows a Virtue so severely Nice,
As has betrayed it to a pitch of Vice,
All which confess a Godlike Power in you,
Who could form Woman to her self so true.
Live, Mighty Sir, to reconcile the Age,
To the first Glories of the useful Stage:
It Is you her rifled Empire may restore,
And give her Power she never could boast before.
A. BEHN.
Dramatis Personae.
Tamerlane the Great. Bajazet, Emperor of the Turks. Axalla, General to
Tamerlane. Ragalzan, one of Tamerlane's Chief Officers; a Villain. Zeylan, a
Revolted Prince of China. Irene, Tamerlane's Daughter. Despina, Bajazet's Wife.
Philarmia, Zeylan's Mistress. Priests, An Astrologer, Captains, Soldiers, and
Attendants.
SCENE, a Revolted Fort in China. THE SACRIFICE.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Pavilion, with the prospect of a besieged Fort. Enter Tamerlane, Ragalzan,
Axalla. Tam. HAS Europe, Asia, Afric felt the Charms
Of my Victorious, but Indulgent Arms,
And shall a soft Chinese Prince still dare
Not to seek out his Glory by despair,
Shake off those gracious Fetters which were sent
By me, from Heaven, to be his Ornament,
Which his great King puts on, and wears with pride?

Rag. At unknown Virtues Salvages are frighted.


Tam. The Conquerors of Persia, Macedon,
The Lords of Caesar's reverence my Throne;
Clear from the rising, to the setting Sun:
What Alexander near could reach, I won:
Had he subdued to the Chinensian Shore,
Then with some reason he had wept for more;
But, like a froward Child, at Meals too great,
He cried for want of Stomach, not of Meat.

Rag. Sir, from Iapan, to the Atlantic Main,
The World lies fettered in your glorious Chain:
Whose Life and Influence in the Heavens is felt,
As upon Earth the spangled Milky Belt.

Tam. Soft, good Ragalzan; we are mortal too:
Heaven cuts out work, which I alone can do.

Axal. I Am glad the Emperor swallows not the Pill:
Who offers too much Good, contrives some Ill.

[aside. Tam. Had Caesar lived, I had taught that Rebel Peace;
And lashed the straggling Demy-God to Greece,
Whose business was t'enslave, but not Reform;
I Have cleans'd the World, and brushed it like a Storm.
To purge the World from Sots, and simp'ring Knaves,
To chain Vile Monarchs, and Crown worthy Slaves,
Is my great Task on the reversed Earth.

Axal. Thanks to your Great, but Heav'n-befriended Birth.

Tam. Right, brave Axalla. Think not that I swell,
Or have out-grown the Robes Heaven dressed me in:
If I in terms so high my Conquests raise,
It is not mine, but my Inspirer's praise.

Enter a Chancellor with a Seal, takes his Seat; then a Master of Ceremonies,
ushering in Ambassadors with Presents. Mr. Cer. The Grecian Emperor kisses your
Footstool.

Chan. The mighty Tamerlane accepts his Offering.

Mr. Cer. The Persian Emperor, etc.

Chan. The mighty, etc.

Mr. Cer. The Emperor of China, etc.

Chan. The mighty, etc.

Mr. Cer. The Russian Emperor, etc.

Chan. The mighty, etc.

Mr. Cer. Two and twenty African Kings beg admission.

Tam. Let the Kings wait till the Afternoon.
Where Is the Memorial? Read it on, Axalla.

Ax. Daramnes, Tigranel, and Crantor.

Tam. My Fathers old Captains: Let them have considerable Pensions, besides
Pay; and the first Commands that fall.


Ax. Isfendlar, Tachretin, and Germean Ogli.


Tam. Rich Noblemen: Let them be employed in places of Honor and Magnificence,
they may support themselves.


Ax. Haly Mordecai.


Tam. Ha! A man that opposes me; not for the public good, but to be taken off
by preferment: let him be advanced to the Gallows.


Ax. Burranes and Garrulan.


Tam. Men of more Sail then Ballast; Impudent, shallow Intruders: Let 'em be
banished the Court. Princes, for the most part, keep the worst Company.


Ax. Close waiting argues no sufficiency; but rather still,
For want of other merits, they pay you with
Offensive diligence.

Tam. Right. Fools are fittest for Dumb-shows:
While wiser men grow faint to feed on Glances.

Ax. Arcanes, Cardamel, and Rozarno.

Tam. Persons of great Wit, Honor, and Integrity: Let 'em be advanced
immediately; there can be no places too good for 'em.

I love not to force Grounds; but sow my Favors
In fertile Soils, and my returns never fail me:
It Is pity Virtue should want stuff to work on,
Or languish with Ignoble Aliments.

Ax. Comets at first are but Terrestrial Vapors:
But, when preferred into the upper Region,
They shine out bright, and there turn glorious Wonders,
Because they are of a pure and fiery substance:
While the dull Clouds ungratefully obscure
The Sun that raised 'em.

Tam. Are there no more men that I can do good to?

Ax. The Prince of Tanais.

Tam. Let him Command over all, next to thy self:
A man of great Conduct, Courage, and Clemency.
Give me the man that is made up like a Caesar,
And he shall be one; but no Tamerlane.
The Scene opens to Bajazet'^ Cage* Tamerlane goes to him. Why will you still
afflict me, Sir, to see
Your malice frustrate all my Clemency.
Like a soft Ball against a stony ground,
Back to my self my benefits rebound.
Heaven knows your Brothers Blood, your Subjects Tears,
Called loud for Vengeance to my tender Ears.
Heaven turned the Scales, and ordered for your share
That punishment you did for me prepare.
Reign with more Justice, and resume your Throne.

Baj. Now, others Scorn; then I should be my own,
Should I, proud wandering Tartar, take from Thee
One Inch of ground, one thought of Liberty:
Could I be ground to Atoms, and each Grain
Might have a Soul made up to dye again;
Thy Terrors should not make me own thy Laws,
Nor owe Contentment of so vile a Cause.
I live for my own sake, and thee De^ie:
When I think fit, I Will cheat thy Pride, and Dye.

(Stamps.) Tam. It Is strange, he should not seek to ease his Fate!
He cannot bear, and yet desires the weight.
Enter Irene. Here, my Axalla, take my fair Irene:
Now pay thy self for all thy services,
Out of this Treasury of Excellence.
It Is a reward assigned thee from above,
For firm Allegiance and Seraphic Love.

Ax. Should Bounteous Heaven such Presents often make,
It would more largely give, than Man could take:
Nor could my Earthy Soul bear such delight,
But that, like Heaven, you raised it to that Height.

Iren. Just Heav^ns forbid, that I should leave so soon
The serene pleasures of a Virgin Life,
For all the Joys of that unknown Condition.

Tam. I know, dear Saint, Axalla does instill
The Christian Faith, which mor^ifies the Will,
And sets the Mind above all Earthly care;
But, it is not fit the World should want an Heir.

Iren. Nor is it fit, we should devote our selves
To those, by vulgar Error, Nuptial Joys,
Till all the World lies prostrate at your Feet,
And spurns no more at your illustrious Yoke.

Tam. The World is cared for; but Axalla dies,
My sweet Irene: Would thou have me lose
My worthiest General, for want of such
An easy Medicine? These doubts, Axalla,
In private must be cleared by you, or none:
Reasons for Love, are best when Love's alone.

[Exeunt. Rag. Solus. It Is as I thought: She Is lost: 'Twas well divined,
And to the Foe the Letter not ill sent.
Zeylan will sound a point of War, to grace
The worthy Nuptials of this well-pair'd Hero.
What Soul can bear such unheap'd loads of Scorn?
Gods, lend me patience for some drowsy minutes,
By your revengeful selves, I Will send the Drug back
With full career, lest your vexed Powers should want it,
And from my Fingers snatch the longed-for Prey.
My Love rejected, and my Service slighted,
And the great Heiress of the World bestowed
Upon an Infidel, a Fugitive Italian;
Because, forsooth, he can tell Stories of one Caesar,
A Servant to the petty State of Rome!
Indeed, this Caesar was a pretty Fellow
To make a Bridge of Boats, or pick a hole
In an old mouldring Wall, and sling the Stones
On the besieged: to give him's due, he might
Have made a pretty Scout for our Tartarian Army.
But shall such puny Lessons give directions
To him that leads Twelve hundred Thousand men,
And has destroyed a Hundred nobler Towns
Than babbling Rome, in the Celestial China,
While I conducted his Victorious Troops?
And is this my Reward? The great Destroyer
Therefore will I destroy, and in his Ruin
Revenge the Conquered World, and therein found my Fame;
If not the best, yet in the loudest Name.

Ex. The Scene the inner part of a Fort. Zeylan, attended with Officers. Zey.
Are the Men all drawn up?

Cap. Ready to March,
And pressing to engage; as eager Lovers
After long delays, or Hypocrites
After a formal Fast, that whets more than
Subdues, urging to pay with sinful Interest
The mortified receiver of Life's Rents.

Zey. It Is well. But let me read this once again.

Enter Philarmia. The mighty Tamerlane lies at your mercy. Nothing is weaker
than secure Greatness. On the South side of his Camp you may break in, up to
his own Pavilion. Make use of the sudden opportunity, by the advice of

Your unknown Friend. Phil. What Stratagem, what wonderful Device,
My worthy, frowning, speechless General,
That I am not thought worthy to partake of?
Are Women then presumed to keep no secrets,
Because they never yet confessed the Truth,
And, with a thousand little Arts, conceal
The Friend of Nature, Love, from silly searching Man
With an Heroic impudent Modesty?
Can they be secret still to curb their pleasures,
And cannot hold their Tongues to save their Lives?
Come, Sir, you have received a Letter from the Enemy:
I see your Men prepared; I Will sally with you.

Zey. Go, dearest, go, and leave me to my Fate;
The Sword has no Commission to destroy
Thy sacred Sex, but feeds on courser fare:
Dangers and business are cut out for Men;
Women are spared, to Stock the World again.

Phil. Shall I outlive thee then? or can I do it?
Are not our Threads so closely spun together,
The same hand breaks them? do thou love thy Fame
And envy mine? Are Women only made
To stock the Dunghill Earth; pull highborn Souls
From native Seats and give them fleshly Dungeons?
No, no: thou may as easily divorce
The loving Elements from each others sides,
As me from thine. Go bid the churlish Earth
Shake off the Amorous Sea, that clings so close
About her ^linty Breast: Go bid the Female Air,
That is incorporate with Litigious Fire,
Withdraw her temperate alimental Aid
In his Victorious unresisted marches.

Zey. But, my Philarmia, should some boistrous hand
Pluck up this lovely Flower, where dwells all sweetness,
Beauty in abstract, Light original;
Should some rough Mortals, with their Impious arms,
Deface this well drawn Image of Divinity,
To which all others are but Counterfeits;
Or with rude Weapons force the Ivory doors
Of this thy sacred Temple, to let out
The fair Inhabitant, thy precious Soul,
With her bright Handmaids, Beauty, Wit, and Virtue:
The Sun, that borrows Beams of thee, would lose
Its Light and Influence, and the World go blindfold,
Nature would sicken, the Creation dye.
Alas! thou constable not ward a fatal blow,
Nor force thy way through woods of walking Steel:
Why will thou wound me through thy feeble sides?

Phil. Oh, but you are too bold! I can foresee
Those dangers, through the perspective of Fear,
Which blinding Valor, like a hot Catarrh,
Deprives your sight of: Honor betrays you
To perilous steps, which Women's cold Complexion
And frightful apprehensions are aware of
But if, inspight of all my watchful cares,
You are involved amidst your desperate Foes;
I Will interpose, like Clouds before the Sun,
And steal thee from'em. If I drop to Earth,
Dissolved in Tears and Blood; 'twas but a useless vapor:
If I am lost; a Fond, but worthless Female:
No Fate to me can too untimely come;
Who may be killed abroad, must dye at home.

(Weeps.) Zey. Oh, stop those Tears, lest thou unman me too,
Till I Am exposed to hissing Contumelies
Of Maids and Matrons, and abhorred by thee
That caused my Shame. Alas! thy Honor lies
In seeking Safety, more than ours in Danger:
Nor can the greatest Acts, Achieved by thy
Unnatural Valor, wipe off half the Stains
That rude Mankind will cast on thy white Innocence
For herding with 'em.

Phil. Why art thou then so good, so gently kind?
Thy Soul's not made up of such course materials.
If thou refuse me, I Will to the other side:
I Will kill all those that offer to kill thee,
Till I have quite destroyed the unnumber'd Armies
Of the Earth-covering and confounding Tamerlane,
And all the World his Subjects, but thy self;
Then I will fight with thee, and thou shall kill me,
And, if thou can forbear to dye, live after.

Zey. Thou have o'rcome: Reason has lost the Day,
That useless part of Man, till Love's away.

[Exeunt. The Scene Tamerlane's Tents. Ragl. Now is the time: Prince Zeylan's
on the Wing,
And he shall seize his Prey; thanks to his unknown Friend.
A lesser loss than her, could never have raised
Revenge so high as his Ingratitude.
Honor, that wavering Judge, here interposes,
Which turns to every Tale: Honor, that spins
Fine curious Paralels, that never meet:
What says she then? First, I must right my self;
And then, not wrong the Public. Rare distinction!
Public! fine Canting word, the Public! Are my Arms,
Or Legs, joined to the Public? Am I in pain
When this Man's hanged, that Torturd? Do I eat
The less, when this Man starves? Or when he is Froze
Or burnt, do I feel that by my Fire side or Grotto?
But, each man's private good lurks in the Public?
Then, each man take his part, and where is the Public?
Oh, but the Public is the Storehouse! No:
Rather the Jayl, that keeps men's private goods
Confined. I Will get mine out, and set the rest on fire.
My private Pleasure is my well-known Sovereign good:
To Obey and gratify each strong Impulse
Of Friendly Nature. What makes the Public? Power.
And what destroys the Public? Why, Power again.
Then let this Power dispose the Public still;
My private Will shall rule that angry Power.

Enter Tamerlane, Axalla, Irene. Alarm within, and Clashing of Swords. Tam.
What means this noise!

Mess. The Enemy is entered,
And has repulsed your Guards. Prince Zeylan's coming to This Tent.

Iren. For Heavens sake, Sir,
Be gone into this inner Room: there is a backdoor to it.

Tam. Is Zeylan come? I Will to my Rebel Guards,
And teach the adventurous Rebel to be tamer.

[Exeunt. Alarm without, Fighting on the Stage. Zeylan is beat off. Re-enter
Tamerlane, Axalla, Ragalzan. Tam. What a bold Rebel's this! No more of mercy,
Since it is despised; Axalla,
Give order for a general Assault:
I Will to the Temple, and give thanks to Heaven
For this success.

[Ex. with Axalla. Rag. But I Will be there before you;
To just Revenge, one disappointment shall
Not stop my Progress: Now I Will trust my self.
I know the Mummy Priest, a cunning fellow;
By's Nature much, but by's profession more:
He Is one of those that deal 'twixt Gods and Men,
A Commerce yet well never understood,
And so they Cheat accordingly.
But has Revenge such powerful pleasing Charms?
Receiving Good, 'sa Toy to doing Harms.
Revenge, the Gods best Dish, their close-kept Dainty*
It Is their Ambrosia, not to be tasted
By grovelling Mortals; and forbid to all,
But bold Promethean Souls; borrowing, because
Able to re-imburse the Gods again
With lofty Passions of immortal Wrath.
Equally powerful still are Contraries:
Hate's the reverse of Love; Revenge is hates fruition:
Nor do I know what is sweetest, or to have
My Mistress in my Bed, My Foe in's Grave.

The Scene the outer part of a Temple. Enter Tamerlane, Axalla, Ragalzan. Tam.
I like their Temples, but I loath their Idols:
To all those Beings, that our Senses reach not,
Forms are injurious; much more to the Greatest.

Ax. I hate no less weak superstitious Fools;
Who, with fond Attributes, the eternal Being
Reproach, and make more Antic than Mankind.
Like Boys, they fear the Bugbears that they dress.

Tam. True. Heaven delights more in the sweet variety
And liberty of thought, than Slanderous Piety:
As a great Monarch him to favor chooses
Who pleasant, but well-manner'd freedom uses,
But hates a sour, tho an obedient Clown
Who loves his Smiles, less than he fears his Frown;
So Heaven's great Soul, dressed in impervious Rays,
The Object of our Wonder and our Praise,
Laughs at our holy Gambols from above:
But those do chiefly his affection move
Who play in's Beams with a well-guessing Love,
For the Great Nature takes delight, to see
The Football* play of Human Sophistry,
Nor willing to be known, loves Men should doubt,
Guess at his Riddles, but not find them out.

Music. Ragalzan appears at a corner of the Stage, with a Priest. Rag. What, am
I well disguised?

Priest. Mummy it self, Sir.
Here is a Vault, and here is the Trap-door to it;
It has a thousand Labyrinths within,
Not made for nothing: Let 'em search till Doomsday,
They Will never find you. Pugh! the Western Priests
Are not the only Laughers at Mankind.

[Exit, with Ragalzan who takes his place among the Mummies. The Scene opens,
and discovers an Amphitheatre of Crowned Mummies. Iren. These Mummies are more
Curious and Magni^icent Than those we saw at Cairo.

Ax. And much more numerous:
Which answers not amiss, to the prodigious space
Of time, supposed by their Chronology.

Tam. Of all the Arts that short-breathed Man affects
To patch and piece up ruinous Humanity,
Aping of Immortality in Dust
Sure is the noblest.

Ax. Yet they are Death's Trophies.
It Is strange, that Man should glory to be conquered,
And boast his losses to all after Ages.

Tam. Proud of his pickled Principality,
When Fame finds nothing in his life, to blow
Her Trumpet for, and wake the listening World.

Ax. And Fame's as false: Cheats us of present Sums,
The daily Rents of Pleasure and of Ease,
To pay in Honor's Airy dry Reversion,
And disputable Titles; Good, or ill,
By dead men unperceived, by the living undistinguished.

Enter Mummy Priest, habited like a Conjurer, etc. Priest. Greatest of
Emperors, draw near, and see
The richest Wardrobe of Mortality
The world affords: Here stand Time-daring Mummies
Of China Monarchs for ten Thousand years.
Should I relate you all, their Deaths and Lives,
Their Arms, their Arts, their Children, and their Wives,
'Twou'd tire your patience, or to hear, or see,
And Conquer, Sir, your Magnanimity.

Tam. Troth, I believe thee. What a Canting Tone,
And what a monstrous Tale!

Ax. They 've long Traditions;
And Lie by old Records as well as Hear-says.

Tam. No, no. Printing has been here in use some Thousand
of years, no wonder they have so many Lies.
Whose Mummy's this?

Priest. This is Viteio,
The builder of an University,
Who lived one hundred and Fifty years.

Iren. And whose is this?

Priest. Ochanti; the Inventer of Printing.

Iren. And this?

Priest. Tzinzummey. The Inventer of
Gunpowder: that frighted hence a certain rambling Prince,
Called Alexander, from the Oxidrace;
Which he, good Man, mistook for Thunder, and
For Lightning.

Tam. A small excuse would serve a Western Conqueror.
This crook-back'd Prince here?

Priest. Huy Hannon.
He that found out the Philosophers Stone.

Tam. And this?

Priest. Pintatei: his unfortunate Successor, that lost it.

Ax. This fellow Drolls.

Tam. No; it is their Tradition.

Iren. Who is this here?

Priest. Auchosan. He that invented
Wagons, to Sail with the Wind.

Axalla walks forward Tam. Are all your Princes then Philosophers?

Priest. No. But whosoever finds an admirable Art,
Is strait made Governor of some wealthy Province,
And his Invention is a^crib'd unto
The King, whose Reign he lived in.

Tam. Hansome exchange, and nourishment for Virtue!

Priest. Here stands the great Tzionzon, builder of the Wall.

Iren. He stares, and turns about his head. Oh horrid!

Tam. It Is strange!

Priest. Marvel not, Sir; it is usual with him:
He seems offended at your Conquests here.

Ragalzan leaps down, Stabs at Tamerlane: Irene interposes. He and the Priest
leap down the Trap-door. Tam. Treason! My Guards! What, vanished through this
door?

Ax. Ha! What Is the matter? where is the Mummy-shower?

Tam. Ah, Generous Girl! Art thou not hurt, Irene?

Iren. No, not at all. The Dagger struck upon this Bracelet
Here, of Beads.

Tam. A piece of Piety well placed: Thanks be to Heaven.
Enter Guards. The fellow was in haste.

Ax. Where is the Villain?
Guards, go search him out,

Tam. It Is to no purpose: they have endless Vaults.
Excellent Maid! how durst thou interpose
Thy tender Limbs, that elsewhere art afraid
Of thy own Shadow;

Iren. It was my Duty, Sir, and my Desire
To save your Life, tho ransomed by my own,

Tam. Never was Child so fond, and so indearing!
When at the Siege of Bagdat, in my Tents
A Saracen, with an envenomed Knife,
Had Stabbed me in the Arm, the subtle Poison
Hasting through all the Crimson Salliports
To reach the Throne of Life:
She strait, with greedy Piety sucked out,
And with her Balmy breath healed up the part,
Which all the helps of bold, but needy, Art
Had never effected.

Ax. I have heard the Story;
And she untainted. Who can hurt an Angel?
I know, I feel her Virtues. But, what mean you?
Shall I not fetch more Soldiers?

Tam. It Is work for a whole Regiment: go call 'em,
And let them scou^ the Vaults for many Miles,
And seize on all those wretched Priests they meet with.
I Will turn their Idol Temples all to Mosques,
Or Christian Churches: The Devil here is Worshipped
In greater State, than elsewhere his Creator.
All Impious Priests are vile, but weak dissemblers;
They brave the Gods, but purblind Mortals fear:
Juglers, that in Seared Mouths take holy Fire,
In whom Religion, Physic of the Mind,
By which true Souls are purged, and refined,
Grows so familiar that it never works,
But feeds ill Humors, and like Venom urks.

Enter Soldiers. 1 Sol. We shall have brave Plund'ring and Firing here!
Heigh Boys!

2 Sol. I; and hanging up these Conjuring Priests.

3 Sol. For my part, I do not like this Sacrilege.

4 Sol. Why, is it Sacrilege, to take away
That which was given in God's name, to the Devil's use?

3 Sol. Ha! God-Almighty made a Trustee for the Devil!
Nay, then have at 'em. Searches, and is frighted.

The Soldiers search; Devils meet 'em at one hole, and fright'em, then another:
then flashes of Lightning and Smoke. The Scene shuts. ACT II. SCENE I.
The out-part of the Fort: Tamerlane's Tents on the other side. Enter
Philarmia, Zeylan. Phil. 'TWas bravely done! one of your worthy Spoils,
To catch the Scythian Lion in your Toils,
Than let him go! Seemed it to your great Mind
So small a Prize, Great Tamerlane to have joined
To Bajazet, and in one Cage confined?
The Scourge and Terror of the World to have tamed,
And for his Conquest of the Globe been famed?
All for a Complement! a Barbarous glance
From a She- Tartar!

Zeyl. 'Twas the effect of Chance:
For, while I paid Irene short Respects,
For thy sake only, honoring thy Sex,
The Emperor escaped. But, is it not Jealousy,
That envious Dream, that avaritious Monster,
That would have more than all, that fills thy Mind
With such unkind expostulations! Tell me.
By Heavens thou wound'st me with ten Thousand Arrows
Sharper than Death, Dishonor, Pains Infernal!
How can my Heart, brim full of theee, receive
Another in? Can the whole World, with all
It Is glittering Trifles, and Deluding Joys,
Add ought to my possession, having thee?
Or can the Gods, with unexhausted Stocks
Of Benefits, reach down a greater blessing
To charm my Soul, or pull up my Ambition
Into a higher Sphere, than thy Embraces?
What have I more to wish or pray for? Speak.

Phil. I Jealous! what of you? For which of your Perfections
Your Valor, or your Prudence? No, no; but I Am ashamed
To own so false a Creature. Farewell.
You man of War: I Will try your mettle.
Exit. He strives to stay her: she breaks from him.
Zey. Nay, stay, and hear me.
Pray Heaven our Loves prove not unfortunate;
This Girls so rash and daring, and so Jealous,
So easily provoked, headstrong, and sudden:
Tho soft as Prayers when pleased, and passionately
Tender, when she perceives her error.
My Soul aches for thee, tho I cannot guide thee.
[Exit.
Enter Ragalzan Rag. Strange disappointment this too! yet I find
There Is no suspicion of my Treason. Nothing
To Holy Villainy! Am I a Saint, or not?
The Saint and Devil differ in Man so little,
Those open barefaced Mortals look as simply
As naked Dogs, or new-shorn Sheep, exposed
To the Injuries and Scorn of all Mankind:
While I, like visiting Angels, kill unseen.
Here I lie round, and close, as sleeping Serpents:
He that treads on me, Feels before he Sees me.
Enter Tamerlane. Now to my post: I must draw near, and flatter.

Tam. It Is time my bus'nes of the World were done:
Or this Cameleon Fortune may change colors,
And Tarnish all my Glories. Why was I
Now so unhappy to escape this blow?
Then I had died in time, and ripe for Fate,
With all my Triumphs waiting on my Hearse.

Rag. aside. I Am sorry for it indeed, Sir.


Tam. Methinks, I find a boding of some mischief,
Which threatens, more than Thousand Lives, my Fame.

Enter Axalla. Ax. The fair Despina is arrived, and begs to be
Admitted: And I hear, she hates
Th'unfortunate, like Cleopatra; hoping
To be the object of your choice. Your late
Severity to her harsh Husband, she
Counts as a piece of Courtship done to her.

Tam. Have thou now known me, Friend, so many years,
And did thou ever find my easy heart
Melt at a Woman's Face? Those many Thousand
Wives, Virgins, Widows, all my Supplicants,
Moved me no more, than Pictures do a Statue
That stands upon its Basis.
No; I am Beauty-proof: Bring in the little Image,
Made up of little Arts, and lesser Charms;
I Will blow 'em off.

Ax. This Conquest over your self
Out-does the Caesar's more than all your Triumphs.

Tam. Why talk thou of these petty Lords of Rome?
What is their Carthage, or Numantia,
To Nanquin, Pequin, Mosco, Cambalu,
Casbin, and Cairo, and Constantinople,
Quinzay, and Babylon, Dehli, and Agra?
And can thou think my Soul can yield to Charms
Which wrought upon those idle-headed Caesar's,
Who in Triumphant Cars, like Flies on wheels,
Assumed the Glory of that little dust
Which their Crampt Empire raised in several Ages?
When I alone have won more Worlds, than e're
They knew or thought of.

Rag. They set some Scriblers to out-lye the World,
And dressed their Roman Eagles up, to Soar
Like Paper Kites, to amuse the wandering Vulgar*
And yet the very Plat-forms of your Conquests
Would cover all the Earth they ever fought for.

Tam. My Actions are too great for all Records,
They tire Narrations, baffle formal Words.

Ax. Right, Sir; but own the Cause. This Vanity
Sticks close, like Ivy to the noblest Plants.

Tam. True, my Axalla; but should I speak less,
I should detract from Heaven, that threw these Favors
Upon my worthless Person.

Enter Despina. Ax. Here she comes:
Now be your self, and His that made you great.

Tam. Ha! What flash of Lightning's this, that strikes my Breast?
Then Fame has once spoke true; a Glorious Form!
But I must be my self; nay, more, appear
Churlish and Cruel, to keep off vain hopes.

Desp. Great Sir, to whom wise Heaven the World designed,
kneeling. As a just Tribute to your greater Mind;
Long may you Reign, if Bajazet may live:
A Grant which Heaven alone, and You, can give.
We cancel all the Rights that Fortune gave,
And Life alone, the gift of Nature, crave:
Show the same mercy you had wished to find,
If Fortune had to Him, not You, been kind.

Tam. Do as you would be done to, Rules no State;
Nor yet is Nature's Law: for in close competitions
Where Life's at Stake, if you do not destroy
Your Rival's Life, your own you cannot enjoy;
Yet none would grant to let himself be slain,
Tho by his death another life did gain.
My Case is clearer, just in all men's Sense,
To kill your Husband in my own defense:
Which is no more than he would do by me,
Or ought to do, if he secure would be.

Desp. High Confidence over Policy prevails;
When great Souls meet, low-founded Reason fails:
Brave Sympathy does Interest disdain;
Or it is an Interest of a nobler Strain,
To please themselves by pleasings all their gain.

Tam. You talk of Friends, or Lovers, lukewarm Mortals
That have not heat enough t'inflame themselves
With high-flown Thoughts, and Self determined Actions:
Give me Ambi^ion that is never extinguished,
Yet feeds upon it self; burns like the Sun
In its own Center unconsum'd,
And Warms or Scorches, whom it please, at distance.
Souls that are inaccessible, and high,
Are strictest followers of the Deity:
Humble Mankind copies the Low Creation,
And makes the tamest Animals their Guides;
Out ^done still by the Strong and wise ones.

Desp. Should Gods destroy all Men that them provoke,
They must Create, to make their Altars Smoke;
If all were killed that do affect your Throne,
King without Subjects, you would Reign alone
A Monarch wrapped in Contemplation:
To a hastening Son, or nature-urging Wife,
To some brave Brutes, or King-contemning Flies,
And Death will come by Siege, if not Surprise.
Was all the World for your vain Self designed?
Or, if it be the Interest of Mankind
To have you dye, why do you wish to live,
When Social Joys you neither take nor give!

Tam. How bold her Reason! how Divine her Face!
What do I feel? some strange, but Cordial heat:
Some Passion shakes my Reason from her Seat.

Desp. The Road to Fame's to try unpractic'd ways;
From common Methods, rises common Praise:
Blood has to Glory ever been a Cheat;
Let Mercy make you Famous, Safe, and Great.
When Fortune shares so much in each event,
Distraining Mortals goods for Heavenly Rent,
Prudence in vain a Monarchs Life protects:
Counsels inspired produce the best effects.

Tam. It Is time to fly!
Madam, you argue well: Let time digest
My thoughts, and ripen them for your request.

Ex. severally. Rag. If I remember well my former frailties,
This discomposure in the Prince, is Love:
If it be so, there is enough to work on.
Other attempts are Dangerous, Rash, Uncertain:
This flattering distemper works as sure
Destruction: he shall be his own Tormentor;
His Life and Fame shall languish e're he dies.
I Will strait to Bajazet, who loves this Wife
More than his Empire; tell him, She Is already
In Tamerlane's embraces: That in him,
Will work some fatal Passion; and in her,
Revenge as desperate.
[Exit.
Re-enter Tamerlane. Tam. To Arms, to Arms, my Soul; and stop the passage
To this weak Enemy. Love, thou poor trifle of
Unactive Minds, drowsy Divinity,
Music for Maids or Madmen,
Thou pinching Play-fellow, tickling Tormentor;
Thou fawning Cutthroat Beggar, hence, begone,
My Breast affords no settlement for Vagrants:
Go to some Silken Persian, soft Italian,
To limber Courtiers, callow beardless Boys;
Go ^ind some lazy Epi^ure, whose Soul
Lives in his Dish, and thence by Transmigration,
Lives in his Wench, and when that short-lived pleasure
Expires, is bo^n a new to Wine and Surfeits.
How dare thou seek for room in my full Mind,
In which the U^iverse lies crammed with all its cares,
Where every Virtue harbors for protection,
And every Vice waits for a Reformation?
And yet, methinks I see the blind ragg'd Boy
Laughing the tottering Globe out of my hand:
It must not, shall not be. He comes, he comes
Again, and warms my Breast with his false Fires.
Captains, let loose the World, that I may once more Conquer't;
Strike off the Chains from all my fettered Princes,
Let 'em Rebel, and find out Manly troubles
To shake off these: Let Business outdo Reason.
Go build more Ships, sea^ch out some Savage Corner
That Nature hides, or evil Spiri^s guard,
From Manners, or Religion; there I Will go
Subdue, Reform: Let Mankind once more prove
How much my Glory does o^^-^^igh my Love.

The Scene a Prison. Bajazet in his Cage; Ragalzan, Iaylo^^. Rag. It is too
true:
The Emperor has denied her to come near you.

Baj. And did I live so long, only to see her?

Rag. Nay, more than that, This night She is designed
For his Embraces.

Baj. Death! Furies! Hell! Damnation! Fires! and Flames!
You Sacred Bugbears, false invented names,
To fright Mankind into Religious Fits;
Where is the Justice of the Sacred Writs?
You Rascal Mahomet* am I thus requited?
My Prayers, my Services, my Off rings slighted?
Is this your thanks? I scorn thee, you are a Cheat;
I made thee Holy, but to make me Great:
Thou brok'st the Contract first. Where is thy Love?
Where is thy Interest with the Powers above?
If such there be, what cross events they give,
That I, who scorn to Reign, am forced to live?

Rag. Majestic Blasphemy! It works most bravely.

Iayl. What says the Prince?

Rag. He does Blaspheme and Rave,
Talks something that is Wicked, and is Brave:
Like modern Heroes.

Baj. See, see! She comes all glorious to the Bed
Of Barbarous Tamerlane, designed to breed
A race of running Tartars! Merciless Gods,
I cannot, will not bear it.

[Knocks his head against the Cage. Rag. So I Will be gone.
Jailer, go help him forwards, I Will prefer thee:
It Is time his mouth were stopped; the vile Blasphemer!
It is the Emperor wills it.

Iayl. Then it is done, Sir.

Rag. 'T will make mad work, in faith! Now She 'labhor
Great Tamerlane, and do some worthy Mischief,
And I shall be her Confident; for, if
The Emperor Loves, Axalla will decline
The scandalous Office: I shall guide the Intrigue:
For still I sooth his proud o'reweening Spirit
To his Destruction. Fool, to think such blows
Can be forgot, or salv'd with Balmy Flattery!
Injuries are Immortal; kept alive
By those that give, no less than those that take'em:
One justly hopes, the other fears Revenge,
Purchasing Safety by a second blow.
Tame Christians court Affronts: Let him not live,
And worship Mahomet, that can forgive.
Exit.
Axalla, Irene. Ax. Do You hear the news?

Iren. What, of my Fathers Love?

Ax. Nay, more than that; The death of Bajazet:
Just now found dead in's Cage, wallowing in's Blood.

Iren. It Is strange! I Am sure 'twas not my Father's act.

Ax. I cannot tell: this Love will change a man
As much as a new Faith; and Proselytes
At their admission are enjoined great Tasks.
Enter Despina weeping, and Ragalzan. Here comes the Mourner, and the
Mischief-maker:
I like not their acquaintance.

Iren. I wonder that he finds such Favor with the Emperor!

Ax. That his quick Eye sees not his bungling Flattery,
The Seam's so visible and gross.

Desp. O sad, sad Story!

Rag. 'Twas as I told you, and your Dream confirms it.

Iren. Oh, they come near! How can I bear with patience
The sight of her, that gives so great Disquiet
To my great Father; blasts his glorious Name?

Rag. Madam, did you observe?

Desp. What makes the Princess fly me?
Am I brought hither to be scorned as well as injured;
These are your Tartarian manners!

Rag. It Is not her Education, but Religion?
She Is bred a Christian, and betrothed to this Axalla:
'Twas they persuaded the Emperor to this Murder.

Desp. Did they? a wondrous Act! Oh, my dear Sultan!
Just Heavens lend me the Power to vindicate his wrongs;
Send me the Furies, I will turn 'em Saints
By this my holy Justice. Oh, oh, oh!

(Weeps). Rag. And, since this peevish Girl has heard her Father's Passion,
She Vows she will never see you; tho you should stoop
To be her Father's Wife.

Desp. A pretty Spark!
But I will see her, tho I walk through Flames
To meet her.

Enter Tamerlane. Tam. Bless me, it is sad! I was to blame, to urge
His patience to that height: and yet he scorned
All offers at my hands, and had designed
For me, the self-same Cage, taken at Tauris.
It Is true, I ordered that Despina should
Not yet come near him, but that was not well.
Ha! there she is, and I begin to change;
In vain I struggle with Love's mighty Yoke,
And the contention 'twixt two powerful Passions
Lays wast my Mind.
This Soultry heat of Love has scorched up quite
The temperate Climes of Virtue: I Am become
Like the Arabian Desert, dry, unfruitful,
Where nothing grows for Mankind's use,
It Is all but horrid Rocks and Precipices,
And Tempest-beaten Sands to blind Men's Eyes,
And bury 'em alive. How can I give
Account of my great Charge?

Rag. He Is in his Passion: now I Will give him counsel.
Might I presume to guess your Royal troubles,
The beauteous Captive gives you some Disquiet.

Tam. Audacious Wretch! how dare thou search into
The Sovereign's Breast, and rudely touch his Wounds?

Rag. You pity, Sir, her Husband's dismal Fate.

Tam. True: wsth unfeigned Sorrow.

Rag. But, Sir, may I proceed a little farther?
And it is my humble care for your contentment,
And the continuance of your spotless Fame,
Tho for my Duty I should meet my death
By my too forward Zeal: yet I will speak
My Conscience for the Public.

Tam. Speak thy Grievance.

Rag. The death of Friends is but a Skin-deep wound
To tough Mankind: The Earth is over-stock'd,
The Feeding's bare; the less the Herd, the fatter.
What then of Foes, or Rivals? Love's a Passion
No Hero ought to blush for; it is their own:
It is the noblest Error of great Minds,
Or a Perfection rather; born of the
Same Parent Valor is, excess of Heat:
It Is a Majesti^ Madness, Heavenly Fury;
None ever escaped it of the Gods, or Heroes.

Tam. What then? Speak out.

Rag. Why then, it is strongly rumor'd
That you are touched with that Celestial frailty.

Tam. Is it divulged so soon? Well then since thou
Have guessed so well, I Will tell thee my Disease.
She is the first of all that trivial Sex
That ever gained the outworks of my Heart,
A kind Esteem; But more, S' has fired the Fort,
And turned out all the vigorous Defendants,
The Manly Virtues that secured the Place:
I never knew Love before, but for State Interest,
Which pa^ns the Prince's Body for the Public.

Rag. So much the worse. The first Loves are most dangerous:
The rest are flashes, Sparkles of the former,
Doubly reflected Rainbows, dying Echoes;
Diseases of the Brain are seldom cured,
And their first Fits most fatal, if delayed.
What fills the World with Madmen? Is It not Love?

Tam. My Reasoning faculty, that was my guide,
Is so bewildred in this Hellish Fog,
That I do often grope for it, seldom find it.
Is there no Cure for this?

Rag. One, very natural: Breathing of a Vein in Fevers,
Or giving Vent to Vessels that would break.

Tam. Oh; but Discourse and Time, may Conquer Passion.

Rag. Stay till a tickling Cough turns a Consumption,
For want of taking such a Sugared Medicine.
Statesmen in Love begin their Alphabet,
It Is a new World, an undiscovered Coast.
I Have Loved, Enjoyed; and Loved, and lost: There is
No Rock, nor Shelf, in all the dangerous Road
Of Woman, but I am your Pilot for it.
Take it from me, tho Honor gets the better,
It Is a most costly Victory: puts you to
The expense of many thoughtful hours, and wastes
A wise Man's Brain, that is fit for nobler uses.
Love lies in Ambush; when you think the least on it,
Rallies again, and routs the unsettled Victor:
And, tho it is often plucked up with endless labor,
The rank Weed still appears.
But think I, you should make a Life of Passion,
To whine, and dally, and to truck for hearts
Some Months, or Years, like other common Mortals?
A Prince's Love's to like, and to enjoy;
And then at once away with Love, and puling Passion.

Tam. Are there no limits then for Princes Passions?

Rag. There may be; yet 'twere better to be eased
At any rate, than leave the World neglected:
Millions of Souls draw vital breath from yours.
The Soldiers murmur that you stop your Progress;
Pausing upon such Toys; yet take this Cordial:
Fortune has made her free, without your guilt.
Attempt to gain her Love by fair persuasion,
And take her to your Wife.

Tam. 'Twere not unlawful;
But, oh, it is Rash, it is Base, it is out of Season.

Rag. Then will you still expose this worthy Passion
To your deriding Foes, and grieving Friends;
Carry the Baby Love about the Army,
And ask the Soldiers how it does become you?

Ta. Thy Reasons have some weight: my Thoughts are wandered*
And blown about with every gust of Passion*
For want of Reason's Ballast. -- Here she com^s*
Enter Despina. And turns thy Problems all to Demonstrations.

Rag. I, and she comes to court you: pray make use on it.

Desp. Down, down proud Billows of my Stormy ^rest*
Be calm one moment, till I search a little
The great Disturber of my injured Soul,
Then rage again, till Fury bids you cease.
Sir, can you spare no Cordial for my Fears?
No Balm, to stop the Issue of my Tears?
Or must I be the Fountain of your Court,
To weep in Artful forms, to make you Sport?

Tam. Dry Clouds, and empty Griefs long hide the day;
The Dismal'st Vapors weep themselves away:
Those Eyes will shine again, or Heaven decay.

Desp. Talk not of Luster, Sir; restore my Light,
And give me the loved Object of my Sight.

Tam. She knows not of his death; what need I name it?
By the quick notice on it, and his hard usage,
She Will think I caused it: but I will prepare her,
Aside. As if she made the most severe Conjectures.
Well, Madam, none with Reason can deny
Their own request: Suppose adjudg'd to dye
A Prisoner was, at whose Obnoxious birth
The Squint-eyed Stars shot vengeance on the Earth
Heavens Fiery Flail, the Whip for restive Mortals,
To make'm draw through Flames in Yokes of Iron,
The Mildew of your Hopes, Seed of your Fear;
And would you in exchange that Prisoner spare?

Desp. Were he the greatest Monster Nature teemed*
From her erroneous Womb; Satan redeemed,
And once again relapsing to his Nature,
Plotting to cheat the winking wise Creator;
The Plague Sore of the World, Factor to Fate,
Bloody as reason of Usurping State
Or, if to save his Life, I lost my own,
My Bajazet should live; nay, live without a Throne.
But, oh!

Tam. Then here your Captive stands,
Chained fast in Cupids thin tenacious Bands;
Strong, tho unseen; like those of Fate, I feel
Love's Airy Nets, those Cobwebs made of Steel:
Pity the Wretch whom all extremes do move,
Who cannot hope for, live without your Love.

Desp. Do thou abuse me too! thou needst not wear
Such studied Cruelty to mock Despair.
I came to taste, not swallow Candyed Poisons;
Curious to know, how many Sulphurous Devils
That weak and leaky Vessel Man,
Hoop'd with Hypocrisy, might hold, who is
A Pastboard Cask, a very S^eve to Virtue.
Tyrant, I come not to divert my Fate,
But to chase on, and scarifie thy Hate.
Phlegmatic ^iend, Dutch Devil, do thou think
Thy Murders can be stifled, Gods can Wink,
When such great Stars as Bajazet add Light
To Heaven, and make thy Crimsoned Earth more bright?
Hid in their blackness do thou think thy Deeds?
Thy Cloven Foot peeps through thy Hermits Weeds.

Tam. How quickly she had notice of his death!

Desp. Cursed be thy ill-got Empire, cursed thy Race,
Live to its own destruction, thy disgrace:
And when thy Rebel Offspring is subdued,
Thy trembling hand in thy own blood embru'd:
Then may thy passions war against each other:
May Lust and Pride, the Idols of the Great,
Command still contraries, and mock thy Prayers;
Torn with wild Horses of cross-drawing Cares,
Those Brazen Bulls due to their Ingineers;
May Hopes spring up, and still be choked with Fears,
And may thou always aim, and ever miss:
I wish thee a long life; but such as this.

Tam. Pray give me leave --

Desp. Nor dye thou by thy Sorrows, Sword, or Laws;
For I would have thee live, without a Cause.
May still some Clouds of hopeless Passion blind
When Honor, with its Sunshine, cheers thy Mind:
Never may thou Love, but find the Women chaste;
Nor ever be proud, but by scorned Love abas'd:
And when thy sly misfortunes flatter most,
May each naked Beauty prove a horrid Ghost.
May Schreech Owls make thy Music, Toads thy Pictures,
Thorns and ill Conscience stuff thy Beds of down:
And may thy Torments never find a date,
Till Heaven wants power to Plague, or Hell to Hate.
Ex.
Tam. Bless me! what Thunder, and what Lightning too!


Rag. Oh, Sir, she is the haughtiest, and the wyliest Dame,
That ever lived.

Tam. Yet she appeared so sweet, so innocent,
Who looked for Storms from so serene a Sky?
Good Gods, what Charms! Her very Frowns are Philtres
Her Treaty undermined my tender part;
This noble Rage, fires and blows up my heart.

Rag. And 'twas a just one too. Have you not used*
Her Husband like a wild Beast, and incag'd him,
Made him your Footstool, worse Indignities
Than death it self, denied her to come near him,
And since, as she thinks, caused him to be murdered?

Tam. Heaven knows, I knew not of his death, but grieve for it.

Rag. And I know too; but what can salve the wild
Objections of a blear-eyed Jealous mind,
To whom well polished Truth looks most like Varnish,
And Arguments serve but for Aggravations?
Most Men believe you caused it, and it is talked of;
For it is the Fate of wise Men, to be thought
To act what Interest, not Justice bids them:
And Histories do oftener palliate Crimes,
Than publish 'em: There is more Wickedness
Than all the World's aware of, (or you either. Aside)
To clear the Truth is now impossible,
Since she has found you love her; which she will judge
To be the cause, more than State-Rivalship.
But, would you take my Judgment, Sir, I Would own it,
And say, I did it for her Love, not Empire.

Tam. What! Shall I own a Lie, and wound my Honor?

Rag. What, by a little Love-talk, blown away
With the next Wind? Ten Lies to every Truth;
Where he that talks the most, still thinks the least on it.
Love is a Lie it self: there is no such Passion:
And Truth to Women makes men most suspected,
Because it is rarely practiced.
No Woman takes her self to be a Monster;
Yet she would be so, if her Eyes were Stars,
Her Lips of Roses, and her Face of Lillies:
Why, Traps were made for Foxes, Gins for Hare^,
Lime-twigs for Birds, and Lies and Oaths for Women.

Tam. You Are a rare Artist in Love's Mysteries!
But then, suppose this should incense her more?

Rag. Why, then it is but t'unswear the same things o'r
Again: How can a credulous Woman
Discern a Truth, from Falsehood?
Her Reason yields, and Passion takes the Sway:
Then swear there are no Stars, because it is Day
That hides them all; Truth is ashamed to stay,
And dares not show her naked open breast
To an excuse that is rich, and finely dressed.

Tam. Oh brave Ragalzan! thou can turn and wind
A Woman, like an Engine.

Rag. They Are no more;
Managed as easily by dexterous Men:
Work up their Passions, then they are on Horseback
Without a Bridle; drive 'em where you please.
As we are to the Gods, so they to us
Are mere Machines.

Tam. I, such Machines, as Ships, that drown their Sailors*
Such Brutes, as break their Masters Necks.
Well, I may use some Art, yet can not travel
Far from the Road of Honor:
But I am Rough, and never was made for Courtship.

Rag. Great Souls are fit for all things; Try your Rhetori^,
Which never failed you yet to win Mankind:
Woman is easier gained; Nature's your Party,
And lays 'em open to the least attack.
Exit Tam. It Is hard, when a Man's own Wit runs so low, that he is forced to
let in the Tide of another Man's Counsel; it is as fatal and slavish, as
borrowing of Money. Now will Despina, when she is a little cooler, tell him that
formal Tale I told her; Plow, that upon very high, and opprobrious Language to
the Emperor, one of the Keepers, by his order, struck Bajazet, that he dyed
on it: which is not so very Barbarous, but Tamerlane perhaps will own it a
little to try her temper; but he shall never be believed, if he unswear it a
Thousand times. He is a Man of so much Honor, That a Lie of his is more
credible than a Verdict of Twelve Men. It Is not good to use a Man's self to be
too punctual: it is too like an Engine; Every Man knows where to have him.


ACT. III. SCENE I.
Tamerlane, Despina, Ragalzan following. Rag. SO, the work is doing, and my
Pupil
Is strong in Argument against himself.
What neither Hate nor Reason could suggest,
Nor Malice hope for, Beauty has supplied;
What all the Universe could never have shaken,
One Female has subverted: That great Mind,
That thought the World too little, creeps and fawns
Like a well-beaten Spaniel. Now Is the time,
Now he lies open, bare from the protection
Of his own Virtues, by the Gods forsaken,
Bound hand and foot by Woman, and delivered
To my Correction: But I Will use him gently;
Gently as Bears the Robbers of their Whelps, as Lions
The Men that stick their Javelins in their sides,
As Clowns their Plunderers, Thieves broke loose their Judges,
As Lawyers Clients, or Electors Ale,
As Brokers Bankrupts, Senates needy Princes,
Trustees a Minor, Priests a sinful Purse,
Mad Dogs their Mates, and Wives their Husbands Whores.

Tam. Dreams are but Vapors of some Thoughts mislayd,
Stilled and retorted without Reasons Aid,
Poisons of Quiet by ill mixtures made.

Desp. Awake I saw and heard his bleeding Ghost,
And of this Barbarous Fact thy Tartars boast:
And did not thou strive to conceal it most?

Tam. aside. Too strong Presumptions make Denyals vain*
Truth is not seen by Judgments prepossest,
No more than Light by Eyes with Rheum oppressed:
I Will try what use of Fiction may be made.
Then tell me, Madam, how has Fame tradu^'d me?

Desp. Fierce Hypocrite, when thou had him denied
The sight of me, whom he loved more than Life,
Or Health, or Fame; tho at thy mercy Cag'd,
A Generous Disdain filled his brave mind,
He called thee wandering Tartar, Conquering Beggar,
That Want, not Honor, forced thy starveling Soul
To prey abroad, and urge thee to a Fortune
Thou never desir'dst, nor dreamed of: strait his Keeper
By thy fierce Frowns encouraged, gave the Prince
A fatal blow.
Who falling down, Is this thy Zeal, he cried?
This thy Devotion, Tamerlane? and died.

Tam. It was my Zeal, and my Devotion too,
If not to Heaven, or Nature, yet to You:
Fame the forerunner of your Conquering Eyes,
That wandering Tell-tale, made my Heart your Prize.
What Interest or Safety never could woo,
The dawning of your Light forced me to do;
What may your Form, full Risen, tempt me to?
Rivals on Earthly Thrones may claim a Station,
But Violence for Heaven is soft persuasion:
Beauty belongs to him that Worships best,
Exalts her Deity above the rest,
Tramples on Law, Religion for her sake.

Desp. Impious wretch, must I thy Crimes partake?
No, Tyrant, ^twas Ambition moved the Wheel,
And ground those Reasons, backed and Edged with Steel.

Tam. Accuse Tyrannic Heaven that made you bright,
Accuse those killing Eyes; not my weak Sight.
I did a Crime, without my own consent;
And Justice pardons, where there is no intent:
When Love commands, who dare's be Innocent?
Blame not the Ship that falls foul on another;
But blame the Winds that blow it: Neighbourly Streams
Keep in their Destined bounds, till Showrs from Heaven
Constrain 'em to invade the Friendly Earth
With as unquestioned Power
As that which gives it from the highest Cause;
Celestial Visions cancel written Laws.

Desp. If Man may act what ever he is moved to do,
The same Man is both Judge and Party too:
Bodies and Souls are so in Marriage tied,
Their distinct Issues hardly are descried;
But well known Body is the surer side.
Inspired thoughts may flow from Heaven or Hell,
But Aethiops Bastards will their Fathers tell:
Charge not the Gods with thy Infernal Sins;
Murder and Piety cannot pass for Twins.

Tam. I urged their Power, but now defend their Justice.
Impartial Heaven, not robbing all the rest,
Could not permit by one to be posiest
So great a Joy so long.
Too happy Bajazet's compendious youth,
Which bathed in Blisses, envied by the Gods,
When for one hour of Heaven in your fair Arms
I Would forfeit all my Right to endless Ages.
But, if you call a Crime what Heaven commands,
Tho cleared above, yet I have lost my Cause.
In vain the Prisoner pleads his Innocence,
Who'd rather dye, than anger his Accuser.
Then, if my death can expiate that Act,
That controverted Crime 'twixt Heaven and you,
Here, take this Sword; Come, pierce this Amorous Breast:
The Impression made by your fair hand, will be
Softer than down of Swans, than Showers of Roses,
Softer than Rain on Wool, whose patient Fleeces
Take without noise, or murmur, Heavenly Blows;
Softer than gentle Air, that breaths from any Lips, but yours^
Returns of Passion, Sighs and mutual Vows,
Joys and Confessions of Intranced Lovers.

Desp. I Will keep thee for a greater punishment;
Nor the slow Tortures of just Heaven prevent.

Tam. Assume Heavens power once more, and punish Laws,
Correct the Crime of which you was the Cause:
In you it is Justice, and I Will never repine
To Love, to Sin, to Dye, by Power Divine.
Ah, sweet occasion of my Pains!
Could all my Pleasures, all my Gains,
Empire surrendered, but contract
Pardon for one resistless Act:
Could my afflicted Soul but have
One Tear, to sanctisie my Grave;
I Would leave the World, and dying boast
That Pearl would pay for Asia lost.

Desp. Who can believe so false, and ^iercea Creature,
Transcendent Prince of Hypocrites!

Tam. She Is ^reater,
Who kills and tramples Mankind at her Feet,
And yet appears so harmless and so sweet.

Desp. No, Tyrant, live; because I loath thy Offering;
Repent, and wash thy Venom out with Tears:
I would not send the Gods a Present out of season,
An unclean Sacrifice, the worst of all the Herd.
Thy Sorrow seems the truer, 'cause it is just,
And Penitence prevails with Powers above:
I can afford'my Pity, not my Love.

Tam. Then Life is given me, but Love denied!
A wondrous motive for that daring Deed!
Died Bajazet for this? that I might Reign.
Then I am guilty: take o'r rated Life,
Sinc Villainy is grown so poor and cheap
To take a Bribe from any thing but Love.
Cleanse not a House on purpose to pull down,
Wash not a bloody Garment, but to wear it;
Nor let a Sullied Coin, that wears The Impression of
Your Heavenly Face, be scoured and brightned, only
To throw away.
By Mahomet, and by his Master too,
Give me thy Love, and the whole World is thine;
That great share I possess: that lesser, left unconquered
To exercise my Arms, inspi^'d by thee;
My Fifty Realms, with all the Lives within 'em,
Men, Women, Children, Beasts, and every Inch
Of ground they feed on in that spacious Pasture,
My Seas with all their Fish, my Air, My Birds, my Clouds;
And if the Sun, and Moon, and Stars receive
Their Al^ment from my exhaled Empire,
Then they are mine, and them I will give thee too:
And thou shall call me Niggard when I have done,
Unless I gain more Crowns to strew thy feet with.

Desp. Well, I Will consider twice, before I undo Thee,
And All the World, by this large Donative:
If you are Real, you may hope for Love.

Tam. My Word on Earth, my Oath's a Law Above.

Ex. leading her. The Scene the outside of the Fort. Alarms, and Fighting
behind the Scenes. Enter Zeylan. Zey. All Is lost; but thus far I Have escaped:
'Twere better
To Have le^t all to the Mercy of Generous Tamerlane;
But now 't's too late.
Yet I am more concerned for my Philarmia,
Than Life, or Fame, or Liberty, or Country.
Enter Six or Seven Soldiers. Ha! what, surpised!

1 Sold. Stand, Traitor; yield.

2 Sold. Deliver.

Zey. Lives are not sold so cheaply.

(Fights, and is disarmed.) Enter Philarmia, Amazon-like disguised. Phil. What
shall I do? there is no quarter given,
My Zeylan will be slain! Could I but meet him!
Oh Heavens! he is yonder, ready to be Butchered!
[Runs upon the Soldiers. Hold, Soldiers, hold; I Have Orders from Axalla
To save his Life: Hold, hold; he is my Prisoner.
Now, with a Fiction, will I try his Faith.
Is your Name Zeylan?

Zey. Yes.

Phil. Then, Sir, you owe this Favor to a Lady,
Whose Interest prevailed above the Orders of the Emperor,
The fair Irene; who commanded me
To seek you out, and save you.

Zey. That life so spared, shall be enjoyed no longer
Than till she calls it back, and still employed
In the most rigorous of her Commands.

Phil. But, Sir, such Favors come not, but on Terms:
The Princess loves you.

Zey. It is her Mercy, sure, but not her Love.

Phil. No, no; she Loves you, and with Justice asks
Your Love, without a Rival.

Zey. Nor is it fit, that so Divine a Princess
Should be the sharer only of a Herat,
But the entire Possessor.
Alas, my humble Thoughts dust never aim
At such high flights; but if I ever fix 'em,
My Faithful Heart is not to be divided
In worthless Rags, and made a sport for Winds,
But Consecrated to one Deity:
Love and Religion both admit no more.

Phil. So, so; he yields: Oh, the perfidious Wretch!
Then shall I bring her back the welcome message
Of your true Love?

Zey. That Is too presumptuous;
But of Gratitude,
Of unrestrained Devotion to her Service,
Which neither Death, nor Dangers, shall deter
From Desperate Obedience.

Phil. Crafty Traitor!
He dares not say he loves her; but it is plain.
I Will probe him ^eeper:
She hears you have a Mistress, called Philarmia.

Zey. I had; but Heaven alone can tell, if now I have he^

Phil. And did not she deserve your dearest Thoughts?

Zey. She was, or is, what nothing can be more.

Phil. And is this all? False Man! Now to the quick.
You must renounce her, or your Life: Be brief.

Zey. Renounce her! What, shall I renounce the Gods,
Forswear Eternal Joys, and blessed Mansions,
Cut off my hopes from Heavens Seraphic Pleasures,
Then, here, resume your mighty Gift,
My Life has ever been a Slave to Honor;
Shall it not serve a Nobler Master, Love?
Not all the Tortures, Crosses, Scourges, Chains^
Those double Deaths, all the refined Inventions
That Witty Malice makes for Misery;
Not all the Thunders, Lightnings, Earthquakes, Floods,
Terrestrial Terrors, or Celestial Fits,
The Frowns of Angry Heaven, or Smiles of Beauty,
Shall force me to abjure such glorious hopes,
Or turn Apostate to Divine Philarmia.

Phil. Then take thy Life, and thy Philarmia too,
[Discovers her self. Thou justest, dearest Soul.

Zey. Blessed Image! art thou here? Oh, may I trust
My Senses, or thy Word? My dear Deceiver!
Dear, desperate self-destroyer!

Phil. But thy Preserver.
Why, did not I foresee that I should save thee?
Which is the better Soldier now?

Zey. Philarmia.
Oh thou art full of Fame; thou may retire
Like a rich lazy General.

Phil. I Will consider;
But here is no time to pour our Passions out,
The Army's coming this way: I Will go back,
And stop the Soldiers from pursuing thee.
Go seek thy safety in some lonesome Cave*
Then send me word, and I will find thee out*
I Will take my leave of the Victorious World,
To share in thy Distresses.

Zey. Stay a little:
Oh, stay awhile. Who knows when we shall meet?

Phil. Lovers, in absence, have delights peculiar:
If naught but what is present gives us Pleasure,
What Joy have Parents, when their Children wande^
In prosperous Voyages? What Joy have Prince^,
In Victories remote? What Joy have Usurers,
When Money travels, to enrich it self?
Then bless thy self with Hope, sweetest of Passions,
Which Absence gives us, Presence robs us of.

Zeyl. Feed me not with imaginary Joys.
The envious World, with its ill-natured Tricks,
And Accidental Crosses, may divide us:
The Gods themselves desire not, men should have
Such filling Joys, as thou and I possess;
Lest they should slight eternal Happiness.
Oh, let us part no more! how can I leave thee?

Phil. Well, well, then I Am content; let me be caught
In conference with thee; let me be slaughtered,
Let me be torn alive, since Zeylan wills it:
Come let us begin to talk.

[Trumpets sound. Zey. Oh, hark, the Trumpet! Have thou hence like Lightning*
Why should I make thee lose thy precious Life,
For saving mine? Farewell, Farewell, my Dearest:
If I go with thee, we shall both be slain.

Phil. Parting, or Death, which is the greater Pain?

Ex. severall^ Tamerlane, and Despina, sitting upon Thrones. An Antic Dance,
and a SONG. GReatness, I give thee my excuse,
For thee I have no leisure;
Nor Care what Business can produce,
For Life's too short for Pleasure:
Count Griefs, Diseases, Love's disdains,
What need these Artificial Pains?
Nature invites us to a Treat,
And gives us but short time to stay;
While Coxcombs Carve, and Wise Men Eat,
Death, the close Waiter, takes away.
Count Griefs, etc.
Tam. Now, Madam, I Am in Heaven, my Soul rides high,
And treads the unyielding Air: nothing can sink
What you have raised so vastly.
Where have I slept all those deluding years,
And dreamed of Joys, but never tasted any
Till this transporting, Deifying minute?
How have I toiled, turned upside down the World,
Begging Men's Voices to be counted happy,
And at this Fairy Feast have still rose hungry!
Drunk with Ambition I saw all things double;
But, when I came to taste the Airy Joys,
They fled the feeling: now, my Soul runs over,
I am all Joy, all Plenty, all Abundance.

Desp. But these imagined Joys may come far short
Of expectation, cloy you to repentance;
And then you will curse th'Inchantress, and the Siren.

Tam. Oh, never, never; I could gaze away
My Life, upon these over-powring Charms,
This all-supplying Face, till Death did fix me
In this Triumphant posture, far more glorious
Tha^ all the Statues of the Ancient Heroes,
Who fooled away their Lives for less rewards:
Oh, I am all content, all Wealth, all Pleasure!
Well, Madam, have you thought of your demand:
That I may pay my Vows; and that great Bond,
Drawn betwixt Love and Beauty, that is Recorded
In the Eternal Registers, be canceled?

Desp. I have, Sir; but you will think it is too much
To grant: Alas! my humble, worthless Person
Can never merit such a mighty Gift.
What is there in me, that could prompt you to
So kind, so rash a Vow? You only meant
To Conquer and delude a credulous Woman.

Tam. By all the Oaths that I have sworn before,
And, if thou urgest, by ten Thousand more,
There Is nothing in my power that I Will resuse thee.

Desp. Then, Sir, deliver up to me your Daughter
Bound in Chains; your dear, and fair Irene.

Tam. My Daughter, bound in Chains! She is no Thief,
Nor Murderer: what Offense has she committed
Against your Self, or Me? Pray ask again:
Command the Assyrian, Persian, Grecian Empires,
I have enough besides; I Will make thee Greater
Than Ninus, Cyrus, or than Alexander,
All three united, and yet less than me;
But, having me, you are greater than us all:
The Emper^rs of the World are but thy Slaves,
When I am thine. But why this vain request?
Take the four Monarchs Lands;
They are Confiscated, and given to me,
For Treason against their Maker:
But why my Pious, dearest Child?
What is she guilty of, that can deserve
Such Ignominious, fatal reparation?

Desp. I see, great Monarchs can dispense with Vows;
Such Fetters are not made for boundless Souls.
Farewell, most mighty Prince;
Live long, and fortunate, without Despina.
[Exit.
Tam. Ha! what a change is this? How soon my Joy's
Unravel'd, and my Soul from topmost Stories
Sunk to the bottom of most damned Despair;
Wound up so high, to make her fall the greater!
What have I done? delivered up my daughter
To certain Death. Heaven, what a Conflict's this!
Not all the Beauties of the Universe
Shall make me yield to so abhorred an Act,
But I have Vowed: But 'twas a Lover's Vow,
Whose Perjuriesure laughed at. No; there is
No jesting with Divinity. But how
Comes Tamerlane reduced to this necessity?
Why, Tamerlane's in Love. A goodly Precedent
For Envious Posterity to discant on!
A fine conclusion of a Glorious Life!
Oh Heaven, the Guide and Prospect of my Actions,
Let thy kind Thunder end the shameful doubt:
Destroy me at this Moment; let me tread
No longer these inglorious steps, nor dash
Thy unexampled Favors on the Ground
By such a childish Act. Love, keep thy distance.
But Love now fights under Religion's Banner,
And makes it is Folly Sacred. Death must prevent
This loathed Act, and expiate the Intent.
[Exit.
An Astrologer, Axalla, Irene, a Captain. Thunder, Lightning, Rainbows
inverted, a bloody Arm, Comet, etc. Iren. Oh Heavens, the dreadful sight! It Is
Doomsday coming!

Ax. Ha! Nocturnal Rainbows! Inverted too!
Reflections answering not the form of Luminous Bodies,
And such a Comet as puts out the Stars!
Cease, you bold peepers into Nature's Bowels,
To give the World glossie but fading Reasons:
Nature this day has made a Fool of Art.

Cap. Methinks the Sky wears a more gaudy Dress
Than her old glistering Garniture of Stars;
There is some mighty Revel sure above:
Hark how they stamp, as if they were dancing Jigs!

Ax. How dare you make such Comments on these Wonders?

Cap. Faith, Innocence is fearless, as it is free;
Tho the Frame crack, the Splinters shall not fright me.
Should the great Gods, that toss these Fiery Orbs
Like Tennis-balls for Heavenly recreation,
Let slip some weighty Globe through careless Fingers,
Upon this Head; the Accident's prepared for.

Ax. Well said, brave youth, if with respect to Heaven.
Ha! what means this? A bloody Hand, and Writing!

Cap. Scriveners in Heaven! then there is some hopes for Usurers.

Ax. The hand of Heaven is drawing some Indentures,
Altering Estates in the poor under-World.
Of all the sights, this does perplex me most.
Pray, Sir your Judgment: It Is an Ancient Hand,
I cannot read.

Astro. No wonder, Sir; 't has not been used
In China these ten Thousand years.

Ax. Noble Tradition!

Astro. But the Words are these, Kiungsi Honan;
Which is Interpreted, Death, Division:
Some Great Man dies, and leaves his vast Dominions
To dubious Heirs.

Ax. Nothing more likely, Sir;
He that grasps more than's Handful, loses all.
A lucky Guess turns to a Prophecy.

Enter Tamerlane. Tam. I Have urged to have my Sentence changed in vain,
Told her the Truth, but why should she believe me?
Should the Sun change his Course, men might suspect
The Daylight.
The Pole Star, if un^ix'd, absolves the Sailor
From farther Faith. Oh, the vile Rogue Ragalzan!
Ha! what a glorious Night after the Storm!
I think a Comet, and an Arm from Heaven!
Come, Vengeance, come; it is time that thou were come;
Welcome, dear Comet, welcome bloody Paw:
Could I but reach thee, I Would shake hands with thee.
Why all this noise, and never a flaming Dart
To fix me dead? I thought the Gods durst strike
When they did threaten. Was there ever Mortal
That more abused their Favors, studied Acts
More vile, to rouse up Heavenly Indignation?
By your Immortal Selves, if you neglect
Your Office, I will snatch away Revenge,
The Jewel of your Crown, and put an end
With my own hands to this Inglorious Life.

Ire. Strange Sights in the Air, they say, foretell great Changes*
What, will these Rebels never make an end?
Good Father, stay at home, and tell the Stories
Of your great Deeds, to your admiring Friends;
But go to Wars no more: Leave off a winning Gamester.
One day, you take a Town, and make a Governor;
The next, you win a Country, make a King:
These pay some little Chief-rent to their Lord,
Enjoy the rest themselves. You take from some,
And give it back to others. Why might not less
Than all the World serve one Man's turn?

Tam. How wisely thou do weigh the Trifles of the World!

Ire. And now you sigh, the Earth lies heavy on you:
Conquer no more; or let the weighty Ball
Roll off, as it came on.

Tam. Oh, my Irene!
It Is thou do cause my Grief, my dear disturber.

Ire. Alas! wherein have I offended you?
Perhaps, my want of Duty was the cause;
But sure I meant it not.
If to rejoy^e at all your Victories;
If to fall out, with all that lessen you;
If to dissolve in Tears, when you're not well;
Or have your Peace disturbed with Martial Cares:
If to fall into Swoons when you 're in danger,
Be not to love you; then I love you not.

[Weeps. Tam. Ah, cruel Girl, begone, I cannot bear thee,
For every look from thee strikes Death into me:
How much more happy art thou now, than I!
Short-sighted Innocence! thou have no Prospect
Of this thy Danger; the sad thought of which
Racks my poor Soul, and cuts me up alive,
And tears my Bowels out before my Face!

Iren. Good Sir, what moves you to this fatal sadness?

Tam. Ah! were it fit that thou should know my Sorrows,
Yet Children should not know their Parents Shame.

Ire. I know your Troubles, and have heard your Vow,
And I can satisfy your nicest Scruples:
Heaven be my Witness, I
Had rather go to death, to give you ease,
Than to th'Embraces of a dear-lov'd Hero,
Whose Wit could charm, whose Valor could secure me,
Whose Beauty could inflame my frozen Breast;
Rather than to my Nuptials with Axalla.
My Refignation will be your discharge
To Heaven, and Earth: Injuries are Rewards
When they are begged for.

Tam. Greater then would be
Thy kindness, and my shame, should I desert thee.

Ire. But, Sir, consider how the World's Amazed,
And Nature's frighted, to see you disordered:
Do we not blow up worthless Cottages,
To save contiguous Palaces, from bold
And disrespectful Flames?
And shall the World want Order, and direction
From your great Soul, if mine can stop its passage
To other Orbs, and make the Earth my Debtor?

Tam. So young, so wise! Why sure thou art Inspired;
Thy Soul's upon the Wing, and sees much farther,
Than the unfledged Companions of her years,
Ill Omen of thy Fate: Thy Soul's too ripe
To stay long in the Shell. Oh, now I fear thee.

Ire. What if I might have lived some harmless years
Of Ignorance, and Youth? Yet if you please
To pluck off this green Fruit (I will not say
Untimely, when you call sor't) to content
Some longing Palate,
'Twill not be harsh to me, if not to you.
You gave me Life, and it is but to restore it,
To pay a debt which you contracted for me;
Let me be just to Nature, if not you.

Tam. No more, no more sweet merciful Redeemer*
Why art thou come to scrue up my A^^ctions?
Oh, every Word from thee, against thy self,
Does wound my Soul, more than ten Thousand Daggers.
Dear, cruel Orator, why do thou plead
Against the Innocent, to save the Guilty?
He that does spare my life's the worst of Murderers*
And thou deserve to dye, by speaking for me:
I cannot bear thy sinful Eloquence;
Let not so sweet an Angel plead for Satan.
Oh, leave me to the Furies: they are my Council.

[Exeunt. Re-enter Tamerlane, with Axalla. Tam. In what condition is the Enemy?

Ax. Now you speak like your self, a watchful Monarch.

Tam. May not Prince Zeylan once again surprise us,
Before the general Assault be given?

Ax. He may, Sir; but I have entrenched the Army
With greater safety, doubled all the Guards
About your sacred Person.

Tam. Wondrous well.
But then give order strait to all the Rounds
To keep a stri^^er Watch, that whosoever
Dares stir abroad to night, be shot at without mercy;
And let it be proclaimed without delays:
Secureness, more than Cowardice, betrays.
[Exit.
Ax. And yet, pray Heaven he meditate no mischief
In mighty Souls, Passion's not soon suppressed:
Like wounded Whales, they struggle till they dye;
By their impatience they increase the smart,
Provoke their Pains, and vex a harmless Dart,
Tossing the mighty Mass till they are on ground,
Their Rage more fatal, than the little Wound.
[Exit.
ACT. IV. SCENE I.
A Guard of Mus^uetiers: Axalla and Irene behind Enter Tamerlane, disgu^^'d.
Tam. SLave to my Passions, Scandal to my self
Here stand the (...) of great Tamerlane,
Right reverend (...) Fine (...)
Poor Thunder-blasted Oak sometime the Glory, now
The just reproach of all the neighboring Shrub^,
But hold! Self-murder, that In^ernal Crime,
Which all the Gods level their Thunder at!
Why, it is an Act the Gods admire, and envy,
Because they cannot do it: and where is the wrong?
May not I mow my Grass, reap my own Corn,
Cut my own Woods, lay down this load of Life,
Without Injustice or to Gods, or Men?
Self-preservation, Nature's Highest Law,
Is best obeyed, when our Sublimer part,
Tired out with Troubles, and chained up with Griefs,
Strives to shake off her fleshy Mancles,
And fly to Nobler Dwellings.
Fine Quirk, to salve the Conscience, to let others kill me!
Well, it is all one, as if I killed my self:
And that is no harm, since I Am no more my self:
The Magistrate in me destroys the Malefactor;
And this form pleases best, a comlier shape
Of Death.

Ax. It Is as I guessed; I know it is he, by his Majesty Mee^^
His piercing Eyes that use to strike Men speechless;
Tho Suns are Clouded, yet the Daylight shows
When they are ascended in our Hemisphere.

Ire. Oh Heavens! It is the Emperor: I Will go to him.

Ax. Oh, by no means, I Have told the the Guards already.

Enter Zeylan disguised. Zey. I hope it is not too late, tho time is precious;
Now my Philarmia's acting her last part;
My Trumpet saw her led away to Judgment,
By this time she is condemned, perhaps led out
To Execution: yet if it were so,
How comes the World to be no more disordered,
No Earthquake, no Eclips, Convulsion, Blindness?
Can Nature keep an equal Pulse, or have
A healthful look in such an Agony,
When she that is the Life of Nature's dying?
Ah, poor Philarmia! must thou lose thy Life
For sparing min^ Unhappy headstrong Girl!
Well, thus ^ar I have got into their Camp
With this Disguise: I Will find some other mean^
To see this high and mighty God-like Man,
And with this Dagger search his haughty Heart,
And try if it be mortal; so prevent
Her Death by the Confusion, tho I lose
My Life to do it, or perish all together.

Tam. All my Commands are lost, there is none will shoot:
I, whom so many Millions late obeyed,
Am slighted, scorned. Have I no Friend, nor Foe,
To put a stop to my declining Honor?
It Is hard. Rogues, Traitors, fawning Slaves
To the Coward Tamerlane: Now I could wish
For raging Bajazet, to be my Orator.

1 Sold. It Is the Emperor, as the General told us.

2 Sold. My Life, it is he by's Voice; Camrade, my Powder's wet.

3 Sold. And my hand shakes, I cannot hold my Arms.

Tam. What, Am I yet contemned? Slaves, Cowards, Dogs,
Whom do you guard here, wandering Tamerlane,
That Renegade, Cutthroat, glorious Thief,
Whom Fortune meant the Gallows, gave the Throne to?

Zey. What a bold Fellow's this, that rails against
His Prince, and no man shoots him? sure it is some
Discontented Votary of China, that contemns
The Conqueror's Laws.
This Fellow may assist in my design.

(Goes up to Tam. Tam. Ha! a Spy o'th'Enemy's!

Zey. Methinks, I see
Some discontent writ on thy brow: Art thou
So weary of thy Life, to rail upon
The Emperor to his Guards?

Tam. I, that I am:
And I would have him killed.

Zey. And so would I,
For stronger Reasons, could I pass his Guards.

Tam. Merciful Providence that brought thee hither,
My dear chance Friend!
I will assist thee in thy brave design,
And bring thee where he is. But, since you are in
A killing mood, thou shall kill me: not that
I love him dearer than I do my self;
But it is more Charity to kill a man prepared,
To ease a Wretch oppressed,
And groaning under Loads of weighty Sorrows.

Zey. Why should I kill an Innocent that never provoked me?

Tam. Alas, I Am not so harmless;
I have done many vile and barbarous Murders,
Committed Sacrilege, unpeopled Cities:
Here stands the Man, that has destroyed more of
Mankind, than ever Mortal did, since the Creation.

Zey. Alas, poor Frantic Wretch!

Tam. Mistake me not, I Have been a General,
And am guilty of all Crimes, committed
By my Command: Then, if a man deserves
To dye for single Murders, can the greater
Number excuse him? Men Duel for Revenge,
A hasty piece of Justice, and do freely
Exchange each others Lives, which each man has a right to:
We murder Thousands that did never provoke us
With wrongful Deed, or Sharper Contumelies.

Zey. In that thou have some Reason.

Tam. Nay, lately I have done the most abhorr'd^
And Hellish Act, that History ever spoke of:
I have condemned a guiltless Person, twice
Has saved my Life, only to please my Lust.
Don't I deserve Damnation? May not I
Obtain from thy kind Hand, that longs to do
Some great Heroic mischief,
The lovely Death-stroke?

Zey. Alas, I pity thee;
And have no cognizance of these thy Crimes,
Half washed away by Penitence.

Tam. Well then,
Suppose that I was Tamerlane; would thou not kill me?

Zey. I, that I would, with much more eager have
Than quench my Thirst with Nectar, or my Love
With Venus, or with Helen, or with her
Whom above all my longing Soul holds dearest;
Loved at first sight, and never after changed.

Tam. I see it is Love that makes us Madmen all.
Then I am Tamerlane, the Terror of the World.

Zey. Rather it is Scorn, or Pity. Alas, poor Madman!
Wrought up by idle Fumes t'affect to dye
For such a Mighty Monarch.

Tam. I tell thee, I
Am he; the Wrath of Heaven, the Scourge of Mortals:
It Is I that have enslaved thy Native Soil,
My Sword has Widowed half the Universe,
Turned the World wrongside outward, in the toss
Broke all the brittle Laws, that ever Mankind
Composed, their paltry Earthen wares of Justice:
And all for Glory, damned eternal Fame.
Take thy Revenge.

Zey. Vain Madman, hold thy Peace.

Tam. Why then, by Mahomet, I am. Zey. Falsely.
Thou swear'st by thy false Prophet, who can take
No Vengeance for thy Perjury, nor hears it:
Nor will I ever believe thee.

Tam. aside. Double Infidel:
It is impossible here to convince him.
Well, well, I long to dye, 'cause Life's a burden;
But if I show thee Tamerlane, in all
His glory, compassed in with Guards, and circled
With prostrate Princes in his bright Pavilion,
And like the Midday Sun with all his Rays about him,
And after find out means to have him single,
And then a way for thee t'escape when thou
Have killed him: Will that merit Thanks, or Friendship?

Zey. Why, now thou speak: and could thou make it good,
Were I the greatest Man that trod on Earth,
And with my hand could reach the spangled Spheres,
And distribute men's Fortunes with their Stars;
I would Depose my self, to be thy Slave,
And lick the Dust before thee.

Tam, If I betray thee, Heaven revenge the Falsehood.

Zey. Come then, my perjured Madman, I will trust thee,
And thou shall Steer me in this unknown Coast;
For what have I to save, Philarmia lost?

[Exeunt. Enter Ragalzan, Despina. Rag. This was a rare request, a Masterpiece
of Malice:
There Is nothing but a Woman could have thought on it.
How could you work him to this height?

Desp. With ease:
Lovers will wind themselves by Words to Passion,
Their Airy Talk turns Fire by Agitation:
Thus, sometimes yielding, sometimes aggravating,
'Twixt Hope and Fear, like Ships betrayed by Calms
To greater Storms; I then extorted from him
Such monstrous Oaths, such wild and Impious Offers,
The Gods might be ashamed to be so Hectored.

Rag. Oh, good, good, good! But did not he deny
What he affirmed, as soon as he had heard
Your Admirable Suit?

Desp. Oh, yes, most fiercely.
But could I think such mean things of a Hero,
A double Caesar, Triple Alexander?
And you had told me all the Truth before.

Rag. It was too true. How could he be secure
Had Bajazet escaped? The Turkish Garrisons
Had all revolted. But I Have found a way
To make him constant to his Vow, and swallow't glibly.
The Mufti's here, and the Dervises too,
About Petitions from their several Churches.
The Mufti's supler than a new oiled Tumbler,
When you have greased his Fist: give him a color,
To make things doubtful, then throw Dice for Justice.
They all shall find it Lawful, and require him
To offer up his Daughter.

Desp. That Is enough:
Let me alone to give the fatal Period.
But how does he digest this Compound Passion?

Rag. I come not near him; but he raves Divinely:
Love and Ambition fiercely sight within him;
When Nature steps to part them, both fall on her:
Love pities her at last, and takes her part,
Then both go to it again, and fight for ever;
Those Mastiffs are too keen to loose their hold.

Desp. Oh, thou refreshest me with cheerful Sounds,
With all the Musi^ of sublime Revenge!
Oh, thou have given me Spirit of Joy to drink!

Rag. Nay, then take to other Dram. His pretty Daughter
Came to him since, and with her innocent Prate
Has so betwich'd him, that he went out strait
And told his passion to the gaping Army:
And would have killed himself, if not prevented.

Desp. I would have hindered him: I would not have him dye
So unprepared,
His Life and Fame shall perish both together.

Rag. But yet some easier way might have been found.

Desp. This is the nobler method.
I Will wound him in his Fame, his tender'st part,
To which his Life has ever been a Drudge,
And run of errands over all the World:
I Will make the angry Lion scourge himself
With his own Tail; and then give him his Fate
As certain, as unlooked for.
When he has offered up his bloody Victim
To my great Shrine, his dear and dutiful Irene,
The Savior of his Life, Age's Supporter;
Abhorred by all his Friends, by's Foes contemned,
Deserted by Mankind, by Heaven rejected,
Then let him dye with all his Shames about him
Petty Revenges, are for Petty Crimes;
And pardon me, great Soul of Bajazet,
If The Earth afford no greater an Atonement
For thy dear Blood.
Pray give me an account of all proceedings,
That we may feast our selves on his Afflictions.

Rag. I will not lose my share of the least morsel.

[Exeunt. Tamerlane in his Pavilion: Princes and Servants about him. Tam.
giving a Ring to one of his Guards. Go tell the Countryman, that sits without
At the Pavilion Gate, that by this Token,
The man that left him there, desires him to
Come in: not a word more, upon your duty.
[Exit Guard. Now is the time, to put a period to
This languishing Distemper, flattering Fever,
This merry Madness, this Apulian Sting,
That makes men rage in measures: now I Will shake off
This rude Companion, Love, that blinds Men first,
Then gives them blows in jest, that smart in earnest.

Enter Guard, with Zeylan disguised. Zey. Am I betrayed, or no? Here stands the
Prince;
But where is my Guide, I know not! It Is no matter,
I Will make a bold Attack, and lose my Life in it.

Tam. Let all withdraw, and leave me with this Stranger.
Come, Friend, draw nearer, view me more exactly,
And tell me, if your Partner in Affliction
Has kept his Word. Am I forsworn, or no?
Am not I Tamerlane?

Zey. Death, it is the same;
Shining in all his Glory! What means this Riddle?

Tam. Nay, fear not to come near me.

Zey. It Is not Fear, but Wonder.

Tam. Here, take this Dagger, strike this open Breast;
But yet, before you do this welcome Act,
Here is the Door you must escape at, to
The River's side; where lies a Boat prepared
To take in the next Comer, which will strait
Row you to Zeylan's Citadel, before
The Deed be known: and here is a Cabinet
Not very weighty, but worth many Millions,
The Spoils of Turkey, Persia, Egypt, China, Muscovy, Syria, Afric, Indostan;
If thou get'st clear from hence, thou have enough
To purchase thee a Kingdom.

Zey. Sure Fame has
Not ^latter'd him: he is a Man of wondrous Virtue!
But Thrones are not exempt from fatal Sorrows.
Can I consent to kill my Benefactor?

Tam. There Is nothing thou can do, that can deserve
So great Rewards, but this. Alas! I Am weary
Of Life, my Empire is too great a Burden,
Without the over-weight of private Griefs:
I never yet refused the thing was asked me,
Nor ever sent a sad Man from my presence;
And shall I be denied so small, so just a Favor?

Zey. My Vengeance fails me. Most Heroi^ Prince,
I cannot guide this Dagger to your Breast;
I beg but one Request, in satisfaction
Of all the Wrongs, the World, or you have done me.

Tam. Refuse not this to me, and I Will refuse thee
Nothing, that my unbounded Empire yields.

Zey. Here on my knees I Will try your Virtue first:
I beg, Sir, a young Beardless Captain's Life,
That is condemned to dye, for letting Zeylan
Escape, that was his Prisoner. Tam. I grant it freely.

Zey. Why, then as freely here I give you Zeylan,
[pulls off his disguise. With all my Forces, all my Reputation
Acquired in Arms, and lie still at your Mercy;
But, know the weighty Reason: she is my Mistress
In that disguise. No smothering Revenge,
Nor over-looking Envy, nor vile Treason,
Moved me to this; but her dear Life endangered
Urged me to undertake your Death, my own,
The ruin of the World, that my fair Saint
Might fly out in the merciful Confusion.

Tam. But art thou Zeylan? Welcome noble Prince,
[Embraces him. Prop to thy falling Country, China's Redeemer!
Can there be so much Virtue in the World?
And Love the Cause, dire Love, that monstrous Passion?
It Is I that am thy Prisoner: here I yield thee
My Sword, with all its Conquests, all its Glories,
With more serene and unconcerned a Freedom,
Than Virgins do their Beauties, Saints their Souls,
To Heaven, or Hymen: but besure thou give
No Q^^rter; take my Life; for if thou spare it,
Perhaps I (...) resume the rest. Thou art
The ^ittest man to execute this Sacred Act:
Oh, now it is Justice, that before was Fury.

Zey. Pray, Sir, be pleased to call first to your Guards;
Her precious Life's at stake.

Tam. Guards, make have;
Carry my Pardon to the sentenced Captain
That let Prince Zeylan escape. Now, Sir,
To my Request: be speedy, and begone
With all your Treasure, lest the Soldiers Fury
O'rwhelm you. Come, ease me quickly.

Zey. I have not, Sir, been bred in Foreign Courts,
Nor can I talk of high-flown Rules of Honor,
Those nice distinctionss, framed in Virtues School;
But I have some rude Sparks of Nature, show me,
By their dim light,
How great a Monster is Ingratitude.

Tam. Thou art ungrateful then, if thou deny me this
So just Request, since I have answered thine:
Death is to me a greater Gift, than Life
Is to thy Mistress. Is there a greater good
Than to be lulled asleep from endless griefs,
And wake no more to find 'em?
Thou art unjust too to thy Native Country;
Nor can thou answer this to Heaven or Earth:
Nor will the Ghost of all thy slaughtered Friends
Let thee sleep quiet, till they are Revenged;
They Will haunt thee, tear thee in ten Thousand pieces;
And send a Sampler of thee to each Corner
Of the wide Mischief-studying Earth, to teach
The World the Fate of Traitors to their Country.

Zey. I never heard Great Tamerlane abused
Heavens favors to excess; but his kind Sword
Still carved out work for his diffusive Mercy;
The petty Wranglers of the Universe
Chose rather to submit to his Just Scepter,
Than to subdue each other:
Shall I deprive the World of all its Luster,
The Ornament of Story, Task of Fame,
Extinguish the great Light graces and guides it,
And by your Glory raise my Infamy?
Urge me not to a Crime your self would fly from.

Tam. Is there such Honor in the World besides?
How many Climates have I passed, and now
At last have found it in this Savage Corner?
Sure it is Instilled by Nature, not by Precept.
It Is time to dye now, for a weighty Reason:
Thou have outdone me in my own Pretensions,
And raised the price of Honor to that rate,
'Twou'd ruin me, and all my Conquered Earth
To rise to that vast purchase. Oh, the Mark's too high
For me to reach; I Will quit the Field
In Virtue, and return to Tyranny:
Kill me, or else thy Mistress dies.

Zey. kneeling. The Gods forbid.
Oh, look upon her first, and she will melt you:
You cannot hurt so sweet an Innocence.
I know you cannot, Nature will not bear it:
She Will smile away your Anger; or she will thaw
Your frozen heart t'a Torrent, with her Tears.
She is the Joy of Nature, Pride of Heaven,
The Idol of all Eyes that ever beheld her:
Tigers would lose their Fierceness at her sight,
And can Mankind hold Weapons to destroy her?
Oh, save her, save her, save her, Virtuous Prince,
And let my Life redeem her.

Tam. Rise, brave Friend.
No; both shall live together, and live happy:
I take delight in the content of all men,
Less dear than thee, tho I have none my Self.
Well, I Will not press thee against the sense of Honor,
And Nature too: I know too well the weight
They bear, in well-born Souls. A thousand ways
There are, to the great Joy that thou deny'st me:
I Will wait a little longer, spread my Sails
To the next Wind, to wast me to my Port,
Where I will Anchor, and Lanch out no more.
But, to return the Heroic Resignation,
I make thee King of China.

Zey. Viceroy rather,
When I have Conquered the Remaining Rebels.

Tam. Then, by my last Will, I bequeath it Thee;
My Death shall soon confirm it. Let Us go out,
And strait declare it to the wondering Army.
The World's my own: let us leave it in full Light;
That Sun makes no fair Day, that sets not Bright.

ACT V. SCENE I.
Tamerlane on a Couch asleep. SONG.
REason and Time had once agreed,
My Heart from Loving should be freed;
But Cupid swore, he would lay a Snare
Should catch my Reason, Time repair.
Sylvia appeared with all the Charms
And Witchcrafts of a Face,
Able to do all Mankind harms,
And Womankind disgrace:
Reason strait fled, Time would have stayed,
Mistaking for the Sun,
The glories of the brighter Maid,
By those his course to run.
Jove saw, and feared some strange surprise,
Lest all the World should be
Immortal made by her bright Eyes,
And Scorn his Deity:
So Time was forced to fly, old Age remain^
But, Ah! poor Reason never came back again.
Enter in Dumb-show, Time with his Hourglass, The Parc^ Death, speckled Fame
drawn in a Chariot by Cerberus, followed by Furies and Infernal Spirits. Scene
opens, and discovers Mount Atlas, with a Face and Beard like a Man made by
Trees, which sinks down by degrees with soft Music; and at the top of him
appear Angels with flaming Swords, and the Fiends begin to withdraw. I Ang. Be
gone, Infernal Spirits; leave this Hero,
Whose Virtues none of Human Race e're equaled.
Be calm, Great Monarch: Let no Fiends molest,
With frightful Dreams, thy too afflicted Breast.
No mortal Beauty does deserve thy Passion;
A brighter Object claims thy Admiration:
Thou have a Share in thy Creator's Love,
Thy Soul, thy Fame, are both secure above.

Tam. Where have I been, in Hell and Heaven at once?
Was this a Dream? Or did I waking see?
My Senses were not locked, sure: Had the doors
Been shut, such Visions never could have entered.
At first, 'twas horid; after, most Serene:
Oh, let me ever taste such Tranquil Joys
As this last moment Heaven infused into me!
What need I care how near I am the Haven,
If I must land in Bliss?

Enter Guard. Guard. Ragalzan begs admittance to your Presence.

Tam. How dares the cause of all my Woes come near me?
He will disturb my Thoughts again: no matter;
Why should I hope for Peace?
Enter Ragalzan. Villain, what have thou done, thou have betrayed me,
And brought me to the Suburbs of Damnation:
I Am on the top of Ae^na, scorched already
With all the Sulphurous Flames, and Hellish Vapors
That Pride, and Lust, and dire Ingratitude,
With all the black Ingredients that are boiling
Within that baleful Fur^^ce, can ^ast up;
And still thy treacherous Counsels push me forwards
Into the dreadful Gulf. Traitor, be sure
Thou bring me off this Ro^^, and place me once again
Into the tranquil Plains of cheerful Peace,
And unreproaching Consci^nce; or, by the Justice
Of all those watchful Powers that threaten my destruction,
I Will bury the^ alive, and cover thee with Kingdoms,
That thou shall never see the Light again.
(...)
But weighed it not so thoroughly.

Rag. More than this;
Because you love va^iety of Faiths,
I have inquired the opinion of the Muf^ce,
The Calif, Patriarch of Antioch, and brought
A Writing here under their Hands and Seals.

Tam. Oh, let me see those Heavenly Lines.

Rag. Look to that Paragraph.

Tam. reads. An unjust Vow is better break than kept:
This Vow is not unjust, nor needs be broke;
For tho the intent of the Demander might
Extend to free disposal of her Person
To Death, or long Captivity; yet since
It Is not expressed, the Emperor's obliged
No farther than to literal performance,
And all means may be used to save her harmless Person.

Rag. Is not this Sense?

Tam. Reason peeps out again,
O'reast with Shame and Passion: Thanks, dear Friend.
O, thou have scattered Life through my dead Veins,
And poured such Floods of Joy into my Bosom,
The sudden Heavenly Showers will cause an Inundation!
Oh, how my wrinkled Heart, shrunk up with Sorrows,
Dilates it self, to let the ruddy Rivers
Have their free course through all the Azure Channels!
Go, tell Despina she shall be obeyed,
(To the Guard.) I Will see it done my self: then bring my Daughter
(Since it must be so) bound; but hark you, Friends,
Guard her as you would do your Lives, or, more than yours,
My own: Let no bold Sacrilegious hand
Dare to profane the Temple of all Virtues;
By Heaven, he dies, that suffers any hand
To touch that Holy Maid. Oh, I Am ashamed,
That such a blot should rest upon my Glory;
But Heaven must be obeyed, tho to my blushes
Bring her, I say;
But then besure you suffer none to touch her,
Or, by the price of all my conquered Globe,
Which is not worth one hair of her bright Head,
I Will crumble you to dust, and blow you round
The Mournful Universe; which I Will hang round with black,
If her dear Life's invaded; if she dies,
And leaves me not an Heir to rule the World,
I Will Massacre Mankind, and root out all*
That race of busy intellectual Monsters,
Half Angels, and half Brutes, and worse than either:
Or turn them all to Eunuchs, who shall how!
In pious Dirges for her hovering Soul,
Till it is ^ixt in foremost ranks of Glory,
Weep out their Lives, and leave the Empty World.

Alarm without, Trumpet and Drums. Enter Axalla, with Captains. Ax. Sir, your
Triumphant Arms have crushed the Rebels:
China, and all the World is now your own,

Tam. Oh, my Axalla, oh, there was a time
I could have heard such Sounds with raging Joys;
But now it comes too late:
Give blind men Beauty, Music to the Deaf,
Give Prosperous Winds to Ships that have no Sails;
Their Joys will be like mine.

Ax. What, not in Temper yet, Sir?
I must acquaint you with a just occasion,,
To intermix some sorrows with your Joys:
The Noble Zeylan and Philarmia's slain,
Whose Gratitude to you, Love to each other
Would not excuse them from this dangerous Action.

Tam. Then Honor's out of Fashion, Tears in Tune.
Alas, poor Rival in that lo^ty Science,
There Is no man left alive that can keep up
That Beautiful Contention: I Have outlived it.
Tell me how that Heroic Pair expired.

Ax. The Rebels were dispersed, their Leaders taken*
Yet rash Philarmia followed the pursuit,
Tho rescued twice by Zeylan, we retreated;
But anxious Zeylan went back to secure her,
And in a Skirmish with the flying Rebels
Received a dangerous Wound: which caused a Rumor
Through all the Camp that he was slain. At last
Philarmia comes Victorious, hears the News;
Then strait like Lightning Armed with bright Destruction,
Flew in the thickest Troops, and flashed, and Shi^'d,
Struck dead whole Rank^ before her; till she was
Exting^ish'd by some envious hand, that drew
Death's dismal Curtain o'r her glorious Face:
Zeylan comes back, and missing her, tho faint,
And bloody, Lanches out again, and finds
A crimson heap of newly slaughtered Bodies,
Their Souls yet fluttering o'r their ruined Mansions*
And there too soon he spied
A Diamond in the Dust, sparkling Philarmia,
Pale, and yet glimmering, in the shades of Death;
Then strait tear's up his Wounds, and with his Dagger (...),
Till he falls dead upon her.

Tam. Happy Pair!

Enter Despina. Ax. What, Love affairs yet! Friends, let us retire.

[Exit with Soldier^*. Tam. Here comes the sole Disturber of my peaceful
^houghts*

Desp. Thanks, most indulgent Conqueror: Now I find
There are some Monarchs that do own the Gods,
That unrestrained Power, allayed
With Piety, can bound it self like The Ocean,
Whose uphil Waves hang o'r the threat'ned Earth*
Might overflow its humble Friend, but will not.

Trumpets, and Cornets; the Procession enters. Virgins in Mourning. Tam. So,
so; here comes the Stateliest piece of Shame
That ever Monarch groaned for: Now I feel
Honor and Piety return again. I Will keep my purpose
Close to Religion, Laws, to Heaven, to Nature
Irene is brought in like a Sacrifice. Dressed like a Sacrifice! Ah, poor Irene,
Art thou prepar^^ (...) for a sudden Fate?

Ire. A sudden Fate! There Is no such thing in Nature;
We Are dying from our ^radles: Heaven can send
No greater (...), when it has predispos'd
M^n for the (...).
It Is a qui^k M^d'cine, for a long Disease.
Re-enter A^alla. Ha! what Pageant's this?
Great Gods, can this be true? or do I see
A Lovers Oath, an over-acted Rant,
A (...) Word, that has outrun a Thought
Fore'd by the Violence of self-urging Passion,
Which the Gods laugh at, other men despise,
And feat^er to the Wind, become so sacred,
So indispen^ible, that she must dye ^or^^?
Nay, she by whom thou Liv^st, thy Angel, thy Redeemer*
Are there such things as Gods? Or are they over-busy'd?
Or is the World become so rankly Wicked
Ne'ra spare Thunderbolt is lest for Thee?

Tam. Oh, spare me, spare me; let me dye, Axall^.

Ax. Can thou devor^ that Life, that saved thy own?
See that blood spilt, that sprung from thy own Fountain;
And kept thy own from shedding? Can thou hear
Her dying Groans, by whose sweet Prayers the Heavens
Have been inclined to thy Success, and softened to
Tay Failings?
By whose dear Murmurs and Celestial Sound
Thy Life has been refreshed more than by Glory?
Whose Tears would melt the Earth into an Ocean,
Whose Sighs would cleave an Universe of Adamants,
And make a Palsy shake the guilty Earth
To ^hreds, to Atoms, to a second Chaos,
Tho it were Crampt with unrelenting Irons;
And Hearts, as hard as thine.

Tam. Axalla, Oh Axalla, could thou see
My Heart, thou would not chide, but pity me:
Here stands a Saint, and there methinks an Angel
Peeps from the Clouds, to call me to performance
Of Sacred Vows. Is Heaven divided
Against it self, and shall frail man be constant!
Nay, more than that; I Am satisfied by all
The Oracles of Heaven, the Mystic Priests
Of several Churches, that my Vow's performed
In her delivery: But, oh! I Have done too much.

Desp. Ha! is it come to this?

[Aside. Ax. Too much indeed, and more than Heaven requires:
For had you made a Vow to burn the World,
Blot out Religion, Laws, destroy Mankind,
And leave no Soul to Worship his Creator;
'Twere Sin to make it, but to keep it greater.
Fie, Sir; for shame grasp your loose thoughts together.
Bind up your shattered So^, that it may piece again,
And grow the stronger by this Amorous Fracture:
Oh, let me never live, to see
The Glory of all Ages basely buried
Thus in a Woman's Arms.

Desp. Sir, I perceive
I breed a Faction in your Family;
Your Slaves are angry, and you must obey:
Unbind the Princess; but unloose me too
From my rash Contract; It Is better for us both.

Tam. No, Fairest, no:
Let me not lose that Heaven, after assurance.
Think of some Nobler, less afflicting Trial,
Some desperate, never yet attempted Action,
Nor ever thought of: Bid me drain the Ocean,
Make Mountains Navigable, transplant a Climate,
Unhindge the Globe; Bid me obscure the Sun;
Name that impossible that shall not be done:
But urge me not to tear out mine own Bowels,
To be alive Dissected, doubly Martyred.

Desp. Are Vows made only to be broke; and Women
The Stales, to cheat the Gods by? Is this your Love?
That I must keep my Word, and you be free:
I Will try if I shall be obeyed: Strangle the Princess.

Ax. kneeling. Hold, Madam, hold: Here, take my guilty Head:
'Twas I that councel^d Bajazet's Destruction,
Contrived the Murder, urged the doubtful Prince.
Could her soft Heart contrive so harsh a Deed?
Her Pious Soul consent to such black Crimes?
Could she the fatal Laws of Empire know,
The hard necessities of Jealous Greatness?
Let me, the Author, expiate the Crime:
Let not this spotless Lamb redeem a Tiger,
Deep in your Husband's Blood.

Desp. You are her Lover;
Then I must punish you, and set her free.

Ire. Oh, Madam, hear him not: his cruel Love
Betrays his Life, but never will save mine;
For sure, I neither can, nor will outlive him.
Ah, generous Innocent! why will thou rob me
Of Martyrdom, in such a Glorious Cause,
To save my Father's Life, and ease his Sorrows,
That weigh too heavy on the afflicted World?

Desp. What Game of Glory's this: where Death's the Prize,
And Life the odious Blank? When Appetites
Are too irregular, pity they should be humored.

Tam. He wrongs himself to save his guiltless Mistress:
No Truth is half so Holy, as this Falsehood.
Despair urged Bajazet to self-Destruction;
Heaven be my Judge. 'twas no Command of mine,
Nor yet their Counsel, to substract one minute
From his Heroic Life.

Desp. So you have told me, Sir; and I begin
To think you real: well, it is time
The Vail were off, lest Passion work some mischief.
Forgive me, mighty Sir, this bold Request,
[kneeling. 'Twas but to try the fir^ess of your Love:
You have discharged your Promise to the utmost,
(...) upon the Rack your own indulgent Nature.
Sir, (...) think this was the way to win you,
And make my self the Empress of the World;
To come to your Majesty bed, all re^king
In your dear Daughters Blood? I Am satisfied
You never ordered Bajazets Destruction,
As you convinced me since.

Tam. It Is a Sacred Truth;
No more, than by hard usage, and denying
To him the sight of you, which was his Life.

Desp. That well might move me, Sir, but not so highly.

Tam. I had your temper showed me in false Glasses,
Which made me Amourously own in part
What you believed by many weighty Reasons.

Ax. This may end well: I Have seldom heard of Women
Stand upon terms with all-commanding Emperors.

Rag. If these two piece again, what will become
Of me, the Engineer? I shall be crushed
'Twixt these two mighty Wheels, that I have put
In motion. Perhaps, the Emperor is not poisoned:
Who knows the walks of wily Womankind?

Desp. Now, Sir, by Virtue of your former Grant,
I Will add but one request, you will not deny me:
It Is to release your Admirable Daughter,
And beg the Friendship of the fair Irene.

Tam. Now you revive me, Madam; all my Sorrows
Vanish like Dreams, or like the gloomy Shades,
They steal away insensibly from Daylight:
And unperceived, like well-bred Courtiers, slide
Out of their Prince's Presence. Oh, how my Heart's
Enlarged! the spacious Room left open
For Airy, lightsome thoughts; there is nothing lest
That can disturb my Peace. Strike off her Chains
And bring her to the Empress.

Ax. The Gods Forbid: What, give her Sacred Life
Into the Hands of one that Vows her Death!
^^ust not to covered Flames, nor Furies reconciled.

Tam. Ha! hold a little.

(To the Guards.) Desp. Am I suspected? Then my Faith's discharged;
And my Revenge, chained up by unjust Pity,
Breaks loose again; my darling, dear Revenge,
And rages for its Prey. Perform your Vow, Great Sir.

Ax. Oh, hear a little! May you not accept
A meaner Offering for this mighty Princess;
As Deities of old took worthless Brutes
To save Heroic Lives; and give the Emperor
A full discharge of his rash Vow.

Desp. If either of you dye, Heaven be my Witness
I freely clear the Emperor of his Vow.
The other dies of Grief by course.

[Aside. Ax. One Life, to save a better, it is no Crime,
But an exchange, to the advantage of
All the surviving World: Then thus, Sir, I absolve you.
[Stabs himself. Guard her dear Life, or let just Vengeance shake
Your Guilty Throne.

Tam. Oh desperate Fondness!

Ire. Oh Heavens!

Irene swoons. Tam. and Ragal. run to her. Tam. What ails Irene?

Ire. Nothing but Dying.

Rag. Sure'tis not Grief alone; I fear she is Poisoned,
By some corrupted Servant: and I Have heard
Some mutt'ring on it.

Tam. Have thou indeed?

Rag. But here
I have a Cordial-Antidote, will expel
Both Grief, and Poison too.

Tam. Give it her quickly.
(Ragal. gives it her.) Ha! She revives.

Rag. to Desp. But she will as soon relapse:
I Have poisoned her, without that State and Pomp,
Which I knew would not take.

Desp. What needed that rash have?

Rag. Ha! She relents, and longs to be our Sovereign;
But I Will secure her,
For fear of squeamish penitential Tales:
Then say, 'twas Justice for my murdered Friend.
Goes to Ax. and embraces him. Ah, my poor dying Friend, dear fellow Soldier!
Have we outlived all dangers from our Foes,
To die thus tamely? Sir, can you bear these wrongs?
Just Heavens, I cannot* False Murdress!

[Stabs Despina. Desp. What thou, Ragalzan! Oh, thou double Traytor^
Did not thou blow the Coals of my revenge,
Accuse them all of Bajazets Destruction?

Tam. Guards, seize the Villain.

Rag. Can you believe her, Sir?
She spits her Venom, now she is trod upon.

Tam. Hold me up, Crantor, I am faint with Sorrow.

Desp. I, and with Poison too. Here was the Dagger kept
To Vindicate my wrongs upon thy Daughter,
Whom now Ragalzan poisoned*
Thou have not many minutes left to live,
Nor I, to tell thee how.

[Dyes. Tam. Blessed be the hand that did it: had thou spared
One Life, more precious than my own, thou might
Have bustled with the briskest Female Saints
For place in Glory.

Ire. Oh, generous Soul! Oh, my beloved Axalla!
Kneeling by him. Oh, tell thy poor Irene, why thou wast
So kindly cruel to thy self and me?

Ax. Live, Princess, Live; live to thy Father's Joy,
The Empire's quiet, and the Ages Glory:
Oh, live, to teach the World more Innocence,
And let this Wretch expire; who might have stayed
To Have loved you longer, not have served you better.

[Dyes. Ire. What, would thou have me live an Age of Sorrows,
When the first Moment of thy Fate has killed me?
I ^aint a pace! Kind Heaven has heard my Prayers:
Oh, I come after thee! nothing on Earth shall stop me.
Two Angels are my Bridemen, Saints my Singers,
The Clouds my Chariot, and the Skies my Shrine;
Where I for ever will join hands with thine.
Oh! it is too much to have both Heaven and Thee.

[Dyes. Tam. She Is gone; the sweetest Saint Heaven ever shined with!
Guards, bear the guilty Wretch to Death and Torture.

Rag. Bear me in Triumph, Guards; I Have won the day*
And dye a greater Conqueror than thy self,
Most mighty Tamerlane: thou, and my lesser Foes,
About my Feet.

Tam. Away with the vile Traitor.
Ex. with Rag. He urged my Patience: now I Will dye in Peace.
Oh, now I Am safe! Now the kind Poison comes
To end the Quarrel betwixt Love and Honor*
To satisfy my Friends, secure my Fame.
You Gods, that make unchangeable Decrees,
And lead Mankind in strong, but unseen Lines;
If you assume us hence to nobler Seats,
Receive me quickly, with a generous Freedom,
For no man's Works deserve so great Rewards:
The powers we have, come from you; And what Thanks
Can they deserve, who only pay what is lent,
And have no power to Cheat? Perhaps, you scorn
The beggarly return of Benefits,
Like Trafficking Mankind: If these be your Resolves,
My hopes I Anchor on his generous Doctrine,
Whose Sepulcher in Iewry I paid Vows to,
Who gives Rewards, yet Suffered to obtain'em.
And now I find voluptuous death steal on me,
And I begin to dream before I sleep:
Green Meadows, Silver Streams, and warbling Winds.
All the whole Sky a Rainbow. Lovely Sight!
Who would not dye for this? Now I Am in the Dark;
And there I leave thee, World, just as I ever found thee.

[Dye^ FINIS.
Books Printed for John Weld, etc.
THe Lives of Illustrious Men, written in Latin by Cornelius Nepos, and done
into English by several Hands The Second Edition; in 8^.

2. A Discourse of Wit; showing what is meant by that which Men usually call so,
with its Causes, different sorts, and great abuses thereof; also a Character of
a Pretender to Wit, with Choice Instructions for the attaining the Ingenious
Art of Translating. By D. A. M. D. in 12^.

3 There Is lately published by Dr. Horneck, a seasonable Discourse, showing the
great necessity of applying our selves betimes to the serious practice of
Religion, very useful (especially at this time) to re-call both young and old
from the Errors of their ways; in 12^. price, I s.


