THE FAMOUS TRAGEDY OF King Charles I.

As it was ACTED before White Hall, By the FANATICAL Servants OF Oliver
Cromwell.

LONDON: Printed for J. BAKER. Price Sixpence.

beheading of King Charles I

THE PROLOGUE To the GENTRY.
THough Johnson, Shakespeare, Goffe and Davenant,
Brave Sucklin, Beaumont, Fletcher, Shurley want
The Life of Action, and their learned Lines
Are loathed, by the Monsters of the Times;
Yet your refined Souls, can Penetrate
Their depth of Merit, and excuse their Fate:
With this position, those rude Elves that dare
Against all Divine, and humane Laws, make War;
Who count it treble Glory, to transgress
Perfect in nothing. but imperfectness.
Can find no better Engine to advance
Their Thrones, then Vile, and Beastly Ignorance:
Their Bloody Mirmidons. of the Table round,
Project to raise, our Theaters to the Ground:
No marvel they lap Blood, as Milk and Glory,
To be Recorded Villains, upon Story.
"For having Killed their King, where will they stay
"That thorough God and Majesty, make way,
"Throwing the Nobles, and the Gentry down
"Levelling all distinctions to the Crown.
So that (which Heaven forbid) should they reduce
Our English World, to their confused Use;
'Twill be admired, more then a Prodegee,
To hear an Herald, state a Prodegy,
An 'twill be thought a sharp and bitter Blur
To salute any, by the Title (Sir.)
We here present you, his deplored Fall,
Whose Death will prove a Ruin general;
(If Fates forbid not) and we hold to view
What the World knows, is not more strange then true:
Anotomizing Treason, damning them
Who Murdered Charles, to share His Diad^m
And to preserve their Souls in Flesh whose (...)
Unto the Ruin, of all Europe tends:
But Joves all Potent Thunder shall divide
Their Plots, and sink them, in their height of Pride.
Exit. The PERSONS.
Fairfax. Ireton. Rainsborough. Peter's. Bosvil. Cromwell. Pride. Sir Charles
Lucas. Sir George Lisle. Blackburne. Lord Capell. Lord Goring. Treason,
Ambition, Lust, Perjury, Sacrilege, Revenge, Parliament Men Messengers Mrs.
Lambert. Mutes.
Soldiers. Servants

THE TRAGEDY OF KING Charles the First.
ACT I.
Enter Hugh Peter's and Oliver Cromwell. Cromwell. MY fine Facetious Devil, who
wear'st the Livery of the Stygian God, as the White Emblem of thy Innocence:
Have thou prepared a Pithy Speech against the Essence and the Power of KINGS?
That when to Morrow all my Mirmidons do meet upon Onslow-heath, like the Greek
Exorcist, Renowned Calchas, when with his Magic Numbers he encouraged great
Alreus Son, and Marshal Diomed to Prosecute their Seige against Priam's Town,
by thy insinuating persuasive Art, their Hearts may move, like Reeds, when
Boreas Breath smites the huge Oaks, that on Mount Pelion grow, I know that
Nectar hangs upon thy Lips, and that the most absurd Syllogism, or
Ear-deceiving Paradox, maintained by thee, shall seem Oraculous, more dangerous
to question than the Sacred Writ:

Sing then (my Hugh) and so thy Numbers sing,
All those that hear, may jointly curse their King.

Peter's. Most valiant and invincible Commander, whose Names as terrible to the
Royallists, as e're was Humades to the Turks, or Talbet to the French; thy
Nose, like a bright Beacon, sparkling still (the Aetna, that does Fame our
English World) hangs like a Comet over thy dreadful Face, denouncing Death and
Vengeance; the Ancients Famed Alcides for his Acts, thou have not Slain, but
Taken the Kingly Lion, and like great Tamberlain with his Bajazet, can render
him within an Iron Cage a spectacle of Mirth, when e're thou please. Had the
Snake-footed, Earth-born Sons of Old but had thy aid, Imponere pelien ossae,
Old Saturn might have laughed to see his Son sit sadly by him in the Cimerian
Shades, while thou did sway the Empire of the Skies; Englands best Patriot,
and my Noble a Sermon (such as Ignatius Loyalla himself, where he to Morrow to
supply my place, for dangerous, Doctrine, direful Use and dreadful Application,
would glory to Name his) I have provided such an one,

As shall confirm our Faction ten times more
Then all that they have known, or heard before:
In it I Will prove Kings (ab origin) have been the Peoples plague, given them
by the Angry God's in Wrath, the mere Exuberance of their Crimes, the Sordid
Vulgar being delighted much to Honor, those dull Images which themselves
Erect, and dread those Anticks which themselves depaint, themselves affording
both the Horns and Nails which make them either dangerous or Ugly, I will
assert, that Regal Power is Devilish, and inconsistent with the Peoples
Freedom: I will make it good, the Tyrant now in hold, (whom some yet call,
their Lord King CHARLES) does Merit violent Death, as Guilty of the many
Thousand Horrors committed in the late most bitter War, I will demonstratively
--


Crom. Enough, Enough, (my dearest Hugh) thou art my better Genius, thy Advice,
I will rely on with more sure respect then on a Sybills Words, or Delphian
Oracle, drink the Elixar of that precious Metal it is Sovereign against that
Perilous Disease, called [he gives him Gold] Speaking Truth, 'twill prove an
Animation to thy Mind, for to proceed in thy Audacious Practice (I mean,
against the King and 's House of Peers) thou wilt find it a most precious
Antitode against the Poison, wavering Fame shall spit, and to conclude, a
perfect Supplement of all defects that Time, or Fate shall by harsh Doom
appoint,

But what will please thee best (my dearest Hugh)
'T will purvey for thee, Wine and Wenches too.

Peter's. Sir, you are pleased to make my Faults your Mirth, I do confess the
Luscious Paphian Sin, has ever vanquished all my Virtuous Powers, the Cyptian
Queen (in full aspect of Mars) being predominant solely at my Birth, besides
the Constitution of my Body made up of moisture and venerable Humors, though
some great Ladies say, (lean Mex do best) may help for to extenuate my Crime of
being too often proved beneath the Navel. But Noble Sir, this Colloque is too
poor, if we consider our most high resolves, our Language should be like those
Laws we mean to give, awful and to be wondered at by Mortals, Sable-brow'd
Saturn, and Blood-thirsty Mars must seem sole Rectors over us Abroad, though
Venus and her sort Son the sightless Boy, challenge our utmost Faculties in
private.


Crom. Thou art that Lodestone, which shall draw my Sense to any part of
Policy in the Machiavilian World, we two (like Mahomet and his pliant Monk)
will Frame an English Alcoran, which shall be written with the self same
Pencil, great Draco engraved his Laws, but first we must subdue the Testy Scot,
and send the Beggars Home as lousie, though not so propt with Limbs, or so well
shaped as when they chose the Politic Hamilton to be their General: Mean time
if those auspicious Stars of Sin, whose Influence has prosper'd Treason
hitherto, shall still continue Gracious to our Villainy, Tom Fairfax may take
the Town of Colchester, and force that stubborn Truly-valiant Heroes (for in my
Thoughts I do esteem them so) who have taken shelter in that Ancient City at
least for to comply on remiss Terms; my next Work then is, to Newmould our
Army, and give a strong Purgation to those Punies who act for me, and may be
called my Parliament, whose great work yet remains to do (my Hugh) the King
shall die, and they shall Father the most damned Act upon the Power of Justice;
that done, all Earls and Lords shall down for to make way for me and those I
favor.

Then thee and I, and those whom we create
Will Reign like Princes, and the Lords of Fate.

Pet. I knew before the scope of your intents, and do applaud them as
magnanimous, and the sole way left to preserve our lives; in order unto which
your dear design, it shall be my task, both at Press and Pulpit, to render
Kingly Government obnoxious and incompatible with the Peoples Rights; to prove
the imprisoned King a truculent Tyrant whose blood alone can expiate Heavens
wrath, and purchase an atonement with the Deities; expect me all I may
(renowned Sir) for promulgation of our well-fixt Cause, from which no fear of
pain, or hope ^f profit shall be of force to draw me.

For he that dares attempt, and goes not on,
Does leap for safety into Phlegeton.

Crom. Our conference here must end, some three days hence I march toward the
old North to meet the Bannock feeding the fiery Scots: They have (I heard)
already worsted Lambert, and puffed up with the pride of victory come on like
Lions, flushed in humane gore, I shall not need to pray your readiness.


Pet. Command me as your Creature; Sir, you were pleased to impose a task upon
me (which by the Aid of some one amongst the Nine, I know not which to thank
for the good turn) I have performed, after a tedious pumping: The Theme you
gave me, Sir, you know was this, The Peoples rights transcends the power of
Kings. Sir, I have done my best to justify your learned Axiom in this Scrowl.

[gives him a Paper.
Crom. Your love to my requests makes your performance of them swift and
punctual by the great Genius of this Land (over which I hope to Reign) I had
forgot what late I urged you to, this shall oblige my love -- What Is here I am
an ill Verse-fier or Verse-maker, (what do you call your Trimeter-men?) and
none but those have sipt of Helicon (I Have heard) can grace a Verse in the
reading it -- pray sing them your self.

gives the Scrowl back to Peter's.
Pet. How Sir? sing them!


Crom. Sing them, or say them, all is one; think not I take you for a Baller
Poet, but I want terms of Art.


Pet. At your pleasure Sir.
[Peters reads. Even till this Age People durst not see
The pride of Pomp in formal Tyranny,
The People who raise Kings unto the Crown
Are ladders, standing still, to let them down.

Crom. The Peoples backs is the worst pair of Stairs a Man can possibly
adventure upon they are strong, but slipery, firm, but false: You are an
excellent Similist (my Hugh) it is an apt comparison to similize the People to a
Ladder; but I pray Heaven thee and I have not ascended so high upon this tall
Ladder, that we shall never have an opportunity to descend without breaking our
necks.


Pet. I beseech you Sir, either hear me, without paraphrasing, or command me to
read no more --


Crom. Nay, now I see thou art a pettish Poet; read on, I Will be as silent as a
Statue --


Pet. Abolish these false Oracles of might,
'Cause we were once blind, shall we now hate light?
Why, like the Wood that yields helves to the Ax
Should we upon our selves lay heavy tax,
Setting up Kings our freedom to confound
With our own strength, exhausting our own ground?

Crom. So, so, enough of this, I Will hear the rest in private, let it suffice
(dear Hugh) that I accept your Verses with all love, and do assign you if (
Apollo please) a Grove of Bay to shade your learned skull from his all-peircing
Beams; Wing'-Time has sent one of his Sons to warn me hasten hence; my ^ate
moves swift, and I must move with it (my Hugh) Farewell, fall not to offer up
the strict Orisons unto our swarthy if now I prove victorious:

A King and Kingdom is my valors prize,
By both their ruins, I intend to rise.

manet Peter's. [Exit Cromwell. Pet. This Fellow (sure) was born (as the III.
Richard, who once ruled this Land) with his mouth full of Teeth, Nature has
given him an I^on Soul, able and active limbs, a politic brain, which is
indeed a storehouse of politic stratagems, as if she meant him for the fall
and ruin of all Mankind, his stout Confederates work their ends amain, but he
outworks 'em all, the very Mine they 've placed for to blow up their pious
Sovereign, shall countermine by Him ruin to themselves, and I Sail with them to
the invisible Land (my Hugh) the King must die, those were his words: O sad and
fatal Project! when they have served their utmost ends upon Him, and on their
knees took Oaths to reinstate Him, must a black Coffin be his Throne, and a
cold Vault his garnished Pavillion? Let the famed Villains of all former times
have their dire deeds razed out of Fames black Book as trivial accidents and
neglected dreams, that these may take up all the room on Record for the most
glorious Miscreants e're Rebelled; but what strange fancy lurks within my
brain, which makes me tax their ways with whom I act, whose deeds I do applaud
as meritorious, deserving honor, and the best repute? what vile finister fate
governs my Life? I loath the ills I do, yet hugg them next my Heart. Pardon
great Jove and my most gracious Prince, whose Virtues do deprive thee of a
being; I must go on, though Oreus yaun upon me, and Demogorgon (with his damned
crew) dictates in person what I preach or Write. Cromwell I come with a
disguised face, with as reserved a cunning as that Greek that brought in
Pallas's Horse to half raised TROY; thy craft I will repel with double care,
resting as jealous as I lay purdue behind a potent Foe; thy guilt is great, so
mine and all of us; it is policy that must protect my life, and place me a
degree above you all.

For he that will the Devils Master be,
Must have a mind, mischievous than he.

Exit. The end of the First Act.
ACT II.
Enter Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow, in Arms, Drums beating, Colors flying with
Soldiers as before the Town of COLCHESTER. Fairfax. THus having ram'd our
Enemies in Kent, quieted Cornwall, and secured Devonshire; what now remains but
with accustomed courage to take in this strong Town of Golchester? Within whose
Walls do lodge diverse of note, who are professed and open Enemies unto the
State we serve.


Ireton. The fate was just, that with delusive hopes has led them to a
receptical of ruin, from whence they cannot budge without our knowledge.


Rainsborow. They Are taken in our Toils, and must not escape with Life quickly
let us draw out our Line, and raise our Batterries, girting the Town with a
close Seige, and let the Cannons dreadful voice proclaim to them their certain
ruin.


Fairf. First let us Summon them to yield on Terms; if they prove so Fool hardy
as to refuse, then let our Iron-ball in smoke and sulphur sing a sad Requiem in
their fearful ears, sound loud the summons, that the Foe may hear we wish a
Parlee.


[A Parlee sounded. Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, Lord-Capell, Lord
Goring, etc. appears as upon: he Walls. Sir Charles. Who gives this hasty
Summons?


Fairfax. Know Sir, the General and the Army raised for the preservation of the
State of England for to support and vindicate their Privileges; in their
Nam(...), that you yield up your selves, and all are under your (...) with this
(...) use.


Sir Charles. Traitor (...) I hold this City) chosen (...) and these my loyal
valiant (...) survive, and rather then (...) (with i^) into the A^.


Fairf. Thou and thy (...) boure such Men as (...) to a hundred, and a hundred
(...) I do confess (thou have triumph(...) scend unto Helis shades like him)
but that proves not the (...) thy cause:

For, by the same rule Ottaman may boast,
The partial Deities favor him the most.

Rainsborow. By that God whom I serve thou traitor Lisle, I Will see thee hewn
in pieces, and thy cursed body thrown unto the D^^^.


Sir George. A vaunt thou hom-bred Mungrel, who art (intruth) merely a valiant
Voice, an hollow Cask in which some rumbling with delights to sport it self;
Thersit^s thus, durst menace Agamemnon, Know Fellow, I have been viciorious
even against a multitude, have trod the thorny path of cragged War, my Body
naked, and my ^eet unshood have viewed those horrors of a purple neld
untroubl'd and unt^uch'd, which but to hear summed up would fright thy
Coward-Soul, from forth her dirty Dog-hole.


Rainsborow. Why spend we time in Dialegue with these Miscreants these cautift
Elves, who fight for Yoaks and Fetters, with as much zeal as half starved
Wretches beg a boon to sat their hungers and wish profesedly to spend their
bloods to please a Tyrants lust.


Lord Capell. Away mechanic Slave, whatsaucy Devil prompts thee so to prate,
when the meanest here thou ought to stoop with all obsequious Duty? Thou
sordid Groom, whom of a Skippers-Boy, the Westminsterian Rebels made thee
their Admiral, whom even the dullest Seamen so despised, they scorned to hale
an Anchor at thy bidding, and at last (tired with thy loathed Company)
intending to have sowz'd thee in the deep (moved with thy trickling Tears and
Pitious plaints) set thee on shore to Foot it back to Westminster; how dares
thy perjured Tongue to challenge us, serving our dread Lord, His Sacred
Majesty, Him whom all Europe wonders at, as the best of all the Christian
Kings, who for his discreet valor Rivals Scipio, for prudence Solomon, for
temperance without Parallel, as are his Sufferings, and griping Griefs by you
(base Traitors) each day heaped upon Him, having immured His Royal Person up in
a strong Den, fit for untamed Lions, banished his Loyal Imperial Lady, and with
Her the Two Eldest of his Issue, bereaved Him of his Navy and Revenue, and what
e're truth called His, know perjured Rebels, ere this Summer end, (perhaps
e're Sol does hunt the Nemean Lion) we shall have strong relief, you a just
Punishment, if not,

Our comfort is, though we be left in the lurch,
We Martyrs fall, for God, the King and Church.

Ireton. You Will not accept then of our proferr'd Summons, or come to
composition.


Lord Goring. Compound! Confound we may (perhaps) some Thousands of you.


Sir Charles. I am resolved ye Traitors, and so I know are my Honored Friends,
which is the Sense of all within the Town, to hold this place even to the
utmost hazard; nor are we destitute of much Provision, enough for to supply us
many Months; when that fails, we have Horses many Hundreds, of Dogs and Cats
even a Multitude: Zeno and Chrisippus, the two main Pillars of the Stoic Sect,
pronounce such Meats as useful to Mankind, as the best Sheep or neat; the
Ancient Almains held the self-same Doctrine. We'll be their Imitators, and that
you may know it is our resolution, forsake your Station, e're we leave the
Walls, or the hot Breath, that lightens from an Angry Cannons Throat, shall try
to wast you hence, away, away we'll meet you in plain Fed.

Thou true Jehovah, now own thine own Cause,
Thou know we Fight for thee, our King and Laws.

Fair. Draw up our Troops we'll make these Boasters feel,
The potent Rigor of our strong Edge Steel.
Alarm excursions, a shout within and crying.
[Fair. cum su^s Exit. Open the Gates, On, on, on,

Enter Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle and Lord Capel, their Party; at the
other Door, Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborough, with their Party, they charge Three
to Three, while the Soldiers on both sides Encounter, the Round heads are
beaten off, a Retreat sounded. Sir Charles. The Power superior to the God of
War, has Graced our first Attempt with Victory; the Rebels (with exceeding
loss) are Fled, whom the most Valiant Capel has in Pursuit; see how they
scutover the Neighboring Plains, like Flocks of Sheep before an hungry Lion;
so for the ^uture, let Almighty Jove infatuate their proud Hearts with Panick
Fear, who strike at himself in his Vicegerent.

Kings are Earths Gods, and those that Menace them
(Were It in their Power) would share his Diadem.
He speaks this looking upon some Roundheads lying dead on the ground selves
for your Impieties! Alas, deluded self-destroying Men! whose Erring Souls by
this winged Hermes, has ushered unto the depth of Barathrum, in blew Flames
for evermore to howl, Cursing your selves for your Impieties! Oh Erring Vulgar!
Oh besotted People, that take such pains to become Miserable, who (with the
Phrygian Fabulators Dog) catch at vain Shadows, and lose the substance: So the
Athenians Courted Thirty Tyrants to be the Party that should gall their
Heart Strings; and the fond Syracusians labored sore to have the Dionisii be
their Consults: Was ever any Nation blessed with so good a Prince (as Charles
our King) that so opprobriously desserted him? Succeeding Ages cannot choose but
say

Nations have suffered cause their Kings were Ill,
But Britains Charles, his Peoples Sins did Kill.
But let it hap as God shall appoint, if it be written in the Book of Fate, the
Rebels shall dissolve the English Monarchy, with the Life blood of their most
Gracious Prince, yet let us hinder that dire Ominous Day, (while we have Being
with our utmost Might, and e're we Fall and be Co^^ixt with new and stranger
Earth, by hard Achievements and Heroict Acts (performed for Charles, and for
our Countries sake) let us provide us Fame when We are Dead, that the next Age,
when they shall Read the Story of this Unnatural, Uncivil War; and amongst a
Crowd of Warriors find our Names Filed with those, that durst pass through all
Horrors by Death and Vengeance, for their King and Sovereign.

They may sing Peans to our Valiant Acts,
And yield us a kind Plaudit for our Facts.

Sir George. If we defend this Town against the Rebels Fury but One Month
longer, Hamiltonian Duke (who now has pasted Tweed with a Numerous Army, full
Twenty Thousand Scots, Ten Thousand English Commanded by the Truly-Valiant and
invincible Knight, Renowned Langdale, we shall have Honorable and sure Relief;
mean time by frequent Sallies, we'll endeavor to break in pieces Fairfax his
guilty Forces; the Prince of Wales is now upon the Downs, and with him most
part of the Royal Navy; the Londoners speak against the Junto, and every Day
are feared to rise against them; the Loyal Welsh continue strong in Arms, and
eke in every Angle of the Land the People wish for Action; the Face of things
at present, promise fairly:

But should you fail (by force of Destiny)
Our comfort is, we (when we list) can Die.

Sir Charles. I heed not Hamilton or his Resolves, knowing him to be Ambitious,
Treacherous, a Proteus that can shift into all Shapes, a sly Insinuating
Sicophant, who by his most Falacious Machinations, has been the Ruin of the
King and Us; 'twas he that Instigated first the King to raise a War against the
Covenanters, (yet under Hand Incited them against Him) 'twas he that gave His
Majesty Advice to go in Person to the Senate House, there to demand the Five
Seditious Members (yet secretly sent them Word of His Intentions) 'twas he
(however he seemed in show Averse) that when His Majesty escaped to the Scots,
when Fairfax wholly had subdued His Forces, procured the Damned Sallary of his
Master, for Twenty Thousand Pounds; and I much fear, it is he and only he, that
will betray the Army he now leads (know thou not George) he ever did aspire
to be the King of Scots.

It Is he that made England all on Flame,
Blasted its Beauty, Burnt its goodly Frame;
And the Armilla which his Zeal does twist,
Is to be Cataline, yet a Calvanist.

Sir George. Let him be Damned and sink to Hell withal his Sins about him, let
us do our Parts, and leave the rest to Heaven (Faith Sir Charles) since we have
Beat the Foe, while Swarthy Tom flies with his, Timorous Troops, here let us
Frolic one half Hour, Mars and Thalia sometimes do accord, only a Health or
two unto our Royal Master.


Sir Charles. George, I am easily led by thy Advice, although it suit not with
our present state to play a Barly-break in a Golgatha, or Drink down Sorrow
amongst a heap of Trunks, as liveless as those Clods they lie upon; I prithee
do thy pleasure: But, say that Ireton (who stands facing us) should in the
midst of our intended Mirth, come up and turn our Triumph into Purple Tears,
and in our Goblets mix our Sanguine Gore.


Sir George. Why? 'twill be rare, I Would wish no other sport; we Lapethites should
soon repel those Centaures, the scuffle (sure) would be as strange and famous,
as that wherein all Ixion's Horse-hoof'd Race, were sent to Hell (swift Nessus
only scaping) who was reserved for a more dreadful Fate, they shall have naught
to boast of, (come they hear) but Iron in their Flesh, and Gunpowder in their
Noses.


Sir Charles. Be it as thou do wish, I Will strive to be as Merry as
Democritus, and Laugh at War and Damages.


Sir George. You highly Honor us (most Noble Governor) [Speaking to the
Soldiers. My Fellow Soldiers, have all your Arms in readiness as you were now
to Charge the Surly Foe, we will not jest away our Lives, or give the
Roundheads Cause to boast a Triumph in their Cathedrated Conventicles; two of
you fetch that [Sends two Soldiers. Runlet of Old Sherry, that is placed behind
the Door of the Town Hall, bring also store of Pots, for we shall use 'em here
(as the Trojans, when by Atrens Sons they were beleaguered close for Hellens
Rape, Hector Sarpedon, Troyolus and Old Pryam, beneath fair Illions Walls (girt
in bright Arms) sat Banqueting before the Black Hair'd Greeks, we'll sit
securely and pledge full Crowned Cups, (perhaps) 'twill Mad the Rebels:

Which if I know, I shall grow Fat with Laughter,
And I will use to drink them down hereafter.

Sir Charles. The same good Fellow (George) thou ever were; see how the Rebels
Grin and Gape upon us.


Sir George. They should Participate of our flowing Cups, would they take but
the pains to come amongst Us, such as the Roman Cateline did provide for those
he had drawn into his Confederacy, Wine mixed with Blood (an Horrid Sacrament)
by which the Swore to Level Romes proud Battlements. So, set it down (my [The
Soldiers return with the Wine. Friends) and quickly pierce it, and then draw
out with as enlarged a Mind as Princes give Gratuities -- it is Rich and Lusty
Liquor, such as would make Heraclitus to Laugh, and Dull Diogence Dance, even
in his Tob! Here Noble Governor, this Bowl brimful, unto the Happiness of Him,
whom Fame of all the European Kings do call the best.


Sir Charles. With as much willingness as one half-spent with a Contagious
Fever, receives a Dose he hopes may bring him Health, will I solemnize it upon
my Knees. All kneel, they drink the health round while the Chambers are sh^t,
and Trumpets perpetudlly sound.


Sir George. So, this was as well performed, about again with it.


Sir Charles. Once more receive it Soldiers, and that done, let us retire unto
our Garrison, believe me (George) we play with Lightning too securely; you know
I dare as much, as him dares most, but dare not be too confidently Rash.


Sir George. By Heaven (Sir Charles) we will not part so tamely, we'll have one
Catch e're we forsake the Ground, if you please for to aid me with your Voice,
(for it must be Sung in Parts) You (Soldiers) all join (...) in the Close, what
says Sir Charles.


Sir Charles. You may command my Suffrage (worthy Lisle) I know (...) you
Fancy; begin --


SONG.
Sir Geo. Plump chcek'd Bacchus, we to thee
Will yield all honor as befits,
For sure thou art a Deity
That can refine the dullest wits,
The liquor of thy Vine
Is precious and divine,
It makes even Cowards fight.

Sir Cha. It prompts our tongues to talk,
Though not our feet to walk,
And dictates what to write.

Omnes. Drink then (Boys) and drown all sorrow,
Who knows if we shall drink to morrow?

Sir Geo. Even in the midst of danger
When safety is a stranger
And no hope of relief,
Take a Bowl full of Canary,
We of our woes grow weary,
And cry a fig ser grief.

Sir Cha. Drink each a hearty draught
Till by thy brains you are caught,
'Twill quite expel all humors;
Cry God preserve the King,
And shield him with his wing,
And d -- for the Round heads rumors.

Omnes. Drink, etc.

Sir Geo. Judge you Gentlemen, is not this better then to be always moiling in
Sand and Salt Peter, continually employed in raising Rampires throwing up
Sconces, and inventing Stratagems, to foil that Foe who fears to look upon us?
Has not this added to your former Vigor? We must not always fight, lest we
become all but one Wound, nor ever tipple, lest the Circaean liquor do
Metamorphose us into Swinish shapes; he that is a true Soldier

Will undertake all Horros, for his chink;
And no less venture for a Wench and Drink.

Sir Cha. This doctrine (my Friend Lisle) is dangerous, yet too much preached
and practiced in all Armies; Soldiers do him their Glory, and detract from
their own worth, that Love to drink and drab; he only may be termed truly
Valiant, that can Repulse and vanquish his own Passions; but this Dish I
perceive (my Soldiers) is too much stuffed with Sage, for you to palliate -- I
wonder Noble Capel stays so long, I fear he has engaged himself too far after
the Flying Foe; he knows not which way back for to Retreat.


Sir Geo. He Is an experienced Soldier, and so inured unto the several
stratagems of War, that 'twere a sin Mars would severely plague, but for to
doubt his Fortune.


Sir Cha. I would not be too confident, or to careless, Heavens bring him off
with safety and with Honor -- let us now re-enter our invincible Fort, and
there consult for safety; we must expect the Rebels will once more make their
Approaches to our Walls (perhaps) with new Supplies, we will prepare a Tempest
against they Storm.

But if great Jove remember whose we are,
His ponderous Thunder will their Onset Mar.

Exit. The end of the second Act.
ACT III.
Enter Cromwell, solus. Crom. THus far my policies run smooth and current, deep
Rivers glide as silent as the Night, when shallow Books fall with a troubled
noise; wherefore was Man created like the Gods, but that like them he should
dispose his Acts to the great dread of some, envy of others, easily deluded the
King my Master, I have led on with hopes of Reestablishment so long, that now
he doubts my feigned reallity; and astrong Party in the Junto sit, who without
me, are now in Treaty with him, but I shall break the Neck of their Design,
(perhaps) before they think it, the several Commanders of the Army are now all
of my Faction, while Fairfax (silly Fool) sits like a Statue, as if he nothing
knew, or nothing durst, I have proposed unto the several Officers to forsake
the King, and yield him up (as one not fit to live) unto the Block; I have
informed them, (and it takes exceedingly, so forward are the Fools to work my
ends, and their own certain Ruin) that the King is a Man of Blood, by no means
to be Trusted, being of a rigid and implicable Spirit, hating (even to the
Death) all have opposed Him, and that should He regain his former Power, he
quickly would make use on it to their Ruin, that therefore they should make a
Retreat in ti^^ nor yield their Necks unto a Tyrants Mercy, that they have
declared ^^ highly for him, might the more easily (by far) entrap him; nor was
it a discredit so to do, since in all Ages such Politic course has been
thought just and safe, they (snared with my words) resolve to do ^^, for to
remove the King by violent Death, and to set up a M^^itary ^ower; now my Plots
work, the Stage grows great with Horror, the English M^narchy grows sick to
Death, its very Basis has an Ag^e-fit which will not cease to shake it, till
it be Levelled to the humble Earth.

Mount, Mount my Thoughts, unite like scattered springs,
It Is a strong Torrent that must bear down Kings.
Enter Peter's, Boswill, Pride, with Soldiers. Here I appointed my dear Buffoon
Peter's, and Col. Boswill, Pride, and my whole Army to meet about this hour --
See, they come; Welcome dear Friends, you have observed your Time: My Hugh, how
thrives our Counsel in the Army, that our Great General the Lord Fairfax
guides? I am sure these Gallant Souls serve under me, are all unanimous to
shake off Kings, and while the Iron's hot to strike that Blow, which shall for
ever free the English Nation from Tyrants, and their awful Power.


Pet. Heroic Sir, they all (even as one Man) applaud even to the skies your
rare projection, both Officers and Soldiers, Covetous for to Accomplish what is
by you proposed, and as a signal of their Resolutions, see here, the more part
of a queint Remonstrance, which must by us be brought to a Period, wherein we
will divulge unto the World, the Reasons and Grounds of our Intents.


Crom. As I would wish, never till now could England hope a Happiness; why, how
now Boswill, Why art thou so sad? The Noble Pride stands -- like a Man
astonished, or like a Marble Statue whose Aged Feet are wrapped in Withered Moss,
what is the matter?


Pride. Nothing (dear Sir) but an excessive Joy which has surpised my
Faculties, and crazed upon the Organs of my Speech, my Mind is busied about the
Kingdoms Fate, my Soul in a deep Conference with my Sense about Mature Affairs.


Bos. The Constitution of my Soul agrees with thine in each degree of Temper,
(most honored Crom.) from our late sworn Principles I Will not recide, though
Heaven Rained down Fire upon me, though Earth yawn'd wide, and Hell gorged
Balls of Sulphur, the King (that Man of Blood) shall lose his Head, and all his
prime Adherents wait on Him unto the other World; the People we will Rule by
the Sword's power, their Lives and Goods, (by Conquest) we have gained, our
sway must be maintained by Strength, not Law.

The Sword that cut a passage to our Sphere,
It Is that alone must secure us there.

Crom. Oh let me put thee in my Bosom (Boswill) henceforth let us converse more
nearly, and like the Zod caks gemini mix our Loves, we'll be a second Pylades
and Orest^s, and never part till death (my Hugh) let us hear some part of that
Remonstrance, 'twill highly spur us on to Action.


Pet. You shall, the most material Clauses (Sir) are these, which take with
this Exordium I Penned late Yesternight:

[He Reads Absolute power of necessity must subsist and keep above water,
though all else be assured of drowning, to the loss of all (or at least many)
branches of universal Freedom, and therefore the Fox did not conclude amiss
when he saw his fellows st^ps march toward the Lions Den. Nos vestigia
terrent, if we enter into a strict scrutiny, we shall find that our choice and
our nature gave us Kings, the dignity conferred upon a single Man, was (sure)
intended for the good of all, but where one draws from all, can that be
pleasing or fortunate? or to leave this one, can that be injury? and therefore
in order thereto we declare, That we call King CHARLES to an account, as the
prime Promoter, Abetter and sole Occasioner of all the Murders and Outrages,
committed this many years, during the war, and bring him to a Trial for his
Life; that with him we will bring to judgment all those of his Party, who (in
order to his Arbitrary Commands) have Marthered, spoiled and impovert shed the
Freeborn People of England --


Crom. Hold, I have heard enough, why this is done to the purpose, and shows
all Gallantry did not Die with Brutus, and his Confederate Consuls; now Laurel
wreaths commixt with Myrtle branches shall decked our fortunate Brows as the
true Patriots of our native Country, (we'll give the whole world cause for to
remember us) aside the ensuing Ages when they read our Acts, shall bless our
Memory with devout respect, but flying Phoebus now has left our Hemisphere,
black Night has now put on her Ebbon Robe and wrapped the Welkin in a sable
shroud, we must away now toward the frozen North, (my fellow Soldiers) we must
direct our March to jerk the Scots back to their Sedgy Cottages, Malevolent
Saturn, oh! be thou propitious, prosper thy Agent in his Deeds of Death,

Which are so grim and horrid, full of ire,
Some will suspect, the Devil, was my Sire.

Exeunt Omnes. Enter Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow, cum aliis, as in a Tent, a
Table, and Tapers. Fairf. How goes the Night?


Ire. About the hour of Twelve.


Fairf. Now then, while all the World's involved in silence, and Man and Beast
takes their Repose and Rest, let us determine about these Captive Heroes, who
with this Town of Colchester to Morrow, must yield themselves unto our Mercy.


Rain. Renowned General, under whose Conduct we have been fortunate and
Victorious, I need not now recite, since you well know what vast Expense of
Blood, of Toil and Treasure, we have been at since we Besieged this Town, the
Third part of our Army quite Consumed by the Immured Enemies frequent Sallies,
by our unfruitful Onsets, and hard Duty, and how Merciless they have shown
themselves to those (of ours) whom Fortune gave them Prisoners; all which
considered, I do give my Vote (and Justice speaks the same) that Capel, Goring,
Lucas, and Stout Lisle, Die without Mercy, even that very Day which we receive
the Town.


Ire. Which is to Morrow.


Fairf. The Law of Arms will not allow of that, they yield themselves on
Quarter, and for the Peers (I mean Goring and Capel) our Power does not extend
to question them, they must be ordered as our States decree; the ancient only
Captains of the World, Hambal, Scipio, and Themistocles esteemed it far more
Glorious, having Conquered their proud Antagonists, to preserve their Lives
(given them as their Boon) then to inctici an ugly censure on them: I love an
Enemy that is truly Valiant, these have exceeded story in their Acts,

And have repeli'd a Siege, such as Breda
Never beheld, nor famous Ravena.

Rains. Then let them live to be a Terror to us, and once more to engage the
Land with Broils, (know Sir) we are not false whilst these subsist; and should
your Clement Mind so sway your Sense, as not to take their Lives, who have
sought ours, we shall have cause to disesteem your Person and your Power, as
him, whose easy Nature and soft Temper is incompatible with our Persons
safety, and Honor our Repute.

Since, if by you, Mercy to them is shown,
You seek our Ruin, and project your own.

Fairf. Ha!


Ire. Though in a rough unpolished Phrase (he utters Truth) most Noble General,
let not his seeming Rudeness raise your Anger, since Time has taught you he is
truly Faithful, no less Magnanimous in active War; Sir, it concerns you nearly
not to permit your inuate Love to Valor, so grail the Wings of just deserved
Fury. you must not tolerate these Men to escape with Life:

For 'twill be thought if you remisly do,
You love their Actions, and Applaud them to.

Fairf. You then are Generals of the Host, not I; but be it as you Counsel,
share you betwixt the Brave Spirits of Two that (if Pithagorus Transmigration
were) would make a Thersites, or Thraso Valiant, (Ransborow) see them shot to
Death as Soldiers destined by Fortune to a Noble end; some two Hours bence I
shall expect to here you say, they are dead

My Soul (I feel) is wondrously perplexed,
Who knows but mine or your turn may be next?

Exit. Rains. He Is much distempered, sure they have bought his Mercy, how
stoutly did he argue to preserve them, with what reluctance denounce their Doom!


Ireton. An ardent Love to worth and honor moves him (without all doubt) to
pity their sad fate, for though Mountains may meet, and generate e're they,
and we, enter firm Union, yet we must needs acknowledge they are Men of most
approved Valor; but see the cheerful Lady of the light appears in the Horizon
decked in her saffron Robe, having old Tithons chill Embraces, she summons
every young and sprightly Sol, to wrap her in his Odoriferous Bosom -- hark,
they shout; What may this portend?

[A shout within. Enter a Soldier. What News does thy Tongue Labor with?


Sol. The Town of Colchester is just now surrendered unto the Generals Hands,
the Governor Sir Charles Lucas, his Loved Associate Sir George Lisle, with the
Lord Capel, Old Goring, and a Number more of Gentlemen are cried up as
Prisoners.


Rains. Be it thy Charge forthwith to certify Lucas and Lisle, that they
prepare themselves two Hours hence to Travail toward the Empire of the Skies,
or to the shades of Dis. I mean to Die.


Sol. I shall Sir.


Exit. Rains. Come Commissary, let us go view the Town to cheer our Friends, and
doom our scornful Foes.

It glads my Soul, and is the only good
That I delight in, for to spill their Blocd.

Exit. Enter Sir Cha. Lucas, and Sir Geo. Lisle, as in Prison. Sir Cha. The
Iron Hand of Jove lies heavy on us, (Oh George) the proud Rebellious Crew
prevail, Loyalty sinks with Plumets at his Heels, while cursed Rebellion rides
on the Sun Beams, justles Jove from his Seat, and fathoms Clouds.


Sir Geo. They may thank that invincible Champion, Hunger, had not he helped,
the Town had yet been ours, the woeful cries of Women and Children, imploring
Bread to stanch their pining Stomachs, their Guts almost congealed to Stone
within them, their Faces black with Famine, stalking the Streets like (Magic
summoned) Ghosts, together with our own dire need, enforced us to surrender to
those Rebels, but Joves dread vengeance (sure) will seize on them that might
(but would not) have prevented this; degenerate London, who have shaken Hands
with thine Allegiance, thy aspiring Fabrics ere long must lie -- What speaks
thy have?


Enter a Soldier. Sol. From the Commanders, Col. Rainsborow, and Commissary
Ire. I have in trust to let you know, some Minuits hence you are to die.


Exit. Sir Cha. Oh perjured Miscreants! is this your Mercy? this my Prophetic
Soul still whispered to me; I knew they in our Bloods would bath their Guilt,
and sacrifice our Lives to their God Treason, these Victims befit Molech, not
Messiah, whom these professed Saints, but real Devils, seem to make the Umpire
of their Deeds.

Angry Rhamnusia, though we fall to Dust,
Punish these Traitors, for their Acts Unjust.

Sir Geo. Then it is decreed, we must take leave of Day light, and tread the
Paths of Immortality.


Jove. art thou just, have thou reward for those
Who unto pious acts their lives dispose?
And have thou lost thy vengeance, can it be
That these aspiring Titans, escape Scot-free?
Where are thy dire Cyclopean balls, the same
That mudling Mulciber, does in Lemnos frame?
It Is thy Olympic vigor can alone
Ding down these Rebels unto Phlegeton.
Enter Three Soldiers Armed. Ha, what are you?


Sol. Your Executioners.


Sir. Cha. You are our welcomest Friends; who is alloted to make his Exit first?


1. Sol. Your self must lead the Dance of Death.


Sir Cha. Here then I bid fairwel, unto this Stage of Misery, my Life has been
but one continued Scene, woven with perturbations and Anxieties --

But stay, whither must now my fleeting Soul take Wing? Into you Starry
Mansion, or Steep Tartarus, up to the Milky way, she will take her flight?

Where Souls of Heroes do enjoy their bliss,
Where all Celestial comforts, meet and kiss;
Mankinds Redeemer, Oh Emanuel!
Who in Man's shape on Earth were pleased to dwell.
Receive my better part -- are you prepared --


Sol. We are.


Sir Cha. Charge me then home, I love to chew those Winter-plums, they are
those Cordial comfits I accept, as sick Men do great Gallens Antidotes;
methinks the Earth goes round Copernicus; thou did relate a Truth, that
Tellus ever has an Ague Fit; Sol wrap thy Glorious Head within a Cloud, or if
thou needs wilt view my Destiny, put on a Mask of Blood, Death is but Somnus
Harbinger, we visit his All-peaceful Monarchy, e're we arrive at Heavens Golden
Gates, where such as knock with a Religious Hand, do never miss of Entrance;
Let me Embrace thee (George) e're I part hence, Thou will not long survive me
-- Shoot, Shoot. [They Embrace.

Incomparable Strafford (see) I come
To wait on thee in blessed Elysium.
[They shoot. So, you have done it bravely, you are good Marks-Men, I applaud
you for it even in Death -- so many Passages are allowed my Soul, She knows not
which to Issue out at, this Fabric of my Flesh now begins to Totter, like to
some City (for it is Peoples Sins) rocked by the humerous Winds; what a fierce
Combat is there now maintained betwixt my wounded Heart and mighty Mors, who
grasps it b'twixt his Hands, squeezing it like a Sponge; so furious Boreas
smites the Solid Oaks that on Mount Pelion grow, making them Nod like unto
feeble Reeds, (George) thy Hand, my Twins of Light, have lost their wonted
Property, Death with his Icy-fingers seals them up: Farewell, Great CHARLES, I
Die thy Loyal Servant. George, we shall meet some Minuits hence (I doubt not)
in a place where all Joys enjoy one Center; the Worlds great Architectresse
never saw two of Her Sons Murdered so Barbarously after fair Quarter promised.

Therefore great Jove, if thou love Loyal Breath,
Take vengeance on the Authors of my Death.

Sir Geo. There cracked the Cords of Life, Oh noble Lucas! [He dies. let me
breathe out my Soul, upon thy Azure Lips: So [Kisses him. Brave a complete Man,
no Monsters (these excepted) would have Butchered; my turn is next, is it not?


Sol. It is.


Sir Geo. Nor would I purchase Life with one Entreaty, this Object so inflames
me, I am grown weary of this Fleshly Weed, and fain would put it off,
exchanging it for an Immortal Robe, Invelloped with Carbuncles, and Saphires --
I, but to have our Lives bereft by a sharp violent Death, to Sleep in a thin
shroud, involved in feigned Earth, our Nerves and Atteries shrunk up like
singed Lute-strings, or the withered Wreath of some Famed Hero, made away in
the dark for to converse with Worms, and half formed Creatures, such as the
slime of Seven-Headed Nile, produces by the aid of Phoebus Beams: Oh! there is
a Contemplation that would stagger the most resolved Spirit, but Destiny must
be Obeyed, Death is still Death, thongh diversely inflicted: To have ones Throat
sluc'd with a Golden Knife, or to be thrust through with a Silver Sword,
mitigates not the Wound, more than the sufferance. But Oh ye vengeful Furies of
dark Hell! ye Three-fell Sisters of steep Erebus, awful Aenyo, all ye dreadful
Hags ominous to Mortals, forsake your Black Cimerian Cells, and with your
steely Whips ascend the Earth, Lash, Lash Traitors to despair and Obliquy; let
Strife, Contention, Fraud, Guile and deep horror seize on great Charles his
Foes, severing their strength, and frustrating their Hopes till they sink
lower, underneath their Treasons, then Plumets cast into the Baltic Sea: Now
do your Office, I am prepared; Oh! you have [They shoot. put Balls of Wildfire
in my Bowels, I am but all one Aetna; Farewell, base gloomy World, in which
deluded Man, ravished with Toys, hunts after Bubbles; till them he break and
vanishes as he had never been, I sink beneath the burden of my own weight,
would with my Fall, the Machiny of the World might be Unriverted and shook to
pieces, the Air commixt with Earth, the humid with the tumid Element, and
active Fire contesting against them both, reducing all to the Original Chaos;
but I contend in vain, the Gods created Man but for their sport, and its fit I
should fulfill their Ends, wishing but not prevailing; I spy the pure
Immaculate Soul of Lucas, Travailing through the Air to find a residence: Stay
gentle Spirit, company is good, when tedious Journies are prescribed, we'll
both fix in one Sphere, when looking down, we will behold and smile.

To see these seeming Saints, but real Friends,
Fall by their devilishly devised Ends.

1. Sol. The Traitors both are Dead.

[He dies.
2. Sol. Traitors, those are Traitors, whose most rigorous Doom, we have
Obeyed, in Murdering these Brave Men.


3. Sol. How Is is this? let us seize upon him.


1. Sol. Do, and make have to most assured Damnation.


2. Sol. I am no longer of your Base Society; Heaven Pardon [Draws. what is
past, my future Deeds shall amply expiate my former Crimes, the Blood of Noble
Lucas, and Brave Lisle,

On Rainsborow's base Head, I will requite,
And send his Soul unto Eternal Night.
Exit.
1. Sol. Let us remove the Bodies, and make after him.

Exeunt, bearing the Bodies.
The end of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
Enters Peter's, with Mrs. Lambert. Pet. THis he imposed as a Command, it has
not been my Practice to to solicit in Causes of this kind for other Men.


Mrs. Lamb. Too soon you have made Trial of your skill; does your Grave Habit
suit with such Course Employment, Reverend Sir?


Pet. Faith Mistress, among Friends, the outward Garb ought not to cause a
Nicety: He is my Honored Patron, took me half frozen from the Foodful Earth,
and warmed me in his Bosom; and 'twere a dull Ingratitude in me not to reward
his Bounty with my service: The Radiant Luster of your Star-like Eyes, makes
him to Bow as your Obsequious Vassal, whom Thousands count it Honor to Obey,
so great an Influence has your excellent Beauty upon his manly Faculties: He Is
now returned, decked with Triumphant Wreaths, from chasing the Blew-bonnets to
their Mountains, having taught that stubborn People, his Name can make the
Genius of their Country tremble, the Politic Havilton is his Prisoner, all
Knees bow to him, as Great Caesar's Rival, nothing does want for to complete his
Conquest, but your Assent to Love him.


Mrs. Lamb. Why so I do, and all Men else that do retain his Temper.


Pet. Your Love admits of too vast extent, I mean, can you Affect him so, as to
admit him to your Bed?


Mrs. Lamb. St. Winifrid forbid it; you know (Sir) that I have a Lord and
Husband, a Man made up of Magnanimity, whose Love is mixed with an Indulgent
Care, should he but doubt of such an Injury, your Master, I my self, and all by
him suspected, had better enter a Phalarian Bull, or stand the Thunders shock
-- alas! I dare not.


Pet. These are but Womanish Fears, Incident unto all your Sex; come you must
yield to Love him, how should your Husband know of your Day Banquets, your
Nightly Revels, and sweet Paphian sports? He Is now in Lancashire, Disbanding
Troops of Horse; or should some Way-ward Fiend, convey the Knowledge of your
stolen Embraces unto his Jealous Ear, my Masters Greatness, countermands his
Fury, circled within his Arms, should Heaven, Earth, and Hell conspire to wrong
you, 'twere sin to doubt a Danger: Consider (Lady) what a potent Friend, what
Treasure, Honor, and content you will gain (if Mundane Glories do Affect you) by
yiedling Love to him, whom other Dames of highest Blood and Fortune would sue
for such a Favor.


Mrs. Lamb. Although my inward Thoughts do tax my Levity, yet won with your
most sugared Eloquence; I here yield all of mine, Lamb. calls his, unto your
Masters Bosom.


Crom. I accept it (Lady) nor shall my most delicious Parragon ever have cause
for to Repent Her Favor, my self, my Sword, all under my Command, the spoils
Enter Cromwell, having been seen to peep through the hangings, during the
Collequie b'twixt Pet. and Mrs. Lambert. of Nations, all that Earth can boast,
shall at thy beck be proved for to be summoned (Pope^ like) Bath thou thy
delicate Body in Asses Milk, commixt with Almond Flower, (with Cleopatra)
dissolve inestimable precious stones in every Glass or luscious Wine thou
drink'st, tread thou on Tyrian silks and Ermins skins let Art and Nature both,
industriously conspire to sat thy lavish Wishes, my Treasure is Inexhaustible;
Three Kingdoms (Dear) I grasp thus -- in this Palm, their Riches and their
Glories all are mine, the Goddess of the World my Patroness Fortune has given
all into my Hands; as for the Man (they call the King) he has not Four and
Twenty Hours to Live, I h've hired a Dapper Lad, a Neat-Tongu'd (but inexorable
Fellow) for Fifteen Hundred Pounds, to ease Him of the Burden of His Cares
(good King) he is fitter far to converse with Saints and Seraphims, than with
Erroneous and Ambitious Mortals, and 'twere a sin (a grand one) for to deter
the Hopes Celestials have for to enjoy His presence) my Bradshaws Brains do
Brood, and has discovered a Line of Law that never yet was talk on, which
says, If Kings do not obey their Subjects, they may chastise them with
Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death; with him a Crew (whom I have ^ke in pay) do
sit as Judges to make good this Maxim: My Bradshaw is grown Proud of his Great
Office, I Have ordered him for to be Clothed in Purple, all Heads for to stand
bare on every Shoulder when the Lord President (for so I have Created him)
shall be in presence, his Co-adjutors all have Honor too; and when assembled,
have no worse a Title then the High Court of Justice: These all are sworn for
to fulfill my Ends, and Doom their King to Die; which once performed, then I am
a Lord alone, though not a King by Title, yet by Power, and thou (my Dearest)
shall share Glories with me, thy Lovely Brows decked with a Coronet of Ophir
Gold, inchas'd with Onix stones; nor do thou dread thy Husbands Anger, his open
Violence, or his Clandestine Plots, he is my Vassal merely at pleasure; and if
I hear he but Repines at our Embraces, I Will spurn his Soul out with my Foot.
(My Hugh) this Business was well managed, thou art a Fluent Orator, when
Cyprian Venus, and her winged Son, waits at thy Elbow, this Service has
obliged me more unto thee then all thy former Industries.


Pet. I am your humblest Creature.


Crom. But why (my dearest Mistress) is that Face of yours (which even the Gods
gaze at with greedy longing) obscured with sullen Mists? What sorrow claims a
Superiority over your Harmonious Senses? Oh let not Care Plow Furrows in that
Forehead! is (now) more smooth than Polished Ivory, or the true Turtles
Feather; give but your Grief a Name, and if it lie in humane Power to ease you,
resolve a speedy and a pleasing Remedy hasts to your Comfort.


Mrs. Lamb. Sir, can you think my Heart is so Obdurate? Or that I can so soon
be lost unto a Feminine Temper, as not to cogitate with what hasty Rashness I
have extinguished Hymen's Tapers, which (some Hours since) Rivald Sols Beams in
Luster, with what a forward Zeal I have infringed my Marriage Vow, and given
away that which is none of mine? Oh Heaven!


Pet. 'sfoot Sir, she is fallen into a Relapse; Kiss her Sir, (quickly) or
she will cool so fast, and her Heart freeze into so hard a Lump, not all your
future Courtship or activity, shall be of force to melt her to your wishes.


Crom. How stupid am I in these Amorous Arts Dear Mistress! let not Penitential
Fancies (the spurious Issues of dull Melancholy) gain the least Power over
your Faculties: What can you fear, while I dare be your Friend? Think on the
Glories that I late proposed; all which shall be made yours, with eminent
safety.


Mrs. Lamb. I shall endeavor Sir, to bear my self as her that Loves and
Honors you.


Crom. Now thou sing'st sweetly, in a far more Melifluous Tone than Quires of
Nightingals, and that this Temper never may forsake thee, our Time we'll spend
in various Delights, such as Caligula, where he again on Earth would covet to
enjoy; enter ye Six Prime Westminsterian Senators,

Music, strike high, our Spirits to advance,
While we do mingle in an Active Dance.
Enter Six Masquers, Habited for Ambition, Treason, Lust, Revenge, Perjury,
Sacrilege, Music; they Dance with them, join Cromwell and Mrs. Lambert,
Peter's singing out last, they Dance together by themselves. SONG.
Let these Joys ever be in prime
Naught but virture is a crime;
Maugre the wise,
Mean men must rise,
Every Olimpiad of time.
Taste them boldly, terrine pleasures,
Yours is the Earth, and all its Treasures;
Rifle, Plunder,
And keep all under,
Let Murmurers wait your leisures.
Exeunt Masquers.
Crom. This was performed as I would wish, now Sweet let us in for to complete
our Happiness, and taste those Joys which Jove himself will Envy, knowing
Agenors Daughter, or Calisto, Inachian Io, or his blasted Semele, were not
indu'd with Beauty so Immense as thee (my dearest Happiness)

Set on unto the Chamber of delight,
Do not Dream (Lambert) thou art Horned to Night.
Excunt. Enter Fairf. Ireton, Rainsb. etc.
Fairf. I need not advertise you Col. Rainsborow, not to be Implacably severe,
against the refractory Chomly; or when you are sat down before that most
impregnable Pontefract-Castle, to Storm more often than rair advantages calls you
to Action: Mars go along with you, I am for London with my Prisoners.


Rains. My Lord, your humble Servant, Victory and Triumph ever wait upon you.


Ire. Farewell Noble Col.

[Exeunt Fairf. and Ire.
Rains. Adieu, sweet Commissary.

Alone, and in all haste to take my Journey, to so Remote an Angle of the Land,
there to take charge of those I never saw, discard their General, and make my
self their Leader, this is a strange Injunction, but I must do it.

Enter his Servant. Have thou delivered what I gave in charge?
Serve. I have Sir; he will not fail punctually to perform it, and sent you, the
true and exact relation (as near as he can gather) who were the Prime Promoters
(of your unlookt-for) Journey.


Rains. Let Us to Horse, I Will Ride Twelve Miles this Night, they shall have no
Cause to blame my Tardiness, away.

Exit. Enter Blackburne (being the Soldier that escaped from amongst the
Fairfaxians, with an intent to Kill Rainsborow, Act 3) with him Three Soldiers,
their Pistols and Swords.
Black. Hist, this way the Villain Posted, only his Man and he together; I hope
the Divine Justice will not suffer him, for to escape our Hands; that way, that
way.

Exeunt. Enter Rains. and his Servant.
Rains. We have quite lost the beaten Road -- there let our Horses Graze a
while; I feel strange Thoughts fighting about my Heart, either my guilty Fancy
did delude me, or I beheld the Ghosts of Lucas and of Lisle, all full of Wounds
staring just now upon me, there! there! do thou see nothing?


Serve. Not I Sir; good Sir let us forsake this gloomy Glade, it presents
Horror, and besides the Night is near half spent.


Rains. A Grim, but Supine Terror clogs my Soul; Morpheus with his ieaden Mace
Arrests my Senses, I needs must Sleep a while

[Lies down
Enter Blackburne and his Mates. Black. Kind Fates, I thank you; this is that
cruel, Tiger (my Fellows) who contrived the much lamented Deaths of Generous
Lucas, and of Valiant Lisle.


Rains. Ha, who sent thee hither?

[He rises up.
Black. Thy Sins; I come to Kill thee.


Rains. It is no easy Task that thou have undertaken, I have an Arm as
Vigorous as thine, a Pistol that will lighten e're it Thunders, a Sword too
that never yet forsook his Master in time of danger.


Black. If thou but call to Mind thy Damned Treasons, thy Charnel Plots, and
vile Conspiracies, thy Murders, Rapines, and fell Outrages, a Child of Seven
Years Old, may quell thy Force and lead thee Captive in a. String; if thou
dare think thy Numerous Crimes have not barred up the Door of Heaven against
thee, pray be but speedy in thy Orisons, I have no mind to Kill thy Soul.


Rains. Saucy Slave, think on thy own sad End; and either at my Feet implore
Remission of thy Rash Attempt, or thou art Dead.


Black. So brave, have at you Sir.


They charge with their Pistols, Rainsborow 's Man falls; also one of Black.
Confederates. Serve. This is Honor beyond thought to fall, or to survive my
Masters second.


Rains. Come on, Sir.


Black. Though thou have escaped my scalding Lead, my cooler Steel shall find a
Passage to thy Heart.

[They fight.
Rains. Thou art not (sure) invulnerable, even Thetis Son was Slain by Phrigian
Paris -- but, Oh my guilt Hangs heavy on my Arm! and Impedes the Violence of my
Blows -- there

[They fight.
Black. Will you not sink, or have you many Souls that take their reign by
turns? If it be so, I have so good a Cause, I cannot shrink beneath the
Trenchant Blade, till by my single Force I have dismissed them all; there Dog
--


Rains. Injurious Destinies, have you enriched my Fame with many Victories over
whole Troops of Men, for to permit my fall in the Catastrophe, by a most
despicable Knapsack bearer, who Carves my Flesh as Butchers do their Meat, and
bores me till I grow transparent -- Oh! my Blood drills like to some prodigious
Spout, which Huswifes set a tilt to cleanse their Linen -- but shall I fall
without Revenge -- He falls


Black. Oh! are you measuring out your length in Clay? Ye Twins of Valor,
Lucas and Brave Lisle.

Your heads, up from your earthly pillows rear,
And see your Murderer lie weltering here.

Rains. My Spirits faint, my Heart is sick to Death, I hold the panting lump
betwixt my Teeth, but 'twill not brook to stay; let all those that have sought
their Sovereigns Ruin, look upon me and my deserved Destiny, I would invoke the
Powers above, but them I have so much exasperated, they will stop their Ears to
my complaints: Oh! die --

Thou King of flames, let me in Sulphur swim
Near to that Caudron, hold my Patron, Pim.
[He dies.
Black. Oh! dire and dreadful end, he is gone to his own Home, (the cursed
Dungeon) with as much willingness as holy Anchorites surrender their white
Souls to Holy Angels, his Body we will throw in yonder Ditch for Beasts and
Birds, to Prey on: I have some [They remove him Wounds, but none (I think) are
Mortal. Come fellow Soldier, let us have to shelter, this Deed when once
Divulged, will be examined strictly --

Beyond the Seas, for safety I will fly.
Till England once more be a Monarchy.
Exeunt.
The end of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
Enter Crom. with Mrs. Lamb. in their Night Robes. Crom. APollo is too hasty in
his rise, and emulates my Happiness; had Jupiter enjoyed so rare a Creature as
thy self (my dear) in his lascivious Arms, he would have charmed bright Phoebus
to the East, and have united Day and Night in one, as when he Revell'd 'twixt
Amphitrios Sheets; how likes my Love of her new Bedfellow?


Mrs. Lamb. You are as Valiant Sir, in those soft Skirmishes Venus expects in
her Pavillion, as in those Deeds of Death, Mars does approve of in his Tent of
War.

Enter Peter's.
Pet. Good Morrow to the most Renowned Crom. and his most Excellent Mistress;
Sir, I this Morning have received a Letter directed unto you, I think it comes
from Commissary Ireton.


Crom. Some News of more than ordinary Consequence if it bare date from him.

[He opens and reads the Letter. Lieut. General.
THe deed is done, (which either ever makes, or mars us all) the King
(according to the Doom of our high Court of Justice) this Morning lost his
Head, Thousands of People being Spectators of his Tragedy: His Body we have
given to the Duke of Richmond, to be disposed off as he thinks fit; the Vulgar
(generally) are much enraged at it, and say (having proceeded so far in our
Treasons against him, that we despaired of Pardon to preserve our own Lives,
and to make our selves Masters over them) we have Murdered the most Virtuous
Prince in Europe at his own Door, but we shall Muzel the Mouths of that
Many-headed Hydra e're it be long; and in the mean time must resolve to keep
what we have got by Frand and Force, by Oppression and Violence; we have
Outlawed the Eldest and Second Son of the dead King, and Proclaimed, That if
ever they be taken on English Ground, they shall die without Mercy; we are now
modelizing the Commonwealth, in the prosecution of which, both Soldiers and
Senators, desire your Aid; this I was commanded to cettifie you; and had I not
been commanded, it had been done of his own accord by

Your assured Friend to serve you, IRETON.



Crom. Then now I am above the reach of Fate, prepare (my Hugh) though not to
be a Bishop, yet to dispose of a whole Diocese; you Lady (the sole Mistress of
my Hopes) are yet untainted in your Husbands Thoughts, let him again Repose his
Horned Head betwixt your Delicate Paps, I must with speed to London, whence I
will send thee thy Lapful of Gold (my Danae) and Jewels Rich and Sparkling, for
to Adorn thy only Eminent Beauty; nor shall be long e're I in Person visit thee.


Mrs. Lamb. Sir, you have Robbed me both of Honor, and my Heart at once; so
strange a Fate does sway me, that whatsoever you judge to be convenient, I must
not contradict.


Crom. Thou art as Wise as Beauteous, rest confident of my Fidelity, Farewell
Star of the North.

[Kisses her, she goes off Come (Hugh) lets post unto the Famous City,
To sit in Council with the State Commit.

Exeunt. Enter Chorus. Now all is lost to humane Sense,
The King is Murdered on pretense,
He was a Tyrant, and in Him
Our Laws and Rights to Laethe swim,
Buried for ever in his Death,
Since they subsisted by his Breath.
1. See here, what would make Indians weep,
2. And force the Monsters of the deep;
3. Shed Tears into the Briny main,
4. And after drink them up again;
5. That which forced Sol to hide his Head
6. Pierced into Graves, and waked the dead;
7. And that which made the Angels hide
He discovers behind the travers the Dead body of the King, also the Bodies of
the Lord CAPEL, Hamilton, and Holland. 8. Their Faces (deep in Scarlet Died)
9. With their soft Wings, and does compel
10. The Catholic to turn Infidel,
11. And to believe Presbyters John's,
12. And strictest Solifidians,
13. Are damned (even from their Cradle) since
14. They Murdered so Divine a Prince. These 14. Verses are spoken wholly in
relation to the Kings Murder.

This Body, when possessed with Life
[pointing to Hamilton Was the sole Causer of the strife,
And Breach (which so our Land has rent)
Betwixt the King and Parliament;
'Twas he, that by his Hell-bred Plots
Decoyed the King amongst the Scots;
Yet afterward (his own to hold)
Sold Him to Traitors for their Gold;
All this in hopes to win that Crown,
Desire of which, has brought him down
Unto the Earth, slain (even by them)
From whom he hoped a Diadem;
His Soul the Furies mean to ply,
With tortures to eternity.
This Body when it it used to walk,
[Pointing to Holland. Knew better how to Drab and Talk,
To wear Gay Clothes, and Complement,
Then to be wisely Eminent;
For Loyalty unto his King
His folly not, his Faith did bring
Him to the Block. But here lies one,
[pointing to the L. Capel. The Glory of his Nation,
A Man of Valor, Virtue, Wit,
Who Learning Loved, and clierisht it
Without compare; his Charity
Extended unto each degree,
Ages and Sex, (had they no more
But this one Devilish Act in store
Of Murdering him) the Rebels (sure)
Could not, yet eight Year more procure,
To Reign by Blood, by Rapines, Horrors,
Treason, inexplicable Terrors;
But what the Fates allot we must
Submit to, and in them we trust
To see these Monsters fall and Rot,
By God and Virtuous Men forgot.
Exit.
FINIS.

