The Famous and Renowned HISTORY OF Valentine and Orson SONS to the Famous and
Renowned Emperor of Constantinople Containing their Marvelous Adventures in
Love and Arms

Newly Printed and Abbreviated for the Benefit and ^^^^^ation of young Men and
Maids, whose Impatience will (...) ^^^fer to read the larger Volume, etc.

depiction of a knight on horseback leading a male prisoner by a rope tied
around his wrists

Printed by W. O. for C. Bates, at the Sun and Bible in P^^^^ (...)

depiction of a king with two babies in the woods with a bear, a horse and a
female figure pepin

orson

Valentin



The History of Valentine a^^
Chap. I. How King Pepin gave his Sister Bellisant in (...) to Alexander,
Emperor of Constantinople; and how (...) Priest made Love to her, and the
Misery that ensued ther^ (...) and of the Birth of Valentine and Orson.
IN former time reigned a potent and wise King in France, wh^ had a fair and
virtuous Sister, having in her all the perfections of Nature; this Lady was
named Bellisant, the fame of her running through many Countries, at last fame
spread it felf into the ears of Alexander, Emperor of Constantinople, who
being stricken in love, with the fame of her beauty, shipp d himself, with his
Train of Nobles, for the Kingdom of France, (renowned at that time through the
World;) having a prosperous gale he soon landed, and journy'd to the Court, and
shortly after his arrival, he declares the cause: King Pepin knowing this,
prepared great triumphs for the celebrating this noble contract: great joy
there was on every side, being nobly entertained in great honor, as befitted
their estates? as soon as the marriage feast was done preparation was made for
their departing to Constantinople (...) not long after the^ arrived, and were
received with (...) nor and (...) ^ou would think it now (...) two (...) tur^
(...) an^ (...) (...) ^er to speak, and presently banished her his Court and
(...) ^ompanied only with one Man called Blandiman, these (...) ^ight and day,
till they come to the Kingdom of France (...) ^entations began of fresh, not
daring to appear before (...) ^her, King Pepin, being under this disgrace; and
being (...) ^d near Paris, she fell in travel, and her Man rode for a (...),
but before he could return, she was delivered of two ^^^^s to her great joy;
but see what follows, a bear crossing the ^ood, violently takes one of the
Babes and bears it to her den; the Empress lays the other down, and runs after
the bear, but all in vain, at last, being tired out, she fainting to the
ground; in the mean time King Pepin, being a hunting, comes by where the Child
lay, and seeing it to be a pretty Babe sends it to his Court^ to be brought up
nobly. Blandiman being returned, and finding the Empress in that condition,
recovers her, but she fills the air with cries and lamentations, and travesting
on they were taken by Giant Ferrgaus, and imprisoned, where we'll leave 'em,
and see what became of her two Sons.

Chap. II. How Valentine being brought up in King Pepin's Court, increased
daily in Strength and Virtues; and how Orson became a Wild-man in the
Wilderness among the Beasts.
(...) as before I rehearsed, having sent the Child, Va^ (...) Paris to be
brought up, at long (...) ^n apt^ (...) ^^d^ (...) ^wn (...) the (...) so much
that she gave it sock, which nourishment caused the Child to grow hairy rough
like a beast, and exceeding strong, and he soon began to run up and down the
woods, fighting with, and devouring other beasts, and grew extreem ^^rte,
insomuch that no Man dur^^ approach near where this Wild-man was; his renown
spreading itself in a small time through all the Kingdom of France, that all the
Country round about chased and hunted him; he feared no weapons but snapped
them asunder: he wore no garments, nor had any kind of speech. In the mean time
Valentine increased in knowledge and wisdom exceedingly, and was greatly
beloved of all the Court; and now the Squire that had the charge of him,
presented him before the King, whom the King placed with his own Daughter
Eglantine, which caused many murmurings against his greatness, saying, 'That at
best he was but a Bastard. In the mean time it chanced that there came into
Orleans diverse Imbassadors from the Pope. demanding ^id against the Sarazens,
who had lately taken the City of Rome. King Pepin understanding this, prepares
a great Army to make resistance against them. Amongst the rest, Valentine was
made a Chief Commander; when they were come to Rome, King Pepin desired battle,
and fain would understand the state of the City; and it was told him, that the
Admiral of the Saraz^ns had surprised the City, and put ^ll without the sword.
The King lays close siege to the City, and calls h s Barons and Officers of his
Army, desiring them to find out a Man to bear a letter to the Admiral, which
none did d^^^^ to undertake; Valantine stepped before the King, and said,
Mighty, Sovereign. If you be pleased, I will carry the lette^, and deliver the
message, and shall not fear to speak to the proud Pagan Admiral, and to the
whole Host of Pagans, were their number twice as many as they be. The King
hearing this, was exceeding joyful, marvelling at his courage; whereupon he
drew a letter of defiance, and gave to him, who took his leave of the King, and
went to the City, and came to the place where the Admiral lay, and saluted him
thus, The Gods preserve the Noble and Puissant King Pepin, my Dread Sovereign,
and Mahomet, whom thou serve^^ save and defend thee, Renowned Admiral. When
Valentine had thus said, the Admiral roused himself in his chair, and with a
frown replied, 'Messenger, return, and get thee out of my sight, and say unto
King Pepin, I will him either to renounce his faith, and believe in Mohomet, or
else let him look to receive no other sentence than death; and get thee gone,
make no longer stay, for my heart is enraged against thee. But his high words
nothing daunted our Warrior, but he mildly said, High and Mighty Admiral, do
not imagine that by pride and presumtion, I come before you, until you hear the
cause thereof. Then said the Admiral, Say on, Valentine replied, I was accused
before the King for a Coward, and that since I come I would have run from Camp;
for which he vowed to smite off my head: I hearing this, sought rather to save
my life, man to lose both life and honor, and therefore I gave out, That I
would come and desire you on the King's behalf, to break two spears with you to
try your valor, and win my lost honor; therefore I desire you would grant my
request, otherwise I dare not return. The Admiral hearing this cunning tale,
said, I swear by Mahomet, thou shall not be refused; and to the end the French
may see it. I Will ordain the just without the City. Valentine fell down and
kissed his hand, desiring a Confessor, telling him he was afraid he should be
slain, which he granted, and presently sent him a Christian Priest, when
Valentine tells his plot how to surprise the City, that when ^he Pagans came
forth to see the justs he should cause the Christians to surprise the Cowards,
and shut the gates, which was afterward, effected. The time being come, and
the Champions armed they took their way toward the chief gate of the City, on
that side King Pepin lay; they being entered the first, there was a great noise
in the French Camp for joy, which caused the Pagans to issue ^^th to behold the
^usts; in the mean time the Friar having played his part in the City, the
Christians possess the gates, so that no entrance could be expected: all things
being ready, each of them valiantly prepares to encounter, and each touching
his spear, the first course they shivered them all in pieces, each admiring the
o^^r's strength, then making a second, Valentine got the better, for which his
^^a^ charged against the Admiral's breast, he gave him such a stroke that (...)
run his spear quite through his body, so he fell dead from his horse; which caused
the Pagans to run on Valentine with naked swords to kissed him, which had been
effected, had not the King suddenly with his H^st rushed into his aid: Here our
noble Hero, Mirror of Chivalry, ^w^^r saved the life of the King by horsing him
again: At length the Christians prevailing, the Pagans began to retire to the
City, which finding shut, there they miserably perished by the sword: and the
City was reduced to his former obedience; and King Pepin was with much
magnificence crowned Emperor of Rome, to the great honor of Valentine, who
beha^ (...) well that day.

Chap. III. How Valentine, after his return from Rome, re^^^ to the Forest of
Orleance, and there Conquered Orson, and brought him with him to Orleance; and
how Haufry and Henry, Sons to King Pepin, took Counsel how to take away
Valentine's Life, and what ensued thereupon.
KIng Pepin after he was returned from Rome, every day more and more showed his
love to Valentine, to the great grief of Houfry and Henry, Bastard-sons to the
King, and in their hearts they did daily hatch mischief: and they hearing of
the mischief the Wild-man did in the forest, and the daily complaints made of
his great injuries, endeavored to persuade Valentine to undertake this
conquest, who being of an heroic spirit, and undaunted valor, was always
wisling to rush into any hazard wherein he might win honor: At length he sets a
resolution to go and fight the Wild-man, and either to die or conquer him,
choosing rather to die in honor, than live in disgrace: which resolution much
^rou^led the King, and he grew angry at his two Sons, who had laid this plo^ to
take away the life of Valentine, and did dissuade him as much as he could from
it; but it was in vain, for go he will and so he sets forward on his journey,
accompanied only with his Page; and so he rode one whole day in the forest
seeking the Wild man, but could not find him so he lay down and refreshed
himself till morning: As soon as day appeared, he espied his Brother Orson
running to him, and seeing Valentine's horse stand tied, he fell furiously
clawing him, which the horse feeling, began to fling and kick; Valentine being
on a tree noted the Wild-man's terrible shape, and began to be timorous; In the
mean time the Wild-man had near slain his horse, which Valentine perceiving,
cries out to the Wild man, Save my horse, and stay till I come down, and thou
shall have fighting enough with me. With that the Wild-man espied him and made
signs as if he would tear him to pleces; he drawing his sword leaped down close
by him, and smote at him with his sword, which he leaping aside escaped, and
presently cotching Va^entine, throws him to the ground, which caused him to
look for nothing but death, feeling the strength of the Wild-man to be so
great; being thus on the ground, Valentine tried to get Orson under him, but an
in va^n; at length drew pocket-dagger out and smote him on the ^de that the
blood ran out Orson seeing himself wounded gave such a secreeth that all the
wood sounded therewith, and running a, gain on him threw him to the ground
again, and wounded him in diverse places; but Valentine recovering, laid about
him very fiercely, and brought the Wild man to his obedience, then tying his
hands to his horse-tail, he rode toward Orleance; and as he came the People
run away for fear, and being to lodge in a little Town that Night, the
Inhabitants seeing the Wild-man with him, run away: they took up their lodging
at one of the best houses in the Town, where they went into the wine cellar,
and Orson drinking too much become drunk; morning being come, he was bound as
before, and so they rode, to Orleance, where bring come, the People shut up
their doors for fear; at length tidings came to King Pepin, that Valentine had
conquered the Wild man, the King was greatly astonished, and said, Ah
Valentine! my Child in a happy hour thou was born, blessed be the Father that
got thee, and the Mother that bore thee. When Valentine came to the Palace
gates, the Porter espying Orson, shut the gates, till Valatine said to him,
Fear not, but go tell the King, I Will shield him and the Court from the fury of
the Wild-man. The King commanded them to enter the Palace: Then Valentine took
Orson and led him into the Court where the King and his Nobles were, among the
rest were Haufry and Henry, and seeing Valentine more honored than before grew
enraged, and therefore resolved to lay a plot to cut him off, and understanding
that Valentine was gone to their Sister Eglantine's lodgings to make sport with
Orson, they thought it fit to kill him there, and inform the King they found
him in her bed; so they presently rushed in with their swords drawn, and
calling him Traitor smote at him, and wounded him in the face: Orson perceiving
that, leapt to them, and crushed them between his Arms, and then struck them to
the ground, and had not the Ladies appeased the uproar, they had there been
slain. Haufry and Henry mad with rage that there purpose did not take effect,
runs to the King, making a grevious complaint against them. The King sends for
Valentine, and hearing the truth, bid him beware of Haufry and Henry, and so
dissmissed him. This plot not taking, they resolve on another far more
dangerous than the former, they join to their aid their Cousin Grigar, who was
to lie in ambuse with one hundred Men at Arms to take Valentine as he rid that
way, and when they would taken him, to carry him to a strong Castle in the forest,
and there imprison him; so it came to pass that as Valentine, with Orson
running by him, was riding that way where the Ambush lay, out stepped Grigar
their Captain, and

Our Warrior considering how he was encompassed with his Enemies, was resolved
to sell his life at a dear rate, and he that stood nearest him tasted first of
his been sword; the first that he encountered he cleft down to his teeth, the
next he cut asunder in the midst; in the mean while Orson was not idle, but
with his rough paws tore their flesh from their bodies, and bit them to pieces
with his teeth, and thus they continued fighting, killing and wounding many,
but all in vain, the number being so many, and being tired with the press that
came upon him, he was taken and carried away, do all that Orson could, who
followed (...) to the Castle where they imprisoned him, and then ran again to
the Court of King Pepin, and into the midst of the hall, where the King and his
Nobles were at dinner and run about the hall making strange lamentations, and
knocking his breast in a most hideous end fearful manner, which did drive the
King into a thousand fears; at length Orson looking round the table, espied the
Traitor Grigar, who hung his head in his bosom, but Orson seeing him, run
furiously upon him, and gave him such a grievious stroke that smote off one of
his ears, and laid him on his face, and put out one of his eyes: Grigar feeling
his wounds, began to cry out for help, at last a valiant Prince releued him,
and brought Orson before the King, desiring he might be put to death: but Orson
being before he the King, made sighs ^oat Valentine was taken in the Forest he
and demanded the combat with Grigar, which with the consent of King and Nobles
was granted, between whom was fought a cruel battle, but at length through
Orson's strength, and the justness of his cause, he overcame Grigar, and he
openly confessed the treason before King Pepin, and they presently sent and
re^eased Valentine, to the great joy of the Court, who admired the save that
Orson bore to him.

Chap. IV. How Valentine and Orson traveled to Aquitain, to the Relief of the
Lady Fezon; and how Orson overcame the Green Knight, and how they came to the
Castle of the Lady Clerimond, whereby Orson recovered his Speech.
VAlentine and Orson being returned with King Pepin into Orleance, but being
not minded to stay there, they resolved to go to Aquitan, to endeavor the
delivery of the fair Lady Fezon, the Duke's Daughter, whose City was closely
besieged by a Pagan Knight, called, the Green Knight; and this Duke was to
bring one to conquer this Green Knight, or else he was to take his Daughter: so
they took their leave of King Pepin; Valentine resolving not to return till he
had found his Parents: Being come to Aquitain, People stocked from all parts to
behold the unmanly shape of Orson, which caused Valentine to get him an
iron-jacket; when they came to the Duke's Palace, he entertained them nobily,
and sent for the Green Knight to dine with him, which he accepted, only that he
might have a sight of the beautiful Lady Fezon and he began to speak proud
speeches, and told them they should be hanged on a tree, as many of their
Fellows had been; which Valentine hearing answered, Proud Knight, these taunts
might have been buried within thy breast, for I tell thee, this day is come
hither a Knight that shall hold thee tack: thou have vanquished many, he it is
shall vanquish thee. Orson knew Valentine spoke of him, and knowing this to be
the Green Knight who had slain so many, with a fierce countinance leapt from
the table, and taking him about the middle, threw him with such violence
against the wall that they thought his neck had been broke; at this action they
began to laugh, and said to one another, Now is the Knight come that shall
overcome the Green Knight. Orson made signs that he would fight him the next
day, for the love of the Lady Fezon: morning being come, Valentine armed him
with his own arms, and so he departed to combat, and made signs that he would
bring the Knight with him dead or alive: It was not long e're Orson came to the
tent of the Green Knight and smote the top with his spear in defiance: he
taking this in disdain, swore by Mahomet, he would abate his pride e're the sun
went down; and then couching his spear in his rest, he entered the field
against Orson, and encountered with such force, that both Men and horses fell to
the ground, but lightly recovering their feet, drew their swords, and laid at
each other fiercely; the Green Knight parted Orson's shield and wounded him on
the shoulder; he finding his blood run down, was far more fierce than before,
and at last with his sword took the Giant such a pat on his head, that he cut
away a piece, and wounded him in the arm; but he had a medicine that if he but
touched the wound with it, it healed. Orson perceiving this, threw away his
arms, and run furiously upon him, and cast him to the earth, and held him under
him, which made the Knight yield to his mercy; yet Orson would have taken away
his life, had not Valentine rescued him: The Green Knight inplored pardon for
his former actions, and obt^ined it, and was carried into Aquitain, and there
was baptized. He declared to Valentine, he that overcame him could be no less
then the Son of a King or Emperor, and must be one that never sucked any
Woman; and that it should be further proved by his Sister Clerimond, who had a
brazen-head that could resolve all questions that ^he asked it. To return to
the Lady Fezon, who was in (...) Orson, being his by conquest, desired to be
married, (...) not consent to till he should obtain his speech, and (...)
^ents. Valentine remembering the Green Knight's (...) resolved to go see the
brozen-head, being already in love (...) the Lady Clerimond, by the
commendations he heard of her beauty: He declared this to the Green Knight, who
presently gave him his ring, as a token that he might be admitted into the
Castle, which was impossible to be conquered. The Duke hearing they would
depart, made Orson swear to marry his Daughter at his return. Valentine and
Orson the day following set forward on their journey: and the Green Knight went
to serve King Pepin. In the mean time Blandiman, the Servant of the sorrowful
Lady B^lisant, had escaped out of Ferragus's Castle, and traveled to the Court
of France, where he declared the sorrowful estate of his Lady, and cause of her
sorrows, and of the birth of the Children in the forest in every particular:
which the King hearing, and taking an account of the time and place, found it
to fall on that day he took up Valentine, and so they concluded that them two
were her Children, to the great joy of all the Cover: King Pepin could not
alone hear this great news, but he must presently set sail for Constantinople
to declare it there, to the exceeding comfort of all that heard it. In the mean
time, Valentine and Orson arrives at the Castle of the Lady Clerimond, and he
made a proffer to enter but was denied entrance until he had leave of the Lady:
as seen as she heard two Strangers were there, she viewed them out at a window,
seeing Valentine, began to be in love with him, and she enquires if they had
any token from her Brother; Valentine showing the ring was admitted into her
presence, whose beauty he greatly admired; desirous therefore to break silence,
being a wonder to each others eyes, Valentine began, Divine Paragon of Beauty,
I was driven hither by the report of a brazen-head that remains in your Castle
that can tell wonders, therefore if it please you to admit us to the sight, we
shall remain your Bond servants in all respects. Clerimond granted their
request, and brought 'em where the head was which thus began to speak Thou
famous Knight of Royal Parentage, thou art called Valentine the Valiant, thou
art the Man that ought to marry the Lady Clerimond, thou art Son to the
Emperor of Greece, and thy Mother was in Portugal, in the Castle of Ferragus,
who has had the keeping of her twenty years: the Wild-man who accompaineth
thee, is thy Brother, born in the Forest of Orleance, and was nourished by a
bear, and be shall not have the use of his tongue till a thread be cut under
it. Now thou art come, my time is at a period; and so bowed down and never
spoke more. Valentine immediately embraced his Brother, and presently cut the
thread under his tongue, and he spoke: Valentine receives Clerimond as his
esopused Lady, and she him as her Lord, but defers the marriage till he had
delivered his Mother, and seen his Royal Father and she settled in
Constantionple.

Chap. V. How Patolet, an Enchanter, gave Ferragus Clerimond's Brother, the
knowledge of all that past, of the Delivery of the Lady Bellisant: how
Valentine and Orson were imprisoned by Farergus, and escaped again, and
Ferragus's Resolution thereupon.
IN the mean time while these Lovers admired one another, is little Dwarf that
Clerimond kept was an Inchanter, and he gave Ferragus an account of all their
proceeding, in the Castle of Clerimond, for he could in a day's time come and
go, for by his art he had made a wooden horse, with a pin at the head, and
which way he turned the pin, and the horse mounting in the air, he could be at
the place designed immediately; when Ferragus heard Pacol^t's cal^ he grew
exceedingly enraged at his Sister for granting leave to a Christian Knight,
swearing by the Gods to be revenged, on them both, After Pacolet's return,
Clerimond commanded him to go and see it Bellisant, Valentine's Mother, were
there or no which he did, and brought word she was in health. In the mean time
Ferragus provides a Fleet, and came to his Sister's Castle, and was very
pleasant with Valentine and Orson, and desires them and his Sister to accompany
him to Portugal, there to be married which they did, but when they were upon
the Sea, in the dead of the night, he caused them to be took out of their beds,
bound 'em and cast them into a dungeon, and when they came to Portugal, they
were put into a Castle, and there left to bewail their (...): Alas, said
Valentine, how soon are our ioys blasted, and mirth turned into mourning.
Bellisant hearing two Christian Knights were in the Castle, left her chamber,
and came to have a sight of them and to ask them whence they were: but
Ferragus, being enraged, would not suffer her; Clerimond had not long been in
the Castle, but she esp'yd Valentine's Mother, and being private together, she
declared to her how her Sons were Prisoners there, (...) for joy to hear they
were alive. In the mean time Pacolet comforted them, and told them, he would
set Valentine and Orson at liberty, and them too; and he was as good as his
(...), but as soon as he saw (...) oppertunity, by his art he opened all the
doors and came where the Prisoners lay, who hearing the door opened expected
nothing but (...) Pacolet said, My Lords, fear not, I am come (...) So leaving
them where Clerimond and Bellisant were, (...) before their Mother craving her
blessing; but (...) away: but Pacolet seeing no time to (...) and they
presently arrived at Clerimon (...) they had refreshed themselves, they
journey'd toward Aquitain But let us return to Ferragus, to see how (...) the
Iaylor came to unlock the doors and found them (...) and looking found his
Prisoners (...) told Ferragus, who enraged thereat, resolves to (...) Castle
(...) assembled his Men of war declaring his (...) mean (...) Valentine and
Orson, (...) also Pacolet, were safe arrived at the (...) they where received
with much (...) and (...) accomplished (...) Fezon (...) Duke of Aquitain, so
both their (...) Ferragus who not (...), for when (...) Castle, he sailed to
Aquitain with (...) revenge for these (...) upon (...) as a (...) about twelve
foot high, and much feared by all his Neighbors, having a prosperous gale, he
s on landed his army, King Trompart being with him to aid him, accompanied with
the Inchanter Adramain, who was to further Trompart's design in getting the
Lady Clerimond, intending with the consent of Ferragus to take her to Wife.

Chap. VI. The admirable Feats of Arms performed by Valentine and Orson, in a
famous Battle before Aquitain, and the Success thereof; and how Valentine and
Pacolet went to Constantinople to help his Father and Uncle, who were besieged
by the Sarazens.
THe courageous Duke of Aquitain hearing of the landing of his potent Enemy,
suddenly prepared great Forces to resist him, to the great content of Valentine
and Orson; and at last seeing their Town besieged by Ferragus, they issued out
with their Army resolving to give them present battle: Here you might see the
rare exploits performed by gallant Warriors, Valentine and Orson working
wonders wheresoever they came, making every one give way to their keen swords.
Here the Giant Ferragus triumphed over his Enemies, intending a final conquest.
The valiant Duke of Aquitain cleared their ranks, and fought manfully, but
venturing too far in the press, was taken Prisoner and carried to Ferragus's
Tent; but Orson, accompained with Pacolet, rushed through the Enemy, resolving
to free the Duke or die on the spot, came at last without the Camp, putting on
Pagans shields, went into Ferragus's Tent; and brought the Duke from thence,
and placed him in the head of his Army, who seeing him released, fought like
desperate Men, and made havoc of their Enemies crying Long live the Duke of
Aquitain; the Pagans hearing this, and knowing him released, were discomfitted
and fled to their ships. As soon as this battle was ended, Valentine and
Pacolet resolve to go to Constantinople to aid his Father, who was besieged by
the Sarazens: Pacolet made ready his wooden horse, and the same night they
arrived at Constantinople, in the great hall before the Emperor who sat at
supper with King Pepi^, who came to aid him against the Sarazens, and the Green
Knight was present, who espying Valentine knew him: King Pepin said, Behold
here one of your own Blood, a valliant Knight, and your natural Son. The
Emperor presently ran and kissed him; and Valentine declared how and where he
left his Mother, the Empress Bellisant, and his Brother Orson, and all his
adventures since he departed from the Court of King Pepin, to the delight of
all that heard him, and joy of the whole City, who made bonefires for his
return: when the Sarazens heard these shouts and revellings in the City, they
were fore afraid, and put themselves in readiness. Valentine and the Green
Knight were greatly moved to see the City begirt with armed Men, therefore
they armed themselves, resolving to try their fortune, issuing forth with two
thousand Men, seized on two hun^^ed wagons laden with victuals and sent them
into the City: the Souldan vexed at this loss, got between Valentine and the
City, intending to take them Prisoners: King Pepin seeing their intent, issued
out of the Town with his Army, and see upon the Sarazens, and there was fought
a cruel battle, there King Pepin bore the Souldan to the earth: but Valentine
and the Green Knight being in the middle of the Enemy, wearied with labor,
were at last taken Prisoners, and sent to the Souldan's Tent, to the great
grief of the Emperor and King Pepin, who were forced to retreat. After this
the Souldan came to his Tent, and caused the Green Knight and Valentine to come
before him, and using to ^^^m proud words, vowed they should never escape with
life: he ordered them to be hanged in the sight of the City; which sentence
^aused great fear to seize on them: but Pacolet being in the City,
understanding the sad event, and seeing how heavenly King Pepin and the
Emperor took their loss, took his wooden horse and departed to the Souldan's
Host, and came just as Valentine and the Green Knight were going to execution;
Pacolet entering the Tent was known by the Souldan, who calling him aside said,
'What news from Portugal? Pacolet replied, 'The best that ever you heard from
the fair Wise of Ferragus. The Souldan hearing this news from Ferragu 's Wife
whom he dearly loved for joy reprieved the Prisoners till morning, and then
went with Pacolet to hear the particulers; Pacolet i^ a serious manner relates
to him how Ferragus's Wife resolved to visit him that night, her Husband being
at Aqui^ain, for her heart was on fire with the love of him. At this he was
like to leap one of his skin for ^^y: so acolet bid him tarry till ^ight, and
he would carry him to her; Pacolet remained with him also, and then set him on his
wooden-horse and departed, and set him down in the great hall in
Constantinople, bidding him stay till he ^ame; so going again to the Souldan s
Army, and charming the Guards, took Valentine and the Green Knight on his
wooden-horse, and set them down by the Souldan, to his great astonishment,
knowing then he was betray d who insa^antly laid hands on him, committing him
to prison till the morrow, and then hanged him in the view of all his Host to
their wonder discomfiture; and Valentine suddenly issuing out of the City with
the whole Army, made havoc of the Pagans, (...) all that made opposition, the
rest fled and saved their lives The City was again made free without any
Enemies to oppos^ it, to the unspeakable joy of the Iuhabitants. The next day
Pacolet took his journey to Aquitain, to bear tidings to the Lady Clerimond,
the Empress Bellisant, and Orson, whose company the Emperor greatly desired;
but while they were preparing for Constantinople, Ferragus renews his Forces
and again besieges Aquitain.

Chap. VII. How Adrimain couzez'd Pacolet of his Horse; how ^ing Trompart's
Head was smitten off by th King of Iudia, with the loss of the Lady Clerimond;
Pacolet's Revenge on Adrimain; Ferragus's Death; Bellisant and Orion's landing
at Constantinople, and other remarkable Passages.
THere was a cunning Inchanter that came to assist King Trompart^ to gain the
Lady Clerimond, this Fellow come to Pacolet and seigns himself his Servant, to
do what he shall command ^^m; Pacolet not privy to his deceit, accepts of, and
^ooges him in his bed, but it proves a fatal night, for when Pacolet was
asleep, Adrimain charms all the house asleep, and goes to Pacolet's horse and
to the Lady Clerimund's chamber, and set her on the horse, and turning the pin,
mounted in the air, and presently arrives at King Trompart's tent, who
presently called him to behold her, to his great joy, who would not stay there,
but presently carry he to his own Country, so setting her on the wooden-horse,
she being last asleep turned the pin, mounted into the air, and before morning
an hundred miles off Aquitain, the horse stopped in a Market Town near the King
of Judea's Court, the People seeing such a strange sight were much amazed and
carried the news to the King who sent for them, and knew Trompart to be the Man
which s^ew his Brother, for which he caused his head to be smitten off; The
Lady Clerimond was led into the Palace, where the King began to comfort her,
and used her very courteously, being in love with her? But nothing could give
her joy, but only the present of her Valentine, for whom she wept sorely, but
at last she count^^ is madness, only to make the King leave his suit, who
wearied her with his speeches. But to return to Pacolet, who made great
lamentation for the loss of the Lady Clerimond, and his horse, at last he vowed
revenge on the Traitor Adrimain, and presently he apparelled himself in Woman's
habit, departs to Ferragus's Camp and came to the Tent of Adrimain, who seeing
such a gallant Beauty, was amazed and fell in love with him, and persuaded her
to stay all night in his chamber, which Pacolet consented to; so Adrimain went
to bed and Pacolet seeing that, in^^ants him and the Host asleep, puts on
Adrimain's apparel, and with his sword smote off his head; and then went to the
tent of Ferragus whom he made leap out of bed, put on his clothes and follow
him into the City of Aquitan, where they secured him till morning; and then
Pacolet bid 'em issue out and stay the whole Host, they being asleep, which
they did, not leaving one to tell the dreadful tragedy of their Companions. In
the morning Ferragus was brought before the Duke of Aquitan, and Orson; they
told him if he would forsake Mahomet and turn Christian, they would save his
life, but he would not consent, so they presently commanded his head to be
struck off. Now they resolved to go to Constantinople, which was again besieged
by the Sarazens: the Lady Bellisant requiring the Duke of Aquitan to bear them
company, so being shipped, the wind serving, they soon landed near
Constantinople, but could not come to the City; but Pacolet gave notice to the
Emperor and King Pepin, that there was an Army arrived from the Duke of
Aquitan, which would assail the Sarazens Camp in the night on one side, whilst
they issued out of the City on the other, which was to the total confussion of
the Sarazens, who were all slain by break of day: And as soon as the Battle was
finished, the Emperor and King Pepin, Valentine and the Green Knight, took
their way to the Seaside to meet Bellisant; as soon as the Emperor saw her,
he leapt off his horse, and fell on his knees and embraced her, entreating he a
pardon for her heard usage, whilst she for joy sounded in his arms; but
recovering her self, they went to the Palace where nothing but salutations
passed that day; and the Emperor did great honor to the Duke of Aquitan, and
the Lady Fezon. But all this while Valentine did not see his of Sun Beauty, at
which he much woundred; when all the Train were entered, and the salutations
over, Valentine calls Polet aside, and enquires where he left the Lady
Clerimond; now began Pacolet for to fear to tell him of her loss but Valentine
being earnest with him, he declared that she was stolen away by Adrimain, and
carried away by King Trompart, upon his horse; Valentine hearing this, could
not choose but shed many tears in remembrance of his Lady, and resolved to
search the whole World for her. But to leave him amidst his sorrows, let us
return to King Pepin, who seeing all things in peace, took his leave of the
Emperor and Empress, and Valentine; but Orson he desired to bear him company
into France, which he did, where they were received with great joy, and they
highly esteemed and honored Orson, which much grieved Haufry and Henry,
insomuch that they plotted how to take away his life, and the execution of
their design they committed to one of their Nephews, who was Usher unto the
King's privy chamber, his name was Granier, their design was to hire their
Nephew to enter into the King's chamber in the night and murder him, and then
to lay it on Orson, who alone had charge of the King: The night was come
wherein they designed to finish their purposed treason, and Granier being hid
in the Chamber, rises, and assays to cut the King's throat, but being afraid,
he laid the knife down in the bed, and went his way and told Haufry and Henry
what he had done, and said he would accuse Orson with the laying it there,
which would be enough to condemn him. The next day Granier said unto the King,
May it please your Majesty: I will betray unto you, the Practiser of your
overthrow; Orson intended to have murdered you in bed, and to that intent has
laid a knife therein: now if it please you to send and see, you will find my
words true. The King at this, enraged, said, False Traitor, can such a thought
enter into thy breast, who shall I trust! seeing thou, whom I account as my
Child, does prove a Traitor to me? Orson being innocent, would have spoken, but
the King would not suffer him, but called his Lords to be Eyewitnesses of this
tragedy intended; coming to the King's bedchamber, they uncovered the bed, and
found the knife, which drew great astonishment in them: The King presently
condemned Orson to death; but by entreaty of the Lords, he was allowed the
combat against Granier and his Brother, which combat was performed with much
valor on both sides, till Orson had slain one of them, then the other being
very weak, cried for quarter, and confessed 'twas he that should have killed
the King; but before he could utter any more, Haufrey drew his sword and cut
off his head, for fear he should betray them. The King was joyful for Orson's
victory, and went to meet him before he came to the Palace, and did him great
honor, and bid him have a care of Haufry and Henry, who did all they could to
destroy him all the Nobles rejoiced, for (...) loved Orson. But (...) you have
heard. (...) Se^, and (...) a short time la^^ (...) he could not hear of he^
there: before he had (...) information was given to the King of Antioch, (...)
Chris^^ans were landed; which he immediately sent for (...) was, That if any
Christian came, he must ei^^er (...) his faith, or fight with a dragon that
remained in a Forr^st hand by the City; which task ^a^^^ine willi^^ly und^^loo^
^^d after much ^^l^ of blood, conquer^ him, to his ^verlasting same, for it
caused the King of Antioch to turn Christian, and all his Kingdom to be
baptized. But our noble Conqueror is not limited to one place, but he depar^s
grievously afflicted for the lo^ of his Lady; but shortly after his departure,
Brandiffer, a potent Monarch of the Turks, hearing of the King of Antioch's
conversion lands an Army o^ a hundred thousand Men, and put all to the sword,
took the King Prisoner, and put him to death, and crowned himself King of
Antioch; after that he departed toward his own Country, and, having a great
storm at Sea, was drove to Cretophe, a little City on the Coast of Greece,
where by chance the Emperor and the Green Knight were; Brandiffer's arrival
being sudden and unexpected, he surpised them, and carried them Prisoners to a
Castle of his which was invincible, to the great grief of the Empress and
Orson. In the mean time Valentine and Pacolet traveled through many strange
Countries, but could hear no tidings of the Lady Clerimond; at last they came
to a strong Castle, and desires entrance, which was denied them by the
Sentinel, who told them, that the Emperor of Greece and the Green Knight were
Prisoners there, with twelve Peers of France, who were taken at Jerusalem,
being gone thither on Pilgrimage, and were betrayed by the treachery of Haufry
and Henry. Valentine hearing this, and ready to burst with grief, the Castle
being invincible, he departed and went to Angory, a City that had been taken
from Brandiffer; Valentine's arrival much rejoiced the wearied Citizens, who
were quite tired with the daily alarms of the Pagans: here Valentine fought
many battles, and won much honor; and in one battle he took King Luca^
Prisoner, by the policy of Pacolet, but this was the last piece of service that
he did Valentine, for King Lucar espying him in the hall where he was kept,
stepped to him and stabbed him, before Valentine could come to his succor;
Valentine enraged at this dismal hap, began thus, False Traitor, thou have
slain him who was all my hope, but thy life shall surely pay for it. Then
Valentine fell on the dead body, and lamented over it grievously. But
Brandiffer hearing of King Lucar's state, seat a Messenger into the City to
Valentine, to tell him that he should have the King of France for his ransom;
which greatly contented Valentine: King Pepin being safely arrived in Angory,
Valentine did him great honor; and King Pepin declared to him how he was taken
Prisoner at Jerusalem, and had remained ever since Prisoner in the King of
India's Court; and told him that the fair Lady Clerimond was Prisoner there,
who counterfited madness to avoid the Kings love. Now began Valentine to take
courage again, after all these storms fair weather begins to appear; now he is
in hopes to bring his wishes to a good end, and close up all his travels with a
quiet life; he is resolved to leave Angory, and in habit of a Pilgrim travel to
the King of India's Court, and there make known that he can cure mad and
lunatic People, and all other diseases. In the next Chapter you will see how
this device succeeded to his purpose.

Chap. VIII. How Valentine in Pilgrim's Habit carried away the Lady Clerimond
from the Indian Court; and how he took the strong Castle where the Emperor and
the Green Knight were Prisoners; and how Valentine, unfortunately and unknow,
slew his own Father, and other Acts which ends this Story.
VAlentine being arrived at the City where the King of Indian kept his Court,
like a Physician takes up his lodging at an Inn in the Town: His Host began to
enquire of him what he was: Valentine told him he was a Physician that could
cure all manner of diseases, and therefore desired him to set his Man go into
the City and post up some Bills, that he might make known his are, whereby to
get somewhat to defray his charges; which his Host consented to: The Man having
done as he was appointed some of the Courtiers chanced to espy the Bills, and
reading in s^ that the Man could cure Madness, declares it to the King;
presently Valentine was sent for, and the King called him aside and declared to
him, that he had in his Court a Lady that was lunatic whom if he would cure,
he should have a bountiful reward: Valentine attending on the King's tale, told
him he would endeavor the re^oring the Lady to her senses, Therefore, great
Sovereign, cause a Fire to be made in her Chamber, and I Will be with her to
night, and use my Skill. The King called one of his S^rvants to guide Valentine
to the Lady's chamber, where he left him: The Lady Clerimnod beholding him,
began to throw things at him; Valentine seeing her, said, Alack, my dear Lady,
you have bought me as dear as I have you; but now I hope to return to my
Father's Court with you. Clerimond eying him, began to look strangely, which
caused Valentine to say Dear Love, I am thy Valentine, and for thee have
suffered more torments that can be imagined; for the Love of thee have I
traveled night and day. When the Lady heard her true Love's Voice, the
instantly fell into a sound, but being recovered she burst forth into these
speeches. Ah, my dear Love, and lovely Valentine, how many dangers have we
passed through; I for the love of thee, and thou for me? And now, my dear Love,
behold the extremity I have cast my self into, into what baseness I have cast
my self for thee; but Love dearly bought, they say, is the sweetest. After
their kind salutations were past, she showed him Pa^ol^t's horse which rejoiced
his heart: Valentine then set Clerimond thereon, and turning the Pin, they
suddenly arrived in the City of Angory, to the unspeakable joy of the
Inhabitance. The next day they were married in as great solemnity as so short a
warning could afford; after dinner were exercised many pastimes which lastedt
ill n ght, which caused these two incom^^^able Lovers to prepare for bed, where
we'll leave them unto those sweet embraces enjoyed by Luvers: Valentine
remained a month in Angory with his beloved Lady, and then thinking of his
Father's Imprisonment, he resolved to endeavor his release by a cunning Plot,
he will, like a Merchant, put forth ships well manned, and richly laden, and go
to this Castle and proffer to sell 'em to the Lady Galazy; with this resolution
he put to Sea, and in a short time arrives at the Castle where he armed his Men
privately, putting their Clothes over their armor: So Valentine went out of
his ship Merchant like, and coming to the gate the Porter asked him what he
brought he cold him he had store of Jewels aboard, and he desired to know
whether the Lady of the Castle would make choice of any of them, the Porter
went and informed his Lady, who sent the Governor, with some Soldiers, to
view them; being come into the sh^ps, the Christians, as Valentine had before
commanded, slew them: then Valentine caused them to put on the Turks apparel,
and to set forward to the Castle, carrying with them many Jewels; the Porter
thinking them to be the Men of the Castle, let them pass in, where they slew
all the Infidels, and broke open the doors till they came to the Lady Galazy's
chamber, and demanding the keys of the prison; she delivered them, wherewith
they opened the Prison, released the Emperor, the Green Knight, and the Peers
of France. As soon as this enterprise was finished, Valentine sailed to Angory,
and left his Father, the Emperor, and the others, to take their rest: The
Emperor soon after hearing the City of Angor, was begut with brand-ster's
Host, resolved to leave the Castle, and to ship himself and ten thousand Men,
and being at Sea they engaged with a Fleet that was going to aid Brandiffer,
and soon overcome them: The Emperor commanded his Men to put on the Pagans
armor, that they might safely land; which stratagem proved fatal, as you shall
hear; and just as they arrived, Orson, attended with one hundred valiant
Knights, came into the Port also, to the great joy of the Emperor: Now the
Christians in Angory, for want of provisions, resolved to give the Pagans
battle: and so were divided into ten Bands, led by ten valiant Captains, whose
courage and conduct added valor to all the others. The Pagans knowing their
design, put themselves into fifteen bands, standing in battle-array; the
Christians issuing suddenly out of the City, presently put all in confusion,
resolving to die or conquer; great courage was showed on both sides. Valentine
slew a Pagan Commander at the first onset; and meeting the Indian King unhorsed
him, and had he not been rescued by his Followers, he had lost his life by
Valentine's keen sword: and if fresh Succors had not come, the Pagans had been
put to flight, which renewed the fight, so that the air was darkened with the
smoke, and nothing was heard but cries and confusion of voices; but on a sudden
news came that a great Fleet of Sarazens were arrived at the Port, and just
landing. Valentine hearing this made great have to the Port with a select Party
to strengthen the Guard there, (but little need was there of it, for these were
Christians commanded by the Emperor, his Father, joined by his Son Orson and
his Knights;) Valentine being ignorant who they were, charged them furiously,
and the first that he engaged he run quite through the body, which unfortunately
was the Emperor. Orson seeing his Father slain, began to weep, and knowing
Valentine by his armor, said to him, Alas, Brother Valentine, here is small
conquest in this, for you have slain your Father. Valentine hearing this, broke
out in such a grievous lamentation, that it grieved all his Followers to hear
him, Alas, quoth he, what an infamous deed have I done? What a wicked act have
I committed? I have spent my life in trouble and now have added murder to my
other sins. Orson seeing him thus lament, comforted him, and desired him to go
with his Army to the battle, for the Pagans in his absence had prevailed. At
last Valentine being set on his horse flew like a lion into the midst of the
battle, and meeting a Pagan Prince, run his sword through his body, and being
careless of his life, proceeded on till he came where Brandisser was making
havoc of the Christians, he rushed so fiercely on him, that he struck him to
the ground, and with his sword clove his head: The Pagans seeing their Generals
slain, and some began to fly, founded a retreat; the Christians greedy of
their blood, pursuing, slew many thousands, others leaped into the Sea and were
drowned, leaving the Christians a complete victory, who immediately returned
into the City, where was great lamentation made for the unfortunate death of
the Emperor of Constantinople, where he was nobly buried But Valentine refused
all comfort, and who was as a Man out of his wits. As soon as they had settled
the affairs in Angory, they crowned the Green Knight King thereof, who had in
the battle valiantly slain several Pagan Commanders, and then departed toward
the City of Constantinople. In the mean time great troubles arose in France;
King Pepin being arrived there, and the twelve Peers of France, from the strong
Castle where they had been Prisoners, Ha^fry and Henry begin to plot the death
of the King and Queen, and their young Son Charl main, whom the King had made
Heir of the Crown and Kingdom: to bring this th^^r devilish design to pass,
they invite the King and Queen, and their Son to a rich banquet, but
Charlemain, came not; in the midst of the banquet they filled a cup of deadly
poison and gave it to thy King, and the King dr^nk to the Queen, but the poison
wrought so in their bodies, that they fell down dead of the t^ll^: After that
they seized on all the strong Cast^es and C^ttes, but could not find the young
Prince Charlemain, who was under his Sister's protection; whereupon having aid
from the King of England, she fought many battles successfully against Ha^fry
and Henry, till they were both slain and Charlemain was crowned King, to the
great joy of the whole Kingdom, for he eminently showed forth his Father's
virtues. In the mean time our Royal Train arrive at Constantinople to the
exceeding joy of the Empress Bellisant, and the whole City, but when she heard
that her Husband the Emperor was slain Valentine and Orson, byh e consent of
her and the whole Nation, we^e crowned Ioynt-Emperours: but Valentine calling
to mind his former sin, in killing his Royal Father, resolved to go on
Pilgrimage; and calling his Lady aside, he declared to her his intent, and
broke a Ring in twain, and charged her not to marry until she saw that piece of
the Ring again, and said, if he did not bring it himself, he would send it when
he died, having so said, with tears they parted: Long time he traveled, lying
in the woods, caves and rocks, enduring great hardship; and at last he returned
again toward Constantinople, where he arriving, begged about the City, and
came to his Brother Orson's Palace, and craved there a lodging under a pair of
stairs, where he lay the term of seven years, eating nothing but scraps which
were daily brought him in a basket (being unknown who he was) at length his
time of death growing nigh, he falling into a deadly feavour, wrote a letter
putting his name thereto, holding it fast when he died: When Orson saw the poor
Pilgrim was dead, he commanded the letter to be taken from him that he held in
his hand but none could take it but the Lady Clerimond, who reading the same,
fell in a swound upon the dead body, lamenting over it. And after that great
preparation was made for the funeral, and his body was enterred with all honor
due to so noble a Warrior. Orson lives long after with his Wife the fair Lady
Galazy, (whom he married after the death of the Lady Fezon,) administering
Justice to all; and was greatly beloved of all his Subjects.

FINIS

