A Vindication OF LITURGIES, SHOWING The Lawfulness, Usefulness, and Antiquity,
of performing the Public Worship of GOD, by set Forms of Prayer.

Wherein several other things also of considerable use, are occasionally
discussed.

In Answer to a late Book, Entitled, A Reasonable Account, why some pious
Nonconforming Ministers in England, judge it sinful for them to perform their
Ministerial Acts in public solemn Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others.

By WILLIAM FALKNER, D. D.

LONDON, Printed for Walter Kettilby at the Bishops-Head in St Paul's
Churchyard, 1680.

TO THE Right Reverend FATHER in GOD ANTHONY Lord Bishop OF NORWICH, My
Honored DIOCESAN.
MY LORD,
IT is too well known, that notwithstanding the purity of Doctrine and Worship,
and the Primitive Orders of the Ministry, established in our Church; in all
which Excellencies and Perfections no part of the Christian World does excel
her, if any equal her; it has been and still is her portion, in Conformity to
our Savior, to his Apostles, and to the purest Primitive Church, to be
assaulted and impugned, by the various oppositions of many Adversaries. Besides
others, our Dissenting Parties within this last year have been very active,
both by other methods, and by Books of several kinds, expressing their
objections against our public Order and Constitution.

And one of them, for the justifying their separation, has adventured so far,
as to charge the general use of prescribed Forms of Prayer to be sinful: which
if it were true, would indeed be an high accusation against our public
worship, and therewith against all the famous Christian Churches. He pretends
an Answer to all that I had said, for the lawfulness and expediency of fixed
Liturgies: unto which I have here returned, as I hope, a sufficient Reply. The
manner of his writing, is in this respect, more commendable than of some
others, in that he plainly stateth his Question, and then produces his
Arguments, that the strength of them may be fairly tried. But I could have
wished for his own sake, that he had not often intermixed his passionate and
groundless aspersions, upon our public Constitutions and Ministry; and his
talking at a high rate with confident words, upon very weak and slender
appearances of Reason. For such things are testimonies, either of the rashness
and weakness of the Writer, who brings these things as a supply, for want of
what is rational and substantial; or else of the badness of the cause, which
needs such supports to maintain it.

And though I thought this discourse not at all like to prevail with
understanding men; there were many things which inclined me to undertake an
examination thereof. That Book is spread abroad, under the name of a person of
as great esteem amongst our Dissenters, as any other in these parts. There is a
fair appearance of a regular way of reasoning, though there wants strength of
Argument; and he more than once declares, that he thinks himself to have fully
answered what I had written for Forms of Prayer; and therefore I was
particularly concerned to show his mistake. And though the more cautious and
wary men among our Dissenters will not affirm the constant use of Forms to be
sinful, because they think such a position not defensible; yet the Genius of
that party is much set against them, and in their practice they reject them
almost generally, with some eagerness: and therefore the determining this case,
is of the greater concernment, with respect to our Non-Conformists in general.

And I have had so much experience of the World, as to know, that the greater
part of men are not so intelligent, and soberly considerative, as to search
into the strength or weakness of Arguments, unless they be directed and
assisted: which defect when it meets with an unsteady temper, is the occasion
of much infelicity to Civil and Ecclesiastical Society. And as I think it in
any case, a piece of Christian Charity, to guide men in their duty; so this is
of greater moment, where the Peace of the Church is concerned, as well as the
private duty of Christians. But it was not the least thing which prevailed with
me to this undertaking, that the Book I answer, led me to the considering
several mistaken notions and assertions, and I hope to the clearing them, which
having been presumed to be truths, have misguided many well-disposed persons.

Upon many accounts, this Discourse addresseth it self to your Lordship, humbly
entreating your acceptance thereof. It defends that common way of Christian
Worship, by public Liturgies; which has been the constant use of this
established Church, wherein your Lordship deservedly enjoys an eminent place;
and of the Reasonableness and usefulness of whose public service, your self
gave a seasonable account. And probably the Book I answer, was also written
within the limits of your Lordships Jurisdiction: and therefore I present this
Discourse to your view, craving your Approbation. And this I do with the
greater confidence, because of the truth of what I defend; the clearness and
evidence whereof is such, as will also, I hope, recommend it self to any sober
and indifferent enquirer. I do confess I had this great advantage against my
Opponent, that I have manifest truth on my side, and this advantage I have made
the best use of that I could. I am so apprehensive of my own defects, that I
cannot expect that this Treatise should be in all things free from them. But I
am sensible, that if I have trifled in the main subject, which is a matter of
weight and seriousness, I am so far from deserving your Lordships favor
herein, that I cannot reasonably presume on your pardon, for prefixing your
name hereunto.

But the chief reason of my presenting this to your Lordship, is, that I might
express a thankful acknowledgment of those favorable respects I have received
from you, and profess that real honor which my self, with the rest of your
Clergy, have for you. And that God will preserve and bless your Lordship, is
the hearty desire and Prayer of him, who according to his duty

Has a great and humble Reverence, both for your Lordships Office and Person,
WILLIAM FALKNER.
Lyn-Regis June 9. 1680.
THE CONTENTS.
THE Introduction, giving the Reader an Account of the occasion of this
Discourse. Page 1 Chap. I. Of the state of the Question proposed by this
Writer, with some Observations thereupon. p. 10 Chap. II. Of the gift of
Prayer, what it properly is? How abilities of expression are the gifts of God?
and how far Ministers are obliged, to use their own abilities in Religious
Worship? p. 28 Chap. III. Of Devotion and attentive fervency of mind in public
Prayer, and whether the use of Liturgies be hindrances, or helps therein. p. 73
Sect. I. Various pretenses for Forms of Prayer being hindrances to attention,
or fervency examined, and the contrary manifested. Ibid. Sect. II. A defense of
some things urged in my Libertas Ecclesiastica, to prove Forms of Prayer to be
no disadvantage to devotion. p. 98 Sect. III. The Antiquity of the public use
of Liturgies, from the first Ages of Christianity, and in the Jewish Church,
both in their Temple worship and Synagogues. p. 136 Sect. IV. Some expressions
vilifying Uniformity, and charging Forms of Prayer to be an Engine of perpetual
discord, with some others, examined. p. 164 Chap. IV. Forms of Prayer are not
forbidden in Scripture. Some things are necessary to be determined in Gods
worship, which he has not particularly enjoined. Of the Authority of
Superiors, and the judgment of discretion, and some other things. p. 177 Chap.
V. Of other Prayers, besides those in the Liturgy and public service. p. 193
Chap. VI. Of Preaching. Whether it be as useful and fit to preach, as to pray
in a set Form of words? Of what account preaching is? Exceptions against the
Sermons of our Ministers, as being satirical, advancing the power of nature,
and justification by works, answered. p. 206 Chap. VII. Praying by a Form, is
rashly charged with mocking God. p. 219 Chap. VIII. Forms of Prayer do not
debase the Ministry. Of the Ministerial Office, and the need of learning and
knowledge. Of the Priestly Office under the Law, and the large Revenue God
appointed for the Priests and Levites. The pretense of ill effects from
Liturgies refuted. p. 225 Chap. IX. Several Arguments for Forms of Prayer,
proved solid and substantial, and among them some things concerning submission
to superiors. p. 241 Chap. X. A Persuasive Conclusion directed to our
Dissenters, to consider how unaccountable to God, and how dangerous to
themselves, their separation is. p. 266
A Vindication OF LITURGIES.
The Introduction, giving the Reader an account of the occasion of this
discourse.
HAving several years since published my Libertas Ecclesiastica, wherein I
endeavored a Vindication of our Liturgy; there came lately to my hands a
Discourse, in which is a pretended answer to two Sections of my Book,
concerning the lawfulness, expediency, and antiquity of set forms of prayer.
When I first looked into it, I thought it a strange undertaking, to attempt to
prove, that it is sinful for Ministers, who are able to compose Prayers
themselves, to make use of any form of Prayer in their Ministration, which was
composed by other men; and that any man might justly suspect his own reasoning,
when it engaged him in such an enterprise. But when I had read it, I found many
things said therein, which might possibly misguide the weak and unwary Reader,
but nothing which was of any great weight. And indeed no false position is
capable of being firmly proved by solid Arguments, though to undiscerning men,
it may be rendered plausible by mistaken fallacies.

Yet because I am very sensible, that the Assertion maintained by this Author,
is both in it self false and erroneous, and also tends to undermine the true
exercise of Religion, and the Peace and Welfare of the Church of God; I
resolved to examine all his Arguments, and to return a fair Answer to so much
of his Book, as was needful for the discussing of the Question proposed, and
for the defending my self against his Oppositions. And this I thought my self
the more concerned to undertake, because so far as this strange assertion
should be received as true, it would make void the design of my former Book,
which was to manifest, that it was both lawful and a duty, for Ministers and
People, to embrace, attend upon, and join in the public service, worship and
Ministrations of the Church of England. And I knew not how far any appearances
of reasoning might be magnified, by such persons who are engaged against our
Church, many of whom in a sinking cause, (so far as concerns the evidence of
truth and reason) may be willing to catch hold on any twig.

The Author of this Book has not published his own name therewith, and
therefore I shall not be curious to enquire after it, but shall treat him as an
unknown person. And I confess, I cannot easily conceive, that he under whose
name it goes, should be so defective both in learning and consideration, as to
be guilty of such mistakes and palpable over-sights, as may be found in some
places of this Book. For besides many other unaccountable positions and
misunderstandings, diverse of which I shall mention in my following Discourse;
it is observable, that what he writes concerning the ancient practices of the
Church, after the Apostles time; or concerning any thing written in those days,
is generally done so loosely, and sometimes with such wonderful extravagancy,
as may surprise an intelligent Reader with some kind of admiration: of which I
shall give the Reader here one instance.

4. When he speaks of the original of Liturgies, he says Chapter 2. p. 68, 69.
, We do believe, that Gregory the Great, under the protection of Charles the
Great, was the Father of all those that dwell in these Tents, and this eight
hundred or a thousand years after Christ. But first to speak of Gregory the
Great, eight hundred or a thousand years after Christ, is far enough from
truth, when he died about the year 604. And secondly, that Gregory the Great
should be under the protection of Charles the Great, is impossible, when he was
dead about two hundred years, before Charles the Great began his Reign. And
thirdly, it is altogether as unaccountable, that the original of Liturgies was
in the time either of Gregory the Gerat, or Charles the Great, when they were
in use many hundred years before them both, as I shall show Chapter 3. Sect. 3.
in the following Treatise. This mistake concerning these persons, whose names
were so famous in History, that a man of ordinary reading could not be
unacquainted with them, is as if any person should presume to give an account
of the Church of the Israelites, and should assert, that the offering of
Sacrifices under the Mosaical Law, had its beginning in the days of Eli the
Priest, in the Reign of King Jehosaphat, six hundred or eight hundred years
after the Israelites came out of Egypt. Surely it is a strange confidence for
any person to vent such things, and to write positively what he no better
understands.

5. But whoever the Author of this Discourse is, I shall apply my self to the
clearing of the truth concerning the matter of it, which I shall do with as
much succinctness as is expedient. And therefore though I shall not willingly
omit any thing considerable, which he urges against the lawful use of constant
public Liturgies, or against what I have said in their defense; yet where he
mentions objections made by others, against the force of his Arguments, and
gives his Answers to them, I shall pass by such things, where the insisting
upon them is not needful for the defense of our Church, or the decision of the
Case proposed. And in answering his Arguments, I shall wave the repetition of
his long Syllogisms, which is a tedious way of proceeding; and in rational
Discourses of this nature, is acceptable to few others, than those who may
admire the art of making a Syllogism. But I shall give a faithful account of
the substance of his Arguments, and leave it to the impartial Reader, to judge
of the validity of my Answers. And that I may the more gratify such, who will
compare his Discourse and mine, I shall keep to his method which he has used,
except where he speaks to the same thing in different places, and in that Case
I shall think it sufficient to have spoken to it once for all. And I shall so
order my Answer, that my first Chapter may answer his first, my second his
second, and so onward to the end of his Book.

6. But touching my former Discourse which this Writer opposes, he seems not
very well pleased, with my having chosen that subject In his last leaf to the
Reader.
to write on, viz. the defense of our Liturgy, nor with the time when my Book
was written, which he says was in that nick of time of his Majesty's most
Gracious Indulgence, if it was possible to persuade the Parliament, that there
was no need of any indulgence toward them. Now as to the subject matter of my
Livertas Ecclesiastica, if he dislike my having engaged therein, or my
undertaking now to defend so much of two Sections thereof, as he has opposed,
I am content so far to bear his dislike and censure; but I think my self to
have given a sufficient Libert. Eccles. B. 1. Chapter 1.
account thereof. And if what he observes concerning the time was true, I think
that was a fit time to defend and justify our Communion, when they who divide
themselves from us, made the greatest opposition against it; and involved
themselves in the heinous sin of Schism. But the truth is, I was engaged in
that work before that Declaration came abroad, but may Book was not published,
till after his Majesty had cancelled that Declaration: the Declaration which
was made March 1671/2. was Cancelled about the end of 1672. and my Book came
abroad in October. 1673.

7. But as to the persuading our Governors against any Indulgence or favor
toward them, it is possible the positions of this Writer may do more to that
purpose, than I have done. I did indeed justify the lawfulness of performing
what is required of Ministers, concerning the Liturgy; which was no more than
to vindicate, what the practice and acknowledgment of every conforming Minister
had before owned. But I think it my duty, to leave the ordering of public
affairs to my superiors, and did not by any expression that I am aware of,
interpose in their work.

8. But I know not how far such Discourses as this of this Author, man (...)
vince superiors, that such persons ar^ (...) capable of being taken in, into
any duly regulated and settled establishment; because of the unreasonableness of
their demands, and the weakness of their Arguments, since he declares against
the enjoining the ordinary use of any Liturgy, or set form whatsoever, in
public Ministrations. And we may see by Chapter 10. p. 164.
the close of his Book, that he accounts it the only medium he can fancy, for
a just comprehension, that there be no Forms of Prayer enjoined, though they
may be recommended by superiors and left at liberty. And yet it seems
probable from his In the two last leaves.
Preface, that all this is not enough; for he there tells us of other six
things he has, to put in dispute besides this. I do not doubt but all those
six things, may be as easily answered as produced: and the Reader may make a
probable judgment of the strength and force of those other things, by this one
which he has singled out from the rest, and therefore surely he thought it to
be as considerable as any of the other.

9. And it might be expected, that he who is curiously severe, in judging of a
fit time, for publishing other men's Discourses, should have a sufficient care
of the seasonableness of his own. And he who considers the business of our
Enemies abroad, and how they are encouraged by our discords at home, may well
think, that they who have any true value for the Reformation, should at this
time incline to promote a settled establishment of the Church, which may tend to
uphold and secure it. And since our dissenters by sufficient trial, found in
our late distracted times, that they could not erect, much less maintain any
establishment in their way, we may thence discern that no settlement can
reasonably be expected but upon the foundations of the Church of England, which
has also the advantage of truth, and agreement with Primitive Christianity.
And therefore it was no fit time now to vent such notions which widen our
breaches, are inconsistent with any public establishment of a Church, and
which put advantages into the hands of other Enemies, and serve their purposes.
And yet I confess this of the time, is the least fault of this Discourse; but
that which is the greater is, that the drift thereof tends to confusion, and
the things contained in it are unsound and untrue, which I shall now come to
manifest.

CHAP. I. Of stating the Question, concerning the established constant use of
Forms of Prayer, in the public service of God.
IN managing his opposition against the constant use of prescribed Forms of
Prayer, The Question proposed, concerning the lawfulness of using Forms by
Ministers who have gifts.
the forementioned Writer does in his first Chapter, give us the state of the
Question, which he undertakes to dispute, and therein he expresses what he
yields, and grants as lawful, and what he judges and esteems to be
sinful, and undertaketh to prove it so: and herein he has declared himself
with sufficient clearness and plainness: What he contends for he thus
expresses, Reasonable Account, p. 5.
All that we affirm is this, That our Consciences do from arguments, which to
us at least seem highly probable, judge, That it is unlawful for Ministers,
having the gift of prayer, ordinarily to perform their ministerial acts in
solemn, stated, public Prayer, by reading or reciting forms of Prayer composed
by other men, confessedly, not divinely and immediately inspired, although our
superiors do requrie this of us.

2. But he allows and acknowledges, p. 2.
that their labors are profitable, who have drawn the matter of Prayer into
Forms: p. 3.
that any Form of Prayer contained in the Scripture, may be used as part of our
Prayer, whether it be under any command or no; but if it be commanded, it
undoubtedly ought to be used; ibid.
That if a Minister distrusting his own memory or invention, shall compose
Prayers for his own use, he may do it: ibid.
that it is lawful, yea necessary, for them who join with others in Prayer, to
make use of their words, which yet are but a Form to them: ibid.
that he that ministers in Prayer to others may use a prescribed Form of
another composure, if he have not the gift of Prayer. And p. 4.
that he allows short ejaculatory Forms; such as Lord have mercy upon us.
This being the sense of this Writer, I shall concerning his stating this
Question observe three things.

3. Obs. 1. From these premises, the Reader may yet have a little further
insight into the matter of this Question: to which end he may consider, First,
that our Prayer is directed to the most high God, and therefore it was called
by the ancient Writers Greg. Nys. de Orat.
(...) and Cl. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
(...), an having to do with, and speaking unto God. Secondly, that the
ordinary wants of Christians (except extraordinary emergencies, which may be
otherwise provided for) and consequently the usual matter of Prayer, for
public Assemblies especially, is constantly the same. He who will deny this,
must as well condemn the Directory, for Direct. Of Assembling the Congregation.
Of public Prayer before Sermon etc.
directing to the matter of public Prayer, as the Common Prayer for expressing
the words; nor can he have such honorable thoughts as he ought to have, and as
the Christian Church always has had, of the Contents of the Lords Prayer.
Thirdly, that the granting it lawful, for a Minister to use a prescribed Form
of Prayer, of another composure, if he have not the gift of Prayer; is as much
as to acknowledge, that such a Prayer, piously performed, is a true worship of
God, and may be acceptable to him; otherwise it would not be lawful. Fourthly,
That the difference betwixt praying for the same things in a Form, and praying
for them without a Form is this, that in the former way the same words and
methods are constantly used, whereas in the latter the expressions are altered
and changed, The result of this Question is, Whether variety of expressions be
of great consequence for the pleasing God?
and oft-times the order and method also, according as the person thinks fit,
or as he is able to perform it.

4. Wherefore fifthly, The main result of this Question, at the last comes to
this: Whether men's changing of expressions, varying of phrases, and altering
their order and method in their Prayers to God, be things so valuable and
considerable in his sight, that his laws and will do require this, and that he
has such an eye unto it, that the humble, devout, and Religious supplications,
and addresses of pious persons, are not acceptable to him, unless they be
attended with such variety of expressions, where the persons have so much
volubility of speech? Now upon a short view, it may appear, that the
affirmative in this Question, is very unlikely and improbable upon several
accounts.

5. If we consult the rules of holy Scripture; The contrary appears from
Scripture.
our Savior particularly rebuked the vanity of them, who think they shall be
heard by their (...), much speaking or many and various words, Mat. 6.7. And as
a remedy against it, taught his Disciples that comprehensive Form of the Lords
Prayer. And from this Text S. Aug. Aug. Ep. 121. c 10.
accounts superfluity of words, to be unmeet for Prayer for things necessary.
And hence also S. Hilary infers, that we should Hill. in Mat. Can. 5.
orare ad Deum, non multiloquio sed conscientia, pray to God not with a
multitude of words, but with a good Conscience. And it is accounted a piece of
reverence to God, which Solomon directed us to make use of in our addresses to
him, Eccl. 5.2. Be not rash with thy mouth, and let not they heart be hasty to
utter any thing before God: for God is in heaven and thou upon earth: therefore
let thy words be few.

6. From the Jewish worship.
And it may be considered, that under the Law, God did not require daily
various changes, of the real expressions of religious worship and service; but
appointed them to be continually the same, Numb. 28.2, 3, etc. which makes it
more than probable, that the variety of verbal expressions, is not requisite to
obtain his acceptance under the Gospel. The daily burnt-offering was
continually without any varying the thing, a lamb of the first year, with the
same sort of meat offering, and drink offering; and the Priests without any
varying of rites about that Sacrifice, were as Josephus says, Joseph. Ant.
Jud. l. 3. c. 10.
(...), performing their office always in the same manner. Only upon their
sabbath days, the ordinary sacrifice was doubled; and upon other days of great
solemnity, there was an addition of other Sacrifices And I need not direct the
intelligent Reader to observe, how much the service of our Church is in these
things correspondent to what the wisdom of God himself then established: our
Evangelical services being now morning and evening offered unto God, as then
were the Legal: as has been observed by Bishop Sparrow's Ration. of Com. Pr.
p. 3, 8. And from the nature of God.
our Reverend and Learned Diocesan.

7. And he who considers that God is a spirit, and that true piety, and
goodness, and sincerity, are the things in which he delights, cannot easily
persuade himself, that the use of different phrases in Prayer, can be of any
great moment before him, unless he had particularly commanded this, and then
indeed it would be a part of Obedience. Proper words are necessary in public
Prayer, that by their expressive significancy, the whole Congregation may join
in their united Petitions, and also for the promoting order and decency, and
manifesting a due honor to Gods worship, and reverence for his name; and all
these things may be most usefully provided for, in a well ordered Form. But
words are not in religious service valuable in themselves, further than they
have respect to such things; but a pure heart, and the exercise of true piety,
is that which God accepts.

8. This truth is so manifest, that even the Ethnic Writers do frequently
express it. The Satyrist declares of a well fixed integrity, and inward purity
of mind and heart, Pers. in Satyr. 2.
Haec cedo ut admoveam templis and far litabo; that this is the most valuable
thing without compare, in the public worship. And when Hierocles had declared,
Hier. in Pyth. p. 26.
what the Pythian Oracle spoke to the same purpose, he thus expresses his own
sense, (...), with piety of mind every expression is acceptable to God, and
without it, none. And amongst the Christian Writers such expressions are
frequent, as that of S. Cyprian, Cyp. de Orat. Dom.
Deus non vocis, sed cordis auditor est; God hears not the voice but the heart:
and that of Cl. Alexandrinus, that the most excellent service is Cl. Alex.
Strom. l. 7.
(...), by a religious devotion, and that as men observe our words, so God
observes our minds and thoughts. But now the affecting variety of words, in the
worship of God (where fit words may be best secured by a good Form) is both apt
to hinder due devotion, and it also speaks such persons much concerned, about
that which is too low and mean to procure Gods acceptance. And it implies a
misconception of the divine nature and Being, in them who look upon such
things, as of great concernment to please him; And the making that a necessary
part of Religion which is not such, by laying a doctrinal necessity, upon it,
where men are able to perform it, cannot be excused from being a piece of
superstition, or a teaching for doctrines the precepts or fancies of men. Chap.
I.


9. Obs. 2. Opposition against our Church and Liturgy is upon uncertain grounds.
It may be noted, that this Author, though he sometimes talk high, does not
account himself certain of the truth of this position which he lays down, in
his stating the case, and in the following part of his Book undertakes to
prove. His position expresses the sinfulness of using Forms of Prayer, in the
Case he proposes: and he says, p. 2.
their judgment of Conscience is that they are unlawful, and this they Chapter 8.
p. 132.
from their hearts believe, and so must practice. But when he speaks of his
Arguments, he says, they have Arguments which p. 2.
appear very probable, and p. 5.
seem highly probable, with other like expressions. And how far this evidence
does prevail with himself, we may discern by these words, p. 164 and p. 70.
We judge not our selves infallible in our sentiments in this case; we condemn
not our brethren which judge otherwise and accordingly practice, p. 132. and in
p. 22. We dare not judge those who we think have the gift of Prayer, but think
not fit to use it in their ordinary service -- Whether it be sin in them, we
leave to Gods determination.
we pray God that if we be in the mistake, God would reveal it to us. These
words do plainly speak doubtfulness and uncertainty, as do those in the
Margent: for no understanding man can use such expressions, concerning what he
certainly knows to be sin. In speaking of the sinfulness of theft or lying, he
would not say, we condemn not them who practice otherwise, etc. to wit, thieves
and liars, since he certainly knows these things to be sin, and therefore that
the practisers of them ought to be condemned. Yet at sometimes he speaks, as if
he proceeded on P. 25. and p. 123.
demonstrations.

10. Now I hope to make it manifest, that his Arguments do not so much as prove
any probability of truth in his assertion: yet I could in the mean time
heartily wish, that both he, and others with him, would seriously consider, how
unsafe it is for themselves, The hurt and danger of such practices considered.
and dangerous to Religion, for men to oppose the state and order of a well
settled Church, upon probable Arguments. Where we have certain evidence of any
thing being our duty, we are bound to embrace it, whomsoever we contradict: but
certain evidence no man can have of an error being truth. And to proceed upon
probable Arguments only, yea or on such as men may by their mistake esteem, and
confidently assert to be certain, is in an error no safe foundation for
practice.

11. The Donatists by their restless Pleas, and various disputations,
manifested that they proceeded on such Arguments, which to them seemed highly
probable; the same may be said of the Arians and Eunomians whose Arguments are
frequently produced by Athan. contr. Arian. Or. 4. and passim.
Athanasius, Naz. Orat. 35, and 36. Gr. Nys. and Basil. adv. Eunom.
Gr. Nazianzene, and other ancient Writers, to a greater number than this
Writer has against Forms of Prayer. And almost all who were of old guilty of
any Heresy or Schism, as also at this day the Romanists, Anabaptists, Quakers,
and other such Sects, have their Arguments which they account probable. And for
the Brownists, who declared in their Praestant. Viror Epist p. 925.
Preface to their Confession, that the Church of England, its Ministry, and its
worship, were all adulterous; Fr. Johnson published his John ^ Reason^ for
s^^^^tion.
seven Arguments of one sort, and seven of another sort, such as to them seemed
probable, and all of them in Syllogisms, as our Author produces his seven
Arguments in Syllogisms against Forms of Prayer. And Erbury and others with
him, had their Arguments which to them seemed probable, which they undertook
Mr. Long in Exam. of Mr Hales of Schism, p. 133.
at Oxford to produce, and urge against all ordination and ministry. Yet if I
should ask this Author, whether he thinks all these persons did perform their
duty to God aright, and were to be discharged from sin, in thus venting their
errors and heresies, and that the Church of God received no disadvantage from
them, I presume he would not assert this; however we are sure of the contrary.
And then the consequence will be, that if it be a duty, to hold Communion with
our public Assemblies, and to perform the worship of God according to our
established Constitutions; they cannot be acquitted from sin, nor excused from
doing hurt to the Church of God, who reject these duties upon their probable
Arguments.

12. But in requital for his so favorable expressions toward us, in not
condemning our using the Liturgy of the Church, this Author expects that we
ought not to change him, and others of his persuasion, with any blame in their
dissent and separation. Reasonable Account, p. 64. Dissenters are to be blamed.
We condemn not our brethren. Let not them, says he, judge and condemn us; We
are in our dissents in the case, another servants. Now it becomes no man to
pass that judgment on others, which is peculiar to God, as, concerning the
hidden things of the heart of man, or his final state: but we are allowed to
account and judge those actions of men to be evil, which are manifestly so. And
it is very unreasonable, that if they who violate any Laws of God or Man, do
not blame others for keeping them, that therefore they must not be charged with
the breaking them. If S. Peter did not fault S. Paul, who according to his duty
kept Communion with the Church at Antioch, S. Paul did not therefore think
himself obliged not to rebuke S. Peter, for his unwarrantable withdrawing from
it: but he declares in this case, Gal. 2.11. I withstood him to the face,
because he was to be blamed; and v. 14. I saw that they walked not uprightly,
according to the truth of the Gospel.

13. Wherefore, because I think it my duty to deal faithfully and plainly in
these things, I do freely profess, that besides what concerns the Laws of the
Church and of the Realm; I account my self to have as plain evidence from the
Laws of God, and the Constitution of the Christian Church, that Schism and
unnecessary separation is a sin, in the breach of Christian Unity, as that
Adultery is a sin in breaking the bond of Wedlock. And I account my self to be
as certain, that if ever there was any unwarrantable separation, from any known
Church since the Apostles time, the separation from the Church of England is
really such: since our Church is truly as free from any just exception, in its
Constitution, doctrine and worship, as any other since that time either was, or
is. And it seems highly probable, if I do not mistake plain words, that some
of our dissenters themselves, are at some times satisfied either of so much, or
of that which comes very near it, concerning the excellent Constitution of our
Church Dr Owen says, Of Evang. Love, p. 54, 55.
We look upon the Church of England, or the generality of the nation professing
Christian Religion (measuring them by the doctrine received since the
Reformation) to be as sound and healthful a part of the Catholic Church, as
any in the World; and again, ibid. p. 87.
We believe that the generality of the inhabitants of this nation, are by their
profession constituted an eminent part of the Kingdom of Christ in this World.
But if pitieth me to consider upon what weak and unwarrantable pretenses, such
persons venture upon the practices of real separation: and by what insufficient
excuses, they plead for themselves in the defense thereof.

14. This Authors opinion is a heavy charge against the most eminent Churches,
and men.
Obs. 3. There are considerable prejudices against the truth of our Authors
assertion, as it is by him stated, even such which, beside the more direct
evidences (of which hereafter) will persuade a sober man, to be wary of
entertaining it, if he duly observe them. For this opinion is not only against
the Church of England, but the most famous Churches in the Primitive times, who
used such set Forms in their public worship, as besides what has been said
already, will sufficiently appear in the following Discourse. This is also
against the Constitution of many eminent Protestant Churches abroad, which I
have elsewhere Libert. Eccl. B. 1. Chapter 4. Sect. 1. n. 11, 12.
observed briefly, and shall not need here to add further proof, since this
Author does not deny the same, but tells us Reason. Acc. Chapter 2. p. 9.
the continuance of Liturgies upon the Reformation, owes it self in a great
measure to their not having men able to pray without a Form. And yet I cannot
but think, that this Author is a person of so much modesty, and has such a
respect to many of those Reformers, and their Successors, as not to think them
inferior to himself; and then they must come under the censure of his
assertion. And to me it seems a very hard thing to embrace such a position,
as must cast reproach on almost all the Churches of Christ in all Ages; and
must also conclude all the most famous Ministers therein, to have lived and
died, in the constant practice of the same sin unrepented of. Now I can easily
apprehend, that such a consideration as this, will have a different influence
upon such men as this Author, according to the different temper in which it may
meet with them. For at one time he tells us Chapter 9. p. 163.
authority or practice is a lamentable Argument: but at another time he
declares, concerning the sense and apprehensions of good men, that Chapter 2. p. 44.
the sensus piorum, neither is, nor ever was judged by persons of sobriety and
worth, an inconsiderable Argument; for the truth of a proposition (especially a
practical proposition) not plainly determined in holy Writ.

15. Nor is it consistent with it self.
his very stating his Question, overthrows the main foundations, and chief
Arguments of his Discourse: and then he who will embrace our Authors assertion,
according as he has stated it, upon such Arguments as he chiefly urges, must
learn to affirm and deny the same thing, or to reconcile things contradictory;
which to me and to all rational men must be, when observed, another great
prejudice against his opinion. Now in stating his Case, he grants, as I above
observed, that such Forms of Prayer as God has commanded in Scripture, (if any
such be) must be used, and other Scripture Forms, though not commanded, may be
used as part of our Prayer; and yet he declares it sinful for such Ministers
who can pray otherwise, to use Forms. 1. From the duty of using their own Chapter
2. p. 6, 7, etc. and Chapter 3.
gifts, and 2. From the hindrance of pious dispositions, or attention and
fervency, from the use of a Form of words in Prayer; and yet if these Arguments
are of any weight, they must conclude against the lawful use of Scripture
Forms, as well as of others, which yet he asserteth to be lawful. And indeed,
some Scripture Forms being in the New Testament commanded to be used, that
sufficiently manifests, that a set Form of words in Prayer can be no
hindrance to a religious temper of mind, unless we will grant that our Saviors
commands are hurtful to his Religion, and that such Positions of men, which are
contrary to his Precepts, ought to be preferred before them.

16. He acknowledges also, p. 3. that it is lawful, yea necessary, for them
who join with others in Prayer, to make use of his words who speaks, which c
an be but a Form to them. And p. 19. he says, such persons have nothing to do
but to exercise their grace. And this consideration was made use of, to prove
the lawfulness of Forms, by Pract. Catechism, B. 3. Sect. 2. Bishop Tail. Of
Prayer Extempore, n. 46, 47. Disp. of Liturg. Prop. 1. Arg. 6.
Dr Hammond, Dr Tailor, and Mr Baxter. Now from hence it not only follows, that
such Prayers are acceptable to God, which are put up by pious men with devout
hearts, but without the exercise of their own gifts; but it must also be hence
concluded, that Unity in public Prayer, is more acceptable to God, than the
use of men's own abilities in conception or expression. For otherwise, it would
be the duty of all persons in the public Assemblies, who have any such
abilities, not to take notice of the Ministers words, or to join in them; but
distinctly to exercise their own gifts, or make use of their private
conceptions there, or else to withdraw themselves from the public Assemblies,
that they may have the more free opportunity for the exercise of them.

17. Nor generally owned by the Non-Conformists.
I shall only add in the last place, that this assertion of our Author is such,
that a great part, and I think the greater part of the Nonconformists
themselves will not own. Indeed in Qu. Eliz. her time, the In Bishop Whitgifts
Defense Tr. 9. Chapter 2. Div. 2.
first Admonition disliked the being tied to any Forms of Prayer invented by
men, but Mr Cartwright in his ibid. Div. 3.
Reply, declares his agreement for a prescript Form to be used in the Church.
And besides other particular persons, the Presbyterian Commissioners at the
Savoy, made not our Authors Position any part of their objections, yea they
were willing to have composed Grand debate; in exceptions of Presbyt. p. 29.
new Forms, as themselves express. And it would be well if our dissenting
Brethren would really consider, how great their disagreements are among
themselves, even in so many things; that it cannot be expected that any way of
settlement should be agreed upon among themselves, as it was experimentally
manifested by the proceedings of 1643, 1644, 1645. and the years ensuing.

18. And I should be wanting in due returns of civility to our Author, if I do
not do him so much right, as to acknowledge, that his perspicuous stating the
Question, has made way for the fairer examination thereof. And he also disowns
those wilder extremes in denying the lawfulness of all Forms in general, and
also declares, that he p. 18.
does not argue for praying ex tempore, but only in the use of our own gifts,
which excludes not premeditation: But I must likewise do the truth that right,
as to observe, that his position as he has stated it, is not consistent
therewith; and therefore ought not to be asserted or defended.

CHAP. II. Chapter II.
Of the gift of Prayer.
THE first Argument produced against the lawfulness of ordinarily using a set
Form, by such Ministers who have a gift of Prayer, is because (says he) this
gift is a mean given by God for the performance of this religious act of
Prayer, and therefore Reasona. Account. p. 5, 6.
may not be neglected or omitted. And he tells us by the gift of Prayer he
means p. 6.
a man's ability fitly to express his mind to God in Prayer. And that such a
person, who is able fitly to express his mind in his own words, ought to make
use of them in public Administrations, and may not lawfully pray by a Form; he
endeavors to prove, by urging some Scriptures which require the use of some
gifts, as 1 Timothy 4.14. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Romans 12.3, 6.

2. What the gift of Prayer is?
Now that I may give the clearest satisfaction to the Reader in this
particular, I shall not content my self barely to answer this Argument, and to
show the weakness thereof; but I shall first give an account, What that is
which is and may be called the Gift of Prayer? and how far this is afforded?
and how far men's own abilities must be exercised? Of the nature of Prayer.
And for the better understanding of this, it must be observed, that a pious
and devout Prayer, does contain a great part of the lively exercise, and
practice of Religion and Piety; especially if we comprehend under the name of
Prayer, both confession and thanksgiving. It includes a professed owning the
true God, and Faith in him, and acknowledging him to be the Governor and
disposer of all things, and the Author of all good: and this is called by Philo
Philo lib. Quod Deus sit immutabilis, p. 306.
(...), a great Prayer. It takes in also a professed owning the Almighty
power, infinite wisdom, goodness, faithfulness and Omniscience of God: and also
the exercise of reverence, submission, humility, hope, affectionate desire,
heavenly mindedness, and repentance; together with a lively sense and belief of
the Gospel grace and promises, and of the merits, Mediation and Intercession of
our only Lord and Savior; and a sincere love to all men, and particularly to
the Church, and our Governors, for whom we pray.

3. Wherefore first, that is eminently and especially to be esteemed the gift
of Prayer, which disposes and enableth to the performance of the duty of
Prayer. And therefore since Prayer is not so much a verbal thing, The gift of
Prayer is a devout temper of mind
as a pious address of the heart, soul and spirit unto God, Gods bestowing the
supplies and assistances of his grace, which kindle and excite pious
dispositions in seeking unto God, with earnest and affectionate desires, a
lively faith, and the exercise of inward devotion; this is most properly his
vouchsafing, and bestowing the gift of Prayer: and our receiving and exercising
them, is our having and using the gift of Prayer. For as the gift of Charity,
does not consist in speaking of the matters or rules of Charity, but in being
inwardly disposed to the lively practice of that divine grace, so is it also in
Prayer. Now if any persons shall here say (as some are used to speak) that what
I have expressed, is not the gift, but the grace of Prayer, he may consider
that by Grace, he can here understand nothing else but an excellent and
gracious gift; and as S. Austin declared Aug. Ep. 105. Sixto.
ipsa oration inter gratiae munera reperitur; Prayer it self is to be reckoned
amongst the works of grace.

4. And whereas this Author Reas. Acc. p. 19.
produces two places of Scripture, to prove the gift of Prayer from the holy
Spirit, This showed from the Holy Scripture.
Zec. 12.10. and Romans 8.26. it is remarkably observable, that both these places
so far as they speak of the spirit or gift of Prayer, have particular respect
to the inward affection and devotion of the heart, and not, according to his
notion, to the ability of expression. The former place is Zec. 12.10. I will
pour upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the spirit of grace and supplications;
and they shall look upon me whom they have pierced, and they shall mourn, etc.
Where the Hebrew word translated Supplications is by diverse Interpreters, as
the Chaldee Paraphrast, the Septuagint, the Syriack and Arabic Versions, and
Pagnine, agreeably to the derivation of it, rendered Mercies or Compassions. And
since the spirit of supplications, is the spirit of grace, it therefore is to
be understood according to the common sense of Interpreters, of piety of mind
and affections, and an holy temper and disposition of heart, to trust in God
and call upon him. And the following words, and they shall look upon me whom
they have pierced, and shall mourn, etc. will infer the same thing, if those
words be taken as expressions of true repentance, which is the sense of many
good Expositors; though some modern and Eus. Them. Evang. l. 8. Test. 4.
ancient Writers, look upon them, as expressing the anguish of them who had
despised and disobeyed our Blessed Lord and Savior.

5. The other place is Romans 8.26. The spirit helps our infirmities, for we
know not what to pray for as we ought, but the spirit it self makes
intercession for us, with groanings which cannot be uttered. Now concerning the
former part of these words, it cannot be conceived, that this great Apostle,
and other Christians at that time, should be ignorant of the common matters of
Christian Prayer, who could not but be acquainted with Aug. Ep. 121. ad Prob.
the Lords Prayer, but a considerable part of the sense of this clause is, that
whilst under troubles and sufferings, of which the Apostle was discoursing,
even good men are apt to think their present redress and deliverance most
desirable, as this Apostle himself did the departing of that outward affliction
which he calls Aug. ib. Chrysostom. in Romans 8.26.
a thorn in the flesh, 2 Cor. 12.7, 8, 10. the influence of Gods spirit directs
them to seek his Kingdom, and with hope, and patience, and submission, to
resign themselves unto the will of God, that that may be done on earth, and
that his most wise Government should order all their affairs in this life. And
the guidance of the Holy Spirit by keeping pious men humble, preserves them
ordinarily from such irregular inclinations and desires, as appeared in the
request of the two Sons of Zebedee, James and John, which they made to our
Lord. And all this is performed by the influence of the grace of the Holy
Spirit.

6. And in the latter part of these words, the Spirits making intercession with
groanings which cannot be uttered, may well be applied to vehement affections,
and inward gracious motions of the heart; but cannot consistently with common
sense, be referred to words and expressions. But I see no great difference,
whether this clause be understood immediately of the Holy Ghost himself, as
most of the Aug. Ep. 105. and Ep. 121. and passim^^ Ambr^^ ad Horon^^
Ancients understand it, that he gemendi inspirat affectum, promotes
affectionate groans; as in a like way of expression they observe the Spirit is
said to cry Abba Father, Gal. 4.6. because thereby we cry Abba Father, Romans
8.15. Or whether it be understood of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, and the
spirits of pious men who are influenced thereby, in dependence upon him; which
is the interpretation of Chrysostom. in loc.
S. Chrysostom, and is also mentioned by Contra Sermon. Arian.
S. Austin.

7. The continued and increased supplies of this divine grace and gift of
Prayer, This gift necessary to be exercised.
or inward devotion of mind, is usually vouchsafed to pious men, according to
their diligence, and progress in piety, goodness and righteousness, and their
frequent practice of these duties of Religion, with careful preparation of
mind. And the exercise of this gift being so great a part of Religion, and of
singular use for obtaining various blessings from God, it ought by all men to
be performed with the greatest seriousness. And as that ability of expression,
whereby a man largely professes the particular doctrines of the Christian
Faith, in the several Articles of our Belief, is not properly the gift of Faith
or of believing, so neither is the like ability of expressing the matter of our
Prayer, to be accounted in any proper sense the gift of Prayer, but rather of
speaking, utterance, or Elocution. But it is the inward gracious dispositions,
and motions of our hearts and minds, which is the most powerful Oratory, to
prevail with God. And this whether with or without a Form of words; yea whether
joined with outward expressions, or attended with silence, is the effectual and
fervent prayer of a righteous man, which avails much. Hereby as Cl.
Alexandrinus Cl. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
says, (...), We speak distinctly though with silence, Of the extraordinary
gifts used in Prayer, in the beginning of Christiauity.
and utter inward loud cries, where no voice is heard.

8. Secondly, There was also a gift of Prayer, and praying with the spirit,
when together with what is above expressed, many Christians in the beginning of
Christianity, were frequently enabled, by the extraordinary impulses and
immediate inspiration of the Holy Spirit upon their minds, so to pray either in
their own or other Languages, that these motions of their hearts, and inward
desires, and also their words and expressions, were the proper and
extraordinary works and dictates of the Holy Ghost, 1 Cor. 14.14, 15, 16, 17.
And it seems highly probable, that the Apostle had some respect to this gift,
Romans 8.26, 27. according to the interpretation of Chrysostom. in Romans 8.
S. Chrysostom, who thinks that for the better clearing those words, there
must be recourse had to the times of such extraordinary gifts, which in his
days were ceased. And he says, God then gave gifts which are called also
spirits; and having mentioned the gift or spirit of prophecy, of wisdom,
healing, miracles, tongues, etc. he adds, after all these, (...), there was a
gift of Prayer, which is also called a spirit (or spirit of Prayer) and he who
had this, says he, prayed for the whole multitude. And in another place the
same Father observes, that this gift which he there also calls, Chrysostom. in 1
Cor. 14.
(...), was sometimes accompanied with the gift of tongues, or an ability by
the inspiration of the spirit, to express these Prayers in other Languages:
which is also manifest from the Scriptures themselves, 1 Cor. 14.14, 15, 16.

9. How far such extraordinary gifts were to be used?
Now he who had this gift, ought to make use thereof in a due and regular
manner, especially so far as concerned the matter of this inspiration and
guidance. For this was an extraordinary and singular favor from God, and these
impulses were most excellent assistances, and infallible guides, for the right
performance of the duty of Prayer, and making intercession according to the
will of God, Romans 8.27. But these eminent and extraordinary motions being
miraculous, were peculiar to that primitive time, for which they were
calculated, when the Christian Faith needed Confirmation, by the demonstration
of the spirit, both for the establishing of Christians, and the Conversion of
others. But no man now can justly pretend to speak or pray, by such infallible
inspirations, nor ought he to be credited who shall so pretend. Yet they who
then received these assistances, were not obliged always to make use of them,
merely for the exercising of their gifts in the Christian Assemblies; but they
ought only so far to use them, as was consistent with the rules of order, and
decency, and edification; but in other Cases they were to forbear the use
thereof, as is manifest from 1 Cor. 14. And upon this account, the Apostle
argues against the public use of the gift of Prayer in an unknown tongue,
though in the use of inspired gifts, 1 Cor. 14.14. my spirit prays, but my
understanding, (...), is unfruitful; i.e. my gift is exercised, and my own mind
and spirit is affected; but my sense and meaning is not declared, to the profit
and benefit of others. For (...), which is here rendered understanding, appears
to be used by S. Paul in this place, for the declared sense of his words and
expressions, or the true Valla, Lud. Cappel. in loc.
meaning of what he spoke, as appears from v. 19. and so it is used elsewhere
in this Epistle, 1 Cor. 2.16. we have (...), the mind of Christ, or the plain
and true manifestation of his mind and doctrine.

10. From this 1 Cor. Chapter 14. I had in my Libertas Ecclesiastica given this as
an Answer to that Argument against set Forms of Prayer, that they limit the use
of gifts: Lib. Eccl. B. 1. Chapter 4. Sect 2. p. 120.
That by the will of God, bounds and limits were to be set, even to the use of
the extraordinary gifts of Gods spirit, that the Church might be edified, 1
Cor. 14.26, 27, 28, 30, 33. Whereas now no such miraculous emanations of the
Holy Ghost can be pretended. Now in reply to this, this Author uses Reas.
Account. p. 14, 15, 16, 17.
many words, and says these Precepts of the Apostle in this Chapter, were
against two or three speaking or gabling together, and for the avoiding undue
length in their Discourses, and that if any speak in an unknown tongue some
should interpret. And then he declares, that such disorderly things may be
restrained; but says, it is one thing to restrain the notorious abuse of
gifts, but it is a quite different thing to restrain the use of them. And to
this purpose he misrepresents my sense, in a Syllogism of his own, and then
triumphs over what himself had formed; wherewith I shall not trouble the
Reader, but shall in a few words declare, what manifest evidence there is in
this Chapter, for that which I urged from it.

11. Rules for the exercise of such gifts laid down 1 Cor. 14. considered.
My intention was to show, that the use of particular gifts, is not of so great
necessity in the Church, because they are gifts, but that even some of the
extraordinary emanations of the Holy Spirit might be, and ought to be forborne
to be exercised, where this forbearance tended to decent order, or edification.
And if this be plainly proved from this Chapter, the general urging the
necessity of the use of all gifts given of God, further than that use is
orderly and needful for edification, is an error and mistake. Now the Apostle
in this Chapter declares that charity, edification, and the good and profit of
others, are things to be preferred and valued, above extraordinary spiritual
gifts, v. 1, 2, 3, 4, etc. that they who had these extraordinary gifts of the
spirit, were not bound to use them in the Church, merely because they were
gifts, unless the use thereof was for the profit and edification of others, v.
2, 6, 18, 19. Yea the use of the gift of tongues, though given by the special
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, was totally forbidden, where there was no
interpreter, v. 23, 27, 28. and yet so far as concerns the nature of gifts, an
ability to speak with other tongues, by peculiar assistances of the Spirit, was
as much, yea more a gift, than an ability of expressing our selves in our own
tongue, without any such extraordinary and peculiar assistance. And they who
had other gifts of revelation, interpretation or doctrine, were to hold their
peace, so far as was requisite to the observing the rules of order, and
decency, and the avoiding confusion, v. 26, 30, 33, 40. But in our Case, there
are no such gifts in being now, as then were in the Church, and therefore no
restraint laid upon any such; here is no prohibiting that which is the proper
gift of Prayer as I have above showed, nor is any thing forbidden directly or
indirectly, by the injoining Liturgies, which is of greater use to the
edification of the Church; as I shall In Chapter 3.
hereafter show; but here is a direction for a better and more useful
performance of the duty of Prayer prescribed.

12. Thirdly, I acknowledge there is an ability in many persons, whereby they
can express their minds in some degree fitly to God in Prayer. This our Author
does Reas. Acc. p. 6, 8, 10.
diverse times declare to be that which he accounts the gift of Prayer. And I
do not love to contend about expressions; yet the phrase of the gift of Prayer,
is no where used at all in the Scripture, and the ancient Writers do usefully
for the promoting devotion in Prayer, discourse of it as a work of the heart
and soul, and not of words: Prayer, says S. Basil Basil. in Mart. Julitt. and
in Bas. de Orat.
(...), we do not at all define to be a business of words: and whilst we are
warned against confidence in (...), much speaking, it is (...), a diligent
disposition of heart, that is of great use. Wherefore as I before said, I
esteem not this ability of expression, to be properly the gift of Prayer, but
rather of speech or utterance, or a piece of elocution.

13. How far readiness of expression in Prayer is a gift of God?
This facility of expression is procured and enlarged, in men who have a
competent natural freedom of speech, by use and exercise, and is advanced by
various methods. I acknowledge that in some an affectionateness of devotion
does contribute much thereto: and in others confident self-conceit, and an
heated fancy, and (as I have read some particular instances) even diabolical
contracts have promoted the same. And as I cannot admit these things last
mentioned to be called the gifts of God, so neither is it to be allowed, that
the natural product of them in those persons should be so esteemed; and much
less are they to be called Gifts of the Holy Spirit. And it is manifest, that a
readiness of expressing the sense of their minds, with fluency of fit words,
and volubility of speech, does attend even such men, who make use of their
Prayers and other Discourses, to propagate and uphold errors, and heretical
doctrines, and Enthusiasm, and even them who are sunk into the depth of
impiety; as well as those who design to promote truth and goodness. And it must
be an high dishonor to the Holy Spirit for any to say, that he gives his
immediate and peculiar assistances, to the advancing of error and falsehood. S.
Paul observed a slight and cunning craftiness, in them who lie in wait to
deceive, Ephesians. 4.14. and that by good words and fair speeches, they deceive the
hearts of the simple, (...), men of innocent and harmless intentions, Romans
16.18. And Nazianzene describes the discourses of Heretics, that they had Naz.
Orat. 33.
(...), a quick, nimble, and voluble tongue, and they spoke, (...), with a
masculine and generous style, and choice and approved words. And these persons
and such like, might be forward enough to call these things gifts, and to use
our Authors Argument against the restraint of them.

14. The high advantages of the influences, and aids of the Holy Spirit in the
Church of God, are with great thankfulness to God and our Savior to be
acknowledged; but the operations of this spirit tend to produce purity,
holiness and goodness. Christians are commanded in the Holy Scriptures to pray
in the spirit, which (besides what was extraordinary, and peculiar to those
times) consists in inward piety of heart, and not in variety of words. And
copiousness of expression is so far from being an evidence of his conduct, that
in S. Chrysostoms judgment, where there is an overflowing abundance, and
multitude of words in Prayer, this cannot consist with that praying in the
spirit, which is commanded by the Apostle, Ephesians. 6.18. It is says he, Chrysostom. in
Ephesians. 6.
(...), not to pray in the spirit, when any one uses multitudes of words and
repetitions. And indeed to pray in the spirit, as the Apostle directs, is to
perform the duty of Prayer with a pious temper of mind, according to the
Christian rules; whereas the designed use of variety of words and expressions,
and the affecting this, is contrary to the Precepts of our Savior. The
Commentaries under S. Ambrose his name declare, In Ephesians. 6.
Hoc est in spiritu semper or are, munda conscientia, and fide integra precem
ad Deum dirigere; This is to pray always in the spirit, to direct prayer to God
with a pure conscience, and an upright faith: and Calvin explains praying in
the spirit, by declaring the inward devoutness of affection, which is a fruit
of that spirit; In Ep. Jud. v. 20.
hinc ardor and vehementia, hinc denique gemitus illi inenarrabiles, Hence
proceed warmth and earnestness of spirit and groans, that cannot be uttered.

15. I acknowledge a sober and due freedom of expression, to be a gift of God,
in the same manner that the capacities of men's understanding, and all other
abilities of mind and body, are Gods gifts. But it is plain that this liberty
of expression, is the product of the natural capacities men receive from God,
which are improved in well disposed persons by ordinary means, under Gods
blessing. And I cannot discern (and I think no man else can) that a Ministers
ability of speech, either for Prayer, or Preaching, or Conference, is of any
other nature, than that freedom of expression which a Lawyer has to plead, or
which other persons of good capacities and liberal education, and who have
accustomed themselves to discourse, do make use of concerning such things, as
they have well considered: only it may be advanced by a pious affection toward
the things he may discourse of.

16. I shall now consider, whether it be the duty of Christians, or
particularly of Ministers, to make use of such abilities, at all times, in the
exercises of Religion. And besides what I have said before, How far Ministers
are obliged to exercise all their abilities?
it may justly be accounted a considerable, if not an unanswerable objection,
against the necessity contended for, of a Ministers using a particular gift, or
ability wherewith he is endued, merely because it is a gift; in that this would
equally make it his duty, to use his present or extempore ability of
conception, and expression in Prayer or Preaching, if he have any such ability,
and the use of his memory, in declaring what he has himself conceived, or
thought on beforehand, and also his reading what has been before composed,
either by himself or by others. But the use of these several abilities at the
same time, is impossible, because of their being inconsistent with one another.
But God obliges no man to impossibilities.

17. And besides this, if it be necessary to the obtaining the favor of God,
for Ministers to use their own gifts, in uttering variety of expressions in
their Prayers to God, because they may not neglect the use of any of their
gifts or abilities; then it must be necessary also, where the person who
Ministers has an ability to perform it, and the Auditory (among learned men
and Scholars) has a capacity to understand it; to perform the Offices of
Prayer in the use of diverse languages, some part in one language, and some part
in another, exercising therein all his several abilities. For our Authors
Argument will as much prove the necessity of this, as the necessity of his
using his own parts, in different ways of expression, in his own language;
since the former is a more eminent and extraordinary ability than the latter,
and if no gift or accomplishment, may be totally neglected in the service of
God, then not this, which is of so considerable a degree. But yet if we
consider God, Cl. Alex. Strom. l. 7.
(...), he desires not, and is not pleased with the variety of sounds of words
and languages; and the urging such a practice as a necessary duty of Religion,
would represent Religion, as if it was a business of affectation, fancy and
humor; and not of piety and seriousness. Now this I mention, to manifest
hereby, of how low and little concernment in Religion, the mere exercise of a
man's own abilities are, further than they have an influence upon the profit and
edification of others.

18. No duty to use any ability, further than is orderly and for edification.
And there are also many other abilities, gifts or perfections of another
nature, which God bestows upon some Ministers, the exercise of which they may
lawfully, and usefully, wholly omit in their Ministerial employments. For
instance, he who is eminently able by critical learning, to explicate diverse
difficult Texts of Scripture; or who is one of a piercing judgment, to fathom
the depth of the greatest controversies, will not only be free from sin, but
may be commended, if he silence these his abilities in his popular Sermons, and
acquaint common Auditories with such doctrines and duties, as are both useful
for their practice, and suitable to their capacities. Thus S. Paul dealt with
his Corinthians, feeding them with milk, 1 Cor. 3.2.

19. I shall now go further, and show, It Is best for the Church, that the
ablest men in some cases ordinarily make use of what was formed by others
abilities.
that Ministers who have themselves gifts, and abilities of the greatest
degree, both lawfully may, and for the greater good of the Church, ought, to
make use of what is drawn up to their hands by others, in some great and
weighty cases, rather than of their own gifts, in the neglect of what is so
composed, drawn up and established. And of this I shall give two instances.

20. My first instance shall be, concerning the translation of the Holy
Scripture. Now I presume this Author will acknowledge, As the Translation of
Scripture.
that Ministers ought to instruct their people, in the doctrine and Religion of
Christianity, out of the holy Scriptures. But according to his Principles, he
who is able to give an account of the Original, ought not to cite the Scripture
according to our English Translation, but must use his own gift and ability, in
making a new Translation of his own: and possibly, if he be guided by our
Authors way of reasoning, he must be still making new Translations of the same
Text of Scripture, when he cites it a second, third, and fourth time, if he be
able to vary so often. And yet it is easy to see, that a fixed and well
considered Translation must be of more value and esteem, and of greater use for
the instructing people in the doctrine of Christianity, than this changeable
method. And in this case, we have the acknowledgment of this Writer himself,
who says, Reas. Acc. p. 20.
both Christ and his Apostles made frequent use of the Septuagint Version.

21. Our Author himself proposes it, as an objection against his opinion, that
according to it, P. 19.
Ministers who are able must be bound in reading the Scriptures, to make a
Translation of their own. And here at first he makes a doubt, whether reading
the Scriptures be a Ministerial act; and says, Christ never said to them, Go
and read, and he supposes the Scriptures may be read by inferior officers, as
is done in other Reformed Churches. But thus far his Answer is very
insufficient, if it be considered, 1. That the reading the holy Scriptures in
the Church, has been a part of the public Offices in the Christian
Assemblies, from the time of the Tertul. Apol. c. 39. Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
first Centuries, and even in the Apostles times, and by their Precept, Act.
15.31. Col. 4.16. 1 These. 5.27. and that this is included in that charge to
Timothy, 1 Timothy 4.13. Give attendance to reading, is acknowledged by many V. Dr
Hammond, and in Baldw. in loc.
Expositors. And therefore if all public offices ought to be performed by the
use of men's own gifts, why not this? 2. Even the public Prayers were also in
the ancient Greek Church, usually performed or read, not by the chief Officers,
but by the Deacon, as Chrysostom. in Romans and passim.
S. Chrysostom often expresses. 3. That yet when persons of great abilities do
undertake to read the Scriptures publicly, they must either sin according to
his Position, in neglecting the use of their gifts, or else must make New
Translations. 4. That what ever such men as our Author will determine,
concerning the public reading the Scriptures, which was also constantly Buxt.
Syn. Jud. c. 9.
practiced in the Jewish Church, Act. 13.15, 27. chapter 15.21. and where our
Savior himself, after he had begun to preach, stood up for to read, Luke 4.15,
16. Yet so long as instructing the people out of the Scriptures, is
acknowledged a Ministerial Act, they must according to his Argument, be hence
obliged to make new Translations.

22. But for a further Answer, he tells us, p. 20.
That no single Minister is fit to be trusted with this, nor to enter a dissent
to the ordinary Version, -- but with great modesty and upon weighty grounds.
Now I commend the modesty of these expressions, though I think in the former
clause, they run too far into the other extreme. I do not see what reason our
Author has, to condemn S. Hieroms translating the Old Testament, out of the
Original Hebrew (or his Translating the Scriptures, for the use of his Hi^ron.
Sophronio.
Countrymen into the Dalmatian or Slavonian Tongue, and the like undertakings
of diverse other persons) because this was performed by a single Presbyter: and
for this work, he has been deservedly honored in the Christian Church. And I
did not think, he would have been so severe against the Version of Junius and
Tremellius, or (if they may escape the better because they were two) against
Beza's Version of the New Testament. Yet I suppose all understanding men will
grant, that the undertaking new Translations of the Bible, when the old one is
sufficiently perfect, is a very needless enterprise, to make them more numerous
than learned men are.

23. But why may not what he speaks of a Version, be as well and as truly
affirmed concerning the public Prayers of the Church, when there are as great
abilities required, (not indeed of skill in the learned languages, and ancient
Customs, but) of true wisdom, care, consideration and prudence, and as much
authority also, fitly to comprise the common addresses of the Church, and to
recommend them to be presented to God in its public service, as to make a
translation of the Scripture? And why private Ministers should have a greater
liberty, to enter their dissents here, than concerning a Translation, I do not
understand; especially since we are more certain, that our Liturgy is free from
any mistake or error, in the matter of it, than we can be in some difficult
Texts, concerning any Translation yet extant, every Age affording further
helps, for the clearer understanding of some of them. And it is as easy a thing
to make declamations against them who shall suppose, that many Ministers are
not able to examine, and give the sense of the original Texts, especially of
the New Testament, as our Author can make against them, who think all private
Ministers not sufficiently able, with due fitness, exactness and
comprehensiveness, daily to compose new solemn addresses to God, to present
therein the common service of the Church. And yet if their private abilities
could constantly enable them, to make Prayers every way as perfect, as a
well-ordered Form is, I shall in the next Chapter show the advantages, that a
fixed Form in the public service, would still have above them.

24. But besides this, I know not how our Author will be able here to Answer
his own instance. For whatsoever may be said of other Ministers; were not Reas.
Account. ibidem.
Christ, and his Apostles who were divinely inspired, of abilities sufficient
to be entrusted with usual interpreting the Scriptures from the Original, yea
and of making an infallible translation also? And yet they thought it neither
necessary nor fit, when ever they cited the Scripture, to exercise their gifts,
in making a new Version, but as he himself observes, they frequently and for
the most part followed the Septuagint. Indeed if our Author should embrace that
Notion, from Aristaeus, which is mentioned by Phil. de Vit. Mos l. 2. p. 659.
Philo, and espoused by many of the Just. Mart. Cohort. ad Gr. Cl. Alex. Strom.
1. Epiphan de Men's and Pond. Augustine. etc.
ancient Writers of the Church; and favored by the Novel. Tit. 29. Constable. 146.
c. 1.
Imperial Law, and by some Salian. An. Mund. 3775. n. 71. etc. Mr Greg. in
Opus^. and others cited by B. Walton Proleg. 9. in Bibl. Polygl.
learned men of later days, that the Version of the Septuagint was framed by a
kind of divine inspiration, he would hereby in some degree avoid this
difficulty. But he has shut himself out from this Plea, since in the same
place he declares, that Christ and his Apostles made use of this Version,
though as full of mistakes as any other. And in that the Penmen of the New
Testament, did sometimes vary very considerably from the Septuagint; as for
instance, in that Prophecy of Zech. 12.10. cited Joh. 19.37. where the
Septuagint in Hieron. in Zech. 12.
S. Hieroms time were observed, and affirmed by him to read it, as our most
ordinary Copies thereof now do; this is evidence enough, that they did not
esteem that Version to be of divine inspiration.

25. A second instance I shall give, No new Creeds to be daily made.
concerns the Creed, or profession of the Christian Faith. Now supposing
according to the assertion of Voss. de Trib. Symb. Dissert. 1. c. 25. etc.
Vossius, that the Creed called the Apostles, was not made by themselves: In
reciting the Articles of the Christian Faith at Baptism, or according to the
ancient Custom to the Aug. de Symbol. ad Catechum.
Catechumeni before Baptism; it cannot be expedient, that every Minister should
every time exercise his gifts, in forming a new Creed. And if he should do
this, it would neither be so close and pithy in its matter and substance, nor
of that authority, which the received Creeds are; and this would be the way to
lose the old faith, by a changeable novelty of words. The ancient Custom of the
Church, was to keep to their Ruffin. in Symbol.
fixed Creeds. And then they who would not acquiesce in the received Symbol or
Rule of Faith, were looked upon with Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. (...).
suspicion, of having designs against the true Faith.

26. Public Forms allowed by Dissenters.
The like may be said of public Confessions. And which way soever our Author
may be inclined in this Case, some of the chief persons of the Presbyterian
Party, in our late times, discerned so much hurt by the rejecting these public
Forms, as made them earnest in pleading the usefulness of them. Thus for
instance, Dr Tuckney, on 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the Form of sound words. Whence
he declares, Form of sound words, p. 246.
Forms so much decryed in our times, were not so undervalued in Paul' s, who
you see left with Timothy a Form of words. And he said, p. 248.
these have been ever in use, since God himself wrote the Decalogue, -- and
Christ taught us his own Prayer, -- And the Apostles their Canons, Act. 15. and
the Primitive Churches and Fathers their Creeds. And he not only asserts, p.
252.
that the Forms of sound words are useful and in some cases necessary: but
complains also, that our p. 258.
experience in these woefully distracted times, too sadly cries aloud, that the
not keeping more close to such Forms of sound words, (which our Church was
sometimes famous for, in point of Doctrine) -- has miserably torn us in
pieces, and divided us in semper divisibilia, with more to that purpose. And
concerning every man taking the liberty, of venting his own novel composures of
this kind, he declares p. 272.
many such Forms are in these times of Deformation rather than Reformation,
minted daily. So he in the Year 1650.

27. And amongst the Independents, when their Elders and Messengers, from the
several parts of the Realm, met at the Savoy, to publish their joint
Declaration of Faith and Order; this their General Assembly, it seems, thought
it not necessary or requisite for them, to make use of their gifts to compose a
new Confession of Faith. For in the main part of what they published, In Declar
of the Faith and Order of the Congr. Churches.
in several whole Chapters, and most of their Paragraphs, they kept exactly
even to the words of the Confession of the Assembly at Westminster, making very
few alterations in any other things, save where the Independent opinions
differed from the Presbyterians. And yet themselves In the Preface.
highly magnified, and applauded their own proceedings in this Convention, and
their Unity therein.

28. And it may be further considered, Well consi^^^ Forms more complete than
other varied compos^res.
that in all these things, viz. the Version of Scripture, the Declaration of
the Articles of Faith, and in public Prayers, it may well be presumed, that
what is well considered and settled, or prescribed as a Form, is more perfect
and complete in the composure, than can be expected in any method of ordinary
variation. And to assert, that these things may be always better (or as well)
performed, and composed by every Minister, or even by the most eminent person
whomsoever, in a constant way of varying, in the use of their own abilities,
than in a well considered and digested Form; is as much as to affirm, that the
varied expressions of men at every particular time, are more proper, pithy,
expressive and full, than the best composed Prayer that is at any time made,
and reviewed with the greatest consideration and care: for so it may be
expected that a publicly established Form is.

29. And he who talks of this our Church, that if all her Ministers cannot
constantly in their daily new Prayers, equal or outdo the perfection or
exactness of a well considered Form, (for this must be his sense, if he speaks
to any purpose) that Reas. Account. p. 157.
this may be spoken to the shame of the Church of God in England: these raw and
extravagant speeches will be to the shame of those who utter them, so far as
they will be ashamed of uncharitable and reproachful calumnies against the
Church of God, and of speaking against all sense and reason.

30. Now the result of what I have hitherto discoursed is, that what our Author
contends for, is neither the true and proper gift of Prayer, which is necessary
to be exercised; nor yet any singular or peculiar gift of the spirit of God, as
a special benefit of Christ's Exaltation; but it is an ability of a more common
and ordinary nature. And that it is neither a duty, nor yet expedient, that
such abilities should be used and constantly exercised, any further than is
agreeable to the rules of edification and order. Thus much I thought fit to
write for the Readers better satisfaction, concerning the subject or matter of
his first Argument; but I shall not need to do the like concerning the rest:
And now it will be no hard thing, to Answer the Argument it self.

31. The substance of his Argument is, Reas. Acc. p. 5, 6.
that a Ministers own gift, of expressing his mind fitly to God in Prayer, is a
mean given by God, for the performance of the Religious act of Prayer; and
therefore may not be omitted, no not at the command of man. To which I Answer,

32. First, That a mean given of God, Means or abilities not necessary for the
performing duties, may be omitted.
if it be only capable of being used, and not a necessary mean to the
performance of the duty, may lawfully be omitted. Especially when there are
several means, which may all of them singly be used, he who chooses one of
them, and the most profitable, is not to be faulted, because he does not use
the other which is less profitable. Thus in the public Prayers of the Church;
whereas a Ministers present fluency of expression, or his remembrance of what
himself has before conceived, with respect to that particular time; or his
using a set Form, are different ways or means of performing this service; he
who chooses the last, which has many advantages of the other two, is not to be
blamed because he does not choose either of those two. And by this it may
appear, that this Writers own Argument, if it were of any strength, might
easily be inverted, and retorted against himself, if we put in the phrase of a
Form of Prayer, instead of a Ministers own gift, etc.

33. Secondly, That ability of expression was not peculiarly and particularly
given by God to Ministers, that they might thereby perform the public Offices
of Prayer. This is manifest, because this is also given to them, whom God never
calls to perform the public Offices of Ministration. And also because if our
Lord had intended it, to be the duty of all Ministers of the Gospel, that they
must use their own abilities of expression in the Prayers of the Church, and
might not make use of any Forms, he would not himself have given them an
Example, of composing a Form of Prayer, and delivering this to be used by his
own Apostles, and this too to be made use of, not as their private addresses,
for themselves alone; but with respect to the whole Christian Society, and
therefore beginning as was anciently observed Cyp. de Orat. Dom. Non dicimus
patermeus -- publica nobis est and communis oration.
Our Father, as being a public and Common Prayer. And this was the more
considerable because it was agreeable to, and in approbation of what John the
Baptist had directed his Disciples: and the like method had been before used,
throughout all the state of the Jewish Church, as I have in Libert. Eccles. p.
103, 104.
another place evinced, and shall further prove, Chapter 3. Sect. 3. n. 27, 28, etc.

34. The Authority of our Governors is to be honored.
The authority of our Governors is also in this Case of considerable weight.
For though the command of man is not to be performed, if it be against the will
of God; yet since it is fit, that a due order of public worship in Christian
Assemblies, should be provided for by them, who have the chief Authority and
inspection therein; the constant use of the Liturgy, being of it self agreeable
to the will of God, becomes more obligatory upon us, because this way of
worship is wisely established by our superiors. And the Apostle S. Paul
declared, that the use ever of extraordinary spiritual gifts, must give place
to decency and order, 1 Cor. 14.26, -- 33, -- 40.

35. But he further says, that a man own gift or ability of expression in
Prayer, is Reas. Account. p. 6, and 7, and 18.
a divine mean, but a Form o^ Prayer is p. 7. and 18. Liturgies are no mere
humane means for Gods worship.
a mere humane mean. Now this must be upon supposition, that an ability to
compose a Prayer to speak it, is a divine ability, (which how far it is true, I
have showed above) but the same ability to compose the same Prayer, if it be to
be written, is a mere humane ability. But no man can see any truth in such a
supposition, nor any reason for it.

36. But however our Author think fit to talk; so far as he has proved any
thing, he has proved the composing of Liturgies, to be by a divine ability, or
gift of Prayer. For he thus argues against those who deny any such gift, as the
gift of Prayer. p. 8.
This is, says he, either (...) deny what is evident to sense, That there are
some persons able, fitly to express then minds to God in Prayer, or to deny the
Scriptures, which say, Jam. 1.17. th^^ every good gift, and every perfect gift
comes from above, from the Father of lights. Besides that, it stubbeth up all
Liturgies by the roots, none it seems having any ability to make them. Now the
result of this Discourse is, that the ability to make Liturgies is the gift of
Prayer, and a gift of God; and consequently they must be a divine mean for the
performance of Prayer, or such an one as is afforded to us by the assistance of
God. Besides this, God has so far declared his approbation of Forms of Prayer,
that he himself delivered such, and enjoined them under the Old Testament, as
our Savior did under the New: and if that may be further called divine, which
serves the ends of God in the World, and conduces to holiness and piety, upon
this account also good and well-ordered Forms must be so esteemed.

37. But it now remains, that I examine his proofs, produced to show that it is
a duty, in the public Prayers of the Church, for a Minister to use his own
gifts of expression, if he have such abilities. His first p. 6.
proof is, 1 Timothy 4.14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was given
thee by Prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. But Ans.
1. In this place the Apostle requires Timothy, to take care of executing his
Episcopal Office, The Precepts of the Scripture concerning the use of gifts
considered.
and exercising his authority (which things were given by the laying on of
hands) and also to discharge the duty of his place and function, with care and
diligence, according to the grace which God had giver him. 2. Here is not a
word spoken it this Text concerning Prayer, or the performance thereof by any
such gift as our Author pleads for, nor does the Context which mentions
reading, exhortation, and doctrine, speak any thing thereof. And I suppose this
Author does not account the gift of Prayer, to be given by the laying on of
hands, when himself says, the Church p. 13.
should judge of her Ministers gift of Prayer, before she trust them with the
public Ministry.

38. And 3. if this Text had particularly expressed the use of the gift of
Prayer, and intended this concerning utterance and expression, as it does not;
the Argument from Timothy, at that time, when public Offices of the Church
were often performed by miraculous gifts, and who himself was in all
probability furnished therewith, would not be of force, for them who have no
such extraordinary gifts. Yet such Precepts do not enjoin the use of any gifts,
further than may consist with order and tend to edification; which are general
rules for the exercise of all gifts. And when the Apostle says in this Verse,
and 1 Timothy 1.18. that Timothies Ordination, and the discharge of his Function,
was by prophecy, even this has respect to those miraculous emanations of the
Holy Spirit, who in those times, did in an extraordinary manner, often make
choice of persons to be ordained; and directed the Apostles by Prophecy, or
some other way of guidance, whom they should make choice of. To which purpose
Ep. ad Corinth. p. 54.
Clemens Romanus speaks of the Apostles, (...), choosing and approving by the
Spirit, those whom they ordained Bishops and Deacons. And Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. l.
2. c. (...).
Eusebius from Clemens Alexandrinus, declares as a certain account of History,
concerning S. John, that he ordained Bishops, and others of the Clergy, of
persons (...), who were signified and marked out by the spirit.

39. Now how severe this Writer is inclined to be, against such like Arguments,
produced by others against his opinion, from Texts where there is no mention at
all of Prayer, we may discern by this instance. When he took notice that that
Text Romans 15.6. that you may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, was
produced, as well it might be, in favor of Forms: he breaks out into a
swelling passion, and in contempt cries out Reas. Acc. p. 142.
Ridiculous! is there in that Text a word concerning Prayer, etc. Now though
there be in that Text, a more general expressi^^ of glorifying God, of the
practice and exercise of which Grot. in Romans 15.6. i. e. Ut cum Deum laudatis,
eique preces funditis, faciatis id, non tantum eodem verborum sono (sicut (...)
fieri solebant) sed and animo pleno mutuae dilectionis.
Prayer is one part (...) branch: yet if there had been no su^^ expression, if
I had been of his Council I would have advised him to milder expressions, for
his own sake, toward such ways of arguing as himself makes (...) of, but with
less strength and evidence.

40. Another place of Scripture he produces is, 1 Pet. 4.10. As every one ha^^
received the gift, even so minister the sa^^ one to another, etc. Now this
Verse is b^ Dr Hammond in loc.
many Writers, understood of givi^^alms, to which sense its Connection wi^^ the
former Verse does incline. But if (...) be understood concerning any
ministerial abilities, of which the following Ver^^ discourses, the main part
of what I mentioned in the second and third Answer to the forecited place of
Scripture, w^^ equally agree to this. And indeed th^^ place cannot be
understood, to have a^^ particular respect to Prayer; since (...) speaks of
ministering one to another: Whereas in Prayer, and all proper acts of w^^ship,
as well as in sacrifice, he that ministers, ministers only to God, to who^^
alone the Prayers and Service of the Church was directed.

41. He mentions also Romans 12.6. Having gifts, differing according to the
grace given to us, whether Prophecy, let us prophecy according to the
proportion of faith. But the same Answer will fit this place also: for neither
here, nor in 1 Pet. 4.10. is any mention at all of Prayer, but the other gifts,
which the Apostles had their particular eye upon, are expressly named in the
following Verses, in both these Chapters. And yet if the Apostle had then
commanded them to have used such expressions in Prayer, as they were furnished
with by the gifts of the Holy Ghost, as Grot. in in Jud. 20.
Grotius seems to think, that praying in the Holy Ghost, Jude v. 20. is to
pray, according to the dictates of the Holy Spirit, (which yet is more
probably, from the connection of that phrase, with their most holy faith
preceding it, and the love of God following it, to be understood of the grace
of the Spirit) this would not have a like respect to us now, since the like
dictates, and effusion of spiritual gifts are not now afforded. They then not
only prayed, but also sung by the peculiar guidance of the Spirit, as is
manifest, 1 Cor. 14.15, 26. and were therefore infallibly guided in both; but
neither assistances of infallibility are now pretended to, from the divine
spirit, save only in the deceits of Popery and Enthusiasm, nor will our Author
allow, that Reas. Acc. p. 18, 19.
new hymns ought to be composed by the exercise of gifts.

42. And he produces Romans 12.3. where the Apostle requires every one to think
of himself soberly, according as God has dealt to every man the measure of
faith, and gives us the last part of this Verse in Greek, as if there were
some stress to be laid thereupon. But this appears to be so little to his
purpose, that I cannot ghess what he aimed at herein, unless it be that a
Minister ought to think himself able, by his constant gifts, to outdo the
perfection of Liturgies; which is directly against what the Apostle enjoined in
the former part of that Verse, that no man should think of himself more highly,
than he ought to think. For I conceive it to be a manifest truth, that there is
now no man whosoever he be, who by constant alterations, and making new
Prayers, according to his own abilities, can perform these services at all
times, with that exactness, which may be had in a Form: but he will sometimes
either omit something expedient, or be defective in due expression, or be
wanting in that pithiness, closeness and comprehensiveness, which may be
provided for by a Form.

43. Now as there is not one word in any of these Texts, concerning the
particular use either of extraordinary gifts, and much less of ordinary
abilities, in public Prayer; so I cannot see, how any Christian can conceive,
that they were at all intended against the use of Forms; unless he can first
persuade himself, that these Apostles intended to contradict the direction and
command of our Savior, concerning the Lords Prayer.

44. Having now sufficiently, as I hope, answered what he produces as his
Argument, I shall not take notice of those other particular Answers, which he
mentions, as having been by some given to this Argument, and unto which he
gives his replies: though several of them are sufficiently vindicated, from
what I have said. But there are two or three other passages in this Chapter,
which I shall briefly reflect upon.

45. His description of the gift of Prayer, for the public service of the
Church, as being p. 6, 8. This Authors account of the gift of Prayer very
deficient.
an ability to express ones mind fitly to God in Prayer, is very defective and
imperfect, especially in two things, though I use the phrase of the gift of
Prayer here, improperly in his own sense. 1. In that he accounts this ability
of composing or forming Prayers, to consist only in a persons being able to
express his mind, whereas it is chiefly to be provided that the conceptions of
his mind be sober, and well ordered, comprehensive, and every way suitable to
the nature of the duty. 2. In that he only mentions the expressing his mind;
Whereas in public Prayers, it is not a man's own private desires or wants, so
far as they are peculiar to himself, which he is to present to God; but he is
to express what is fit, to represent the minds of the whole Assembly, and the
common desires and wants, and joint Devotions of all the Congregation.

46. Another place I shall examine is, where he tells us they p. 9, 10. His
defav^ing the ministry of our. Church is unjust, and unreasonable.
think it will be hard to find nine or ten thousand Scholars in England,
furnished with the gift either of praying or preaching, in any tolerable
manner: and one great reason is, because they have been so tied to a Liturgy,
that they have never applied themselves to the study of the Scriptures, and
their own hearts, as they should. Thus in this place and in many others, he
takes any occasion to reproach, and cast dirt upon the Ministry of the Church
of England; even to such excess, as sometimes to call them (though he excepts
very many particular persons from that charge) p. 124.
an ignorant, lazy and sottish Ministry. And he is the more liberal in these
exorbitant Censures, when he does withal bespatter our Liturgy, as in both
these places, or what he terms p. 149.
that pitiful thing called Uniformity, in words, and syllables, and phrases.

47. Now I conceive my self abundantly warranted to say, that the abilities of
the present Ministry of the Church of England are such as were never in this
Church outdone (if equalled) in any foregoing Age; nor as I verily believe, in
any other part of the Christian World, since the Apostolical times, in any
Church of so large extent. And it is an easy thing, but mightily unworthy of a
Professor of Christianity, to speak bad and evil words of the mosT worthy men
and things. But does the use of a Liturgy hinder men from studying the
Scriptures, or their own hearts, (which is a loud calumny upon our Ministry,
and many other excellent persons, of eminent piety and goodness, who have a
very high value for our Liturgy) and were the ancient Fathers, and our first
Reformers, and their Successors, who closely adhered to a Liturgy, men of no
understanding in the Scriptures, and men of no piety of heart, or holiness of
life? Or is the daily reading the Scriptures, as is done in the Liturgy (and by
the Ministry of England at other times also) that which must hinder men's study
and understanding in them? and is the constant use of morning and evening
devotions, which the Liturgy directs, the great obstacle to piety, and to
men's taking serious care of their own hearts, to have them possessed with fear
and reverence of God, and disposed to the exercises of Religion, and universal
obedience? And what a wild accusation is this, to revile and asperse a National
Ministry at random, and at a venture, concerning such things, wherein every
Reader may discern, that it is impossible for him to know what he speaks to be
true, and others, blessed be God, know them to be false?

48. And I wish our Author be not himself defective, in some part at least, of
what he charge upon others. For in studying the Scriptures, he could not but
meet with Precepts against evil speaking, false accusing, rash judging, and
uncharitableness; and in studying his own heart, he would discern, whether he
had not offended in any of these. And I presume him (though I am not very
certain who he is) to be so much a Scholar, as to know that (...), the usual
Greek word for the Evil one, does properly and primarily signify a Calumniator,
and it is thence unlikely, that any of the spirit of Christianity should be
contained in reproaching others, which Nazianzen accounted to be Naz. Orat. 53.
(...), one of the greatest evils.

49. In Answer to such words, I could also without much pains, find out
defaming and reflective expressions, if I were inclined that way; but I am
content herein to be inferior to him, but truly sorry to see what liberty he
sometimes gives himself in such things. I have long since learned, from the
example of our Lord and Savior, from the rules of the Christian Religion, and
particularly from our Church-Catechism, to keep my tongue from evil-speaking,
lying, and slandering. And if he will not take it ill from me, which I assure
him, I intend no otherwise than with a truly charitable mind; I dare
confidently affirm, that if he shall please to be a strict observer of so much,
though it be out of our Liturgy, he will not thereby be the worse man.

50. And I hope he may be the less offended with me for this Counsel, because I
do not write it out of any private provocation, or any apprehension of
disrespectful expressions toward my self. I acknowledge his expressions
toward me in particular, to have been very civil and courteous, and I thank
him for them. And I shall not return to him any thing unmeet. But I should not
be faithful to the truth, nor to himself, if I should not show the weakness and
mistakes of his Arguments, so far as I discern them. And the duty I owe to the
Church, of which I am a member, cannot well be discharged, without taxing his
reproachful words against it, where I meet with them.

51. What he speaks concerning p. 18, 19.
Hymns and Anthems, I shall have occasion to take notice of in the next Chapter 3.
Sect. 2. n. 38, etc.
Chapter.

CHAP. III. Of Devotion, and attentive fervency of mind in public Prayer: and
whether the use of Liturgies be hindrances, or helps therein.
SECT. I. His pretenses for Forms of public Prayer, being an impediment to
attention and fervency, examined, and the contrary manifested.
HIS second Argument against the lawfulness of the ordinary public use of
Forms, by him who has abilities of expressing himself without them, is, that
they hinder the attention, intention and fervency, both of Minister and people,
and therefore Reas. Acc. p. 23.
may not be used. But this charge against well-ordered Forms, can never be made
out: and his proofs will appear very weak and slender.

2. Now I freely acknowledge and assert, Pious devotion greatly needful in
Prayer.
that in our Prayer we ought to have a holy and Religious sense of God, and of
Jesus our Mediator. We ought also to be serious in minding and attending to the
duty in hand, Chapter III.
and as free as may be from distractions: and to have a lively exercise of
faith, hope, reverence, and such other Christian Graces, as I mentioned in the
n. 2.
former Chapter. And the more devout we are, to the higher degree we are raised
of this temper, and active disposition of mind. This is indeed of great
consequence in our addresses to God, and as Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 157.
S. Austin says, Prayer being a spiritual thing, it is so much the more
accepted of God by how much our spirits and affections are answerable to this
duty. If this be what he means by his attention and intention; it will be
readily granted, that that way or model of service, which hinders these duties,
and is not consistent with their exercise, is thereupon unlawful And this
seems to be his sense, when he says, p. 33.
attention is for the soul, hoc agere, to do what it pretends to do: and by p.
34.
intention and fervor, he means, an holy zeal and heat -- of the inward man,
of sorrow in confession, desires in petition, joy in thanksgiving. But there
may be too great a stress laid upon zeal, earnestness and fervency: since this
is sometimes found, even to some degree of ecstasie, in men of hot heads,
strong imaginations, and deluded minds, in whom it is far from the temper of
sober devotion. Sect. I.
And an awful reverence of God, a Religious and godly fear, a humble
submissiveness, and sober exercise of other Christian graces, is far to be
preferred before it. Now I doubt not, but that a pious man may pray seriously,
religiously and affectionately, either in the use of a Form, or without one;
but I think the former has in many cases the advantage, and specially in the
public service of the Church, as may hereafter appear.

3. When he comes to prove, that the use of set Forms of Prayer hinders
attention and fervency, he uses high words, and says, p. 25.
it is to them next to a demonstration, and p. 26.
it is impossible for any without self-condennation to deny it. But if after
all this, his proofs shall appear shallow and insufficient, then these will be
evinced to be rash words, and talking lavishly with immoderate confidence.

4. In his discoursing concerning attention, instead of Arguments he proposes
three questions, which he would have considered. First, p. 25.
Whether it be possible for any person, to read any discourse, with that degree
of attention of thoughts, Diligent attention may be easily given to what is
read.
as he must pronounce the same with by heart. To which I Answer, that it is
certain this may be easily done, and I think it strange it should be
questioned. How usual is it t^^ read the Scriptures, and other Books, wi^^ as
great attention, as the same things ca^ be spoken without reading? Particular^^
in considering his Arguments, I should have thought him big with strange
conceits who should tell me that I must b^ at the pains of getting them without
Book, before I could attend to their sense^ and I know I can do it better, by
viewing them in his Book. If our Author ca^^ not do thus much, he cannot be of
capacity to make any great proficiency, by any thing he has read: and he must
b^ the unfittest man, of any I know, to answer other men's Writings, when he
cannot well attend to their sense in readin^ them. And it is strange to me that
any man should write a Book, if he think (...) man can much attend to its sense
in reading it; and he that is of this opinion needs not be much concerned how
carelessly he writes.

5. The ancient Christians declared, the reading the Holy Scriptures to have
had (...) mighty efficacy upon their minds and spirits, insomuch that he devout
Reade^ was thereby, as Orig. cont. Cells.
Origin expresses it, i^ a manner inspired: which could not have been, without
a diligent attention (...) them. But if our Authors way of Dicourse course were
of any force, the delivery of Christian Doctrine by Oral Tradition, must be
much more vigorous, lively and powerful, than by the Scriptures. I confess, he
does make a particular exception concerning the Scriptures, when he speaks of
often reading what we are before acquainted with; and says, p. 27.
God has secured an abiding reverence for them in all pious souls. But I
suppose he does not mean, that this is done in any extraordinary and miraculous
manner. And it is plain, that even the Scriptures are read by many with
carelessness, and have been long observed to have been perverted, and abused by
Iren. adv. Haer. l. 1. c. 1, etc. 15. Tert. de praescript. adv. Haer. c. 17.
Heretics. Wherefore the reverence that pious men have for the Scriptures, in
reading them, is chiefly with respect to God, because they are his word and his
laws, whereby his will is declared to men. But since as Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 112.
S. Aug. observed, when we pray, we speak to God; and when we read, God speaks
to us; a Religious honor and fear of God, so far as it prevails, will secure a
reverence to the frequent use of the same Prayer, because therein also we have
to do with God, and address our selves unto him.

6. A second thing he would have considered, (which, as the former, has
particular respect to him that Ministers) is, whether any thing can more
conduce to (...) the thoughts upon the duty, and God, p. 26.
than when a man can trust his affection to thrust out words. A pious temper of
mind does more six men's hearts on God in Prayer, than the greatest freedom of
expression can do.
Now having considered this, I think it past all doubt, th^^ a devout sense of
Gods presence, and o^ his purity, and of the great assurance w^^ have of his
readiness to help and ble^^ them who Religiously and diligently see^ him,
together with humble considerations of our dependence upon him, and a careful
preparing our hearts to approach unto him, do wonderfully more conduce to fix
our thoughts and minds upon God and our duty, than using our own word with
freedom of expression, and a voleble tongue can do. And by this method the
whole Christian Assembly, as well as the Minister, may be prepared for the
right performance of this service. Our Author^ method may occasion him who
ministers, to attend the more carefully (...) his words, but this only is
that, which commands and guides the heart. And that men's hearts may be as much
composed, an^ their Spirits as fervent, in the use of a fet Form, as in any
other way, is manifest from what I formerly observed, Libert. Eccl. B. 1. Chapter
4. p. 135.
that our Saviors praying more earnestly in his agony, was in repeating again
and again the same words. And the Leyden Syn. pur. Theol. Disp. 36. n. 33.
Professors observed, that when upon his Cross he said, my God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? he used a Form of deprecation from the Psalmist; and yet
sure no Christian can think, that he the less attended to what he spoke.

7. The third thing he would have considered, is, whether any such attention be
to be expected from people p. 27. Of the attention of the People in Prayer.
to Forms of Prayer, which they often hear, as to a conceived Prayers? Now that
part of attention, which consists in considering the way and manner of
expressions, conceptions or method, is like to be the greater in the use of a
conceived Prayer, by reason of its being new: but this is of no benefit to
Religion, but a real hindrance to true devotion. But a pious attention of soul,
to join in the matter of Prayer, may be the better performed, by persons
Religiously disposed, in a set Form, when they know beforehand what Prayers
they are to present, and come prepared to join in them.

8. But to render what he aims at the more plausible, he says, Ibid. God
requires attention to his word in known duties as much as in new things.
it is at least an ingenious observation, that God to stir up his peoples
attentions and affections tells them, he would do a new thing; and that I did
in my Preface to my Libertas Ecclesiastica say, the humor of this Age is more
apt to seek for new Books, Chapter II.
than to read (...) ones. Concerning what he first observes 1. The Scriptures
sometimes call that (...) new thing, which is so wonderful and ^^raculous, that
the like was never hear^ before. Thus when the earth was to op^^ its mouth, and
swallow up Corah and (...) Company, this is called Gods making (...) new thing,
Number. 16.30. The like expression is used in Jer. 31.22. which Te^^ was by the
Hieron. in loc. Aug. de Temp. Sermon. 9.
ancient Writers expounded concerning the miraculous conception (...) Christ.
But are varied expressions thing of this nature? 2. Does God never inten^ to
stir up the attentions and affections (...) men by his word, but when he tells
the^ he will speak or do a new thing? Surel^ God declared, Jer. 7.23. -- 28.
that the command of obeying his voice, was th^^ which all the Prophets had
urged, an^ yet he did not thereupon allow, that (...) should be the less
attended to. An^ whereas in this very page he said, th^^ God has secured an
abiding reverence, (...) all pious souls to the holy Scriptures, it wa^ not so
ingenious an observation as our Author thought it, to contradict himself here,
as if no such reverence and attentio^ would be given by Gods people to h^^
word, but in new things.

9. And which way soever in other things, the genius of men, and the humor of
the age may tend; true devotion in Religion always enclines to the same things;
to wit, to glorify God for his infinite excellency, to praise him for his
abundant goodness, to confess our sins, and implore his pardon, grace and
protection; and the blessings both of this life and of eternal life. He who
would leave out these old and constant matters of Prayer, will but badly guide
others in that duty: and they who are diligently attentive to what is new in
the variety and novelty of expressions, but neglect attention to these old
things, will not be the better Christians. Our Author tells us, none gives that
attention to a discourse or story he Ibid.
has heard an hundred times over, that he gives to a new one. A devout temper
not like that of hearing a Story, to be pleased only with new things.
And I wonder he should have no greater sense and understanding in these
things, than to argue from such comparisons. For though in things that tend to
instruct men's understandings, or gratify and humor their fancies, those
things which are new, do most affect them; yet in the exercise of grace, the
fear and reverence of God, and desires after the same kind of divine blessings,
are more serious and earnest in those persons, who by a long continued
practice, have accustomed themselves to these very things, Chapter III.
than in them who have been hitherto strangers to them, and unacquainted with
the, and to whom they are altogether new things.

10. He next comes to prove, Of fervency in Prayer.
that fervency and intention of spirit in Prayer, is hindered by the use of
Forms. To this purpose he says, Reas. Acc. p. 28. and p. 52.
as to him that ministers; there is a great deal of difference between words
following the affections, and affections following the words. And this he says
is an old Argument of Didoclavius. And the very same was urged by De Conscient.
l. 4. c. 17. qu. 4.
Amesius, and therefore surely was thought to be the best Argument, these
Writers could meet with. And our Author also says, p. 31, 32.
they believe the people do find a different flame in these Prayers: but it is
not easy to assign the reason of the difference.

11. Now here I grant, A Religious man is more devout in a Form of Prayer by
his frequent use of it.
that in such a Form of Prayer, as the person has never before read or used,
there can be no particular previous preparation of heart or affections, to join
in the several Petitions thereof; and this in the first use of such a Form, I
admit and acknowledge to be a disadvantage to devotion. But if thus much be
true, it will manifest, that the people must be hindered in the fervency of
their devotions, by joining in a conceived Prayer: because being unacquainted
beforehand, with what would be therein expressed, Of affections following
words in Prayer.
their affections must follow the speakers words. And thus the former part of
what he asserts, does wholly undermine and disprove the latter, which was laid
down without any proof at all: and this is the more considerable, because the
devotion of the people or the whole Congregation, rather than of the Minister,
is chiefly to be regarded in public Prayer, and on their part lies this
disadvantage.

12. But in such an ordinary Form, which he who ministers is well acquainted
with, there is no such impediment to his devotion. For he may come with his
heart particularly disposed, to apply himself to God for those special
blessings (and so may the people do also in the like case) and so the pious
disposition and acting of his spirit, as to those particular Prayers, is not
only the sudden consequent of his present reading those words, but is previous
thereunto. This Author partial.
But here I cannot but take notice of our Authors great partiality, concerning
the preparation of men's hearts to Prayer. He declares in his own way p. 26.
that a premeditation of the greatness and majesty of God, and of ones own
vileness, etc. are of great use: but to him who uses p. 28.
prescribed Forms, he allows only that there may be some general previous
preparation of affections, but it is hard to keep them warm so long, as until
he comes to his work. Thus prejudices hurry men into the most unreasonable
absurdities, and unaccountable censures of others. And that we may further see
how much this Writer fights in the dark, and does not weigh the force and
tendency of what he urges; to prove Forms to be an obstruction to fervency in
Prayer, he tells us, they p. 28, 29.
think it not possible, that the words of another should so well fit our
hearts, and be so expressive of raised affections as our own. Some things urged
against forms of Prayer, will equally conclude-against all public worship.
Now these words are of no weight against Forms, since they may best express
what things we ought to desire: But I suppose he did not consider, that what he
thus speaks, tends to declare, that the people cannot with fervent affections
join with the Minister in any Prayer whatsoever, because they are not their own
words: and then all public Prayer fitted to the people must be condemned; and
so they must either take up with the Quakers silence, or the Romish service,
where the Assembly are not capable of understanding, and consequently of
joining with the Priests in their Service.

13. But he has another thing to urge, which particularly concerns the
Ministers reading of a Form: and that is, that then p. 29.
the soul looks through the eye, and is diverted from its contemplation upon
God. His sense is, that the looking upon the words in the Book, must hinder his
heart from being directed unto God, because as he after says, p. 31. and the
same sense p. 52.
it is impossible, that any created being should in the same action duly intend
two objects. Now our Author is so unhappy in his Arguments, that they not only
recoil with equal violence upon himself, but what he urges, is against all
vocal Prayer, whether of Ministers or others, in public or in private; and
also against others joining with them. For the considering of words, phrases,
method and sense, is a different thing in conceived Prayer, from the directing
the heart and spirit unto God; and this must take up more of his mind and
thoughts, than the looking upon a Book does. And the peoples hearing and
observing the words of Prayer spoken, is as different a thing from the motions
of the mind toward God, as the seeing the same words is. Reading or hearing
words hinders not the minding the sense of them.
But in truth, since the main use of words is, that they are to express things,
the use of the same act about the word and the thing signified by it (as to
understand each of them) or the use of such different acts about the word and
the thing signified by it, as to read or hear the one, and to understand or be
affected with the other, are no impediments at all to the vigorous actings of
our souls and minds. He must be no ordinary man, that is able to make out, that
the seeing or hearing the words of any Proposition or Discourse, hinders from
clearly understanding the sense thereof, when these words are wholly
subservient to the thing, to express the sense and meaning thereof. Nor can I
be persuaded, that I affect any thing of God or goodness the less, for hearing
or reading such words, as represent and express them, or direct and excite my
affections toward them. And withal he who is well acquainted with a Form of
Prayer, needs no industrious exercise of his eye in the use thereof.

14. But on the other hand, Manifold advantages to piety from the use of Forms
of Prayer.
since in such conceived Prayers as our Author pleads for, the Ministers mind
must be employed in considering and conceiving and digesting his words, and his
method, and sense; and is apt to be sometimes solicitous, lest he do amiss in
any of these, and may sometimes have pleasing reflections upon his own fluency;
or the contrary; these things may more justly be esteemed hindrances to his
devotion. And besides what I have abovesaid concerning the devotions of the
people, the using conceived Prayers as the public service of the Church, may
be an impediment thereof, upon these several accounts.

1. They are not certain, join in the matter of a new conceived Prayer, till
they have well considered it, and therefore are the more apt to hesitate
concerning it. expressions, and the manner of the composure of the Prayer,
either to judge of it or imitate it, which tend to distract the mind, and
divert it from the worship of God. one accord put up to God, in the several
Assemblies of our Church, may reasonably be, and to many is, a quickening of
their devotion, from the benefit of Christian Unity, and the Bishop Sparrow's
Rationale of Com. Prayer, p. 9.
promise annexed thereunto, Mat. 18.19, 20. Concerning which Text S. Cyprian
observed, that though some, not considering the whole discourse, made use of
the last clause to encourage division: yet it appears from the Connection of
that with the former Verse; If two of you shall agree, etc. that, Cypr. de
Unit. Eccl.
si collecti unanimiter oraverint, duo aut tres licet sint, impetrare possunt
de Dei Majestate, quod postulant; if they be gathered together with one accord,
though they be but two or three, they may obtain what they seek for of the
divine Majesty. And therefore there may be a greater hope of obtaining those
very things, which we particularly know to be the joint desire of so great a
number of Christians. quickness of capacity, which is necessary for their
hearts and affections to go along with new Prayers, who yet can piously and
devoutly join in those they have been well acquainted with. impertinencies, or
unadvised and unbecoming expressions in conceived Prayer, or whatsoever is the
result of passion, imprudence, negligence, weakness or bad principles and
erroneous opinions, this must be expected to be a disturbance and hindrance to
the fervency and devotion of the Auditors.

15. But because I am apprehensive, Whether in the Apostles times all public
worship was performed by extraordinary gifts.
that some may be apt to think, that much of what I have said in the preferring
the use of public Forms to other conceived Prayers, may seem applicable at
first view, to the Apostolical times also, as if the use of their miraculous
gifts, when they used no Forms, were to be undervalued, I shall therefore
desire these things may be considered. First, that as it is manifest, that
under the Old Testament, they who had the gift of prophecy, were not at all
times under the special impulses of the divine spirit; so it is neither certain
nor probable, that in all the Primitive Churches, these extraordinary gifts
were constantly afforded to all its Ministers, for the performing all their
Ministrations thereby. The Apostle's directions to Timothy, to give attendance
to reading, meditation, care and diligence, 1 Timothy 4.13, 15, 16. 2 Timothy 2.15.
do seem plainly to evince the contrary. And since the Jewish Church, both at,
and before the coming of our Savior, made constant use of Forms of prayer, as
has been observed by diverse Buxt. Syn. Jud. c. 5.
learned men, and the same has been particularly proved, both both from their
Talmud, and Rituals, as well as from their other Rabbis by Seld. in Eutychium.
Mr Seldom, as was observed by Dr Hammond, in his view of the Directory, Chapter 1.
Sect. 15. and also by Hor. Heb. in Mat. 6.9.
Dr Lightfoot; and conformably hereunto, the Baptist and our Savior, taught
their Disciples Forms of Prayer: I see no reason at all to conclude, that the
public Prayers in those early Primitive times, were never performed by the use
of Forms. But of this the Reader may judge more when he has read to the end of
this Chapter.

16. Secondly, When they had these extraordinary assistances, it is but
reasonable to think, that the Holy Spirit did not put them upon designed
constant using variety of words, and new phrases, in those things which were
their common and usual parts of worship. For since our Savior himself showed
his dislike to the (...), or many and various words in Prayer, and gave an
example for the due performance of it, in his comprehensive Form; the Spirit of
God in the Primitive Christians, acting according to the will of God, would not
guide them to what was contrary to our Saviors prescriptions. Thirdly, Great
difference between Prayer by Apostolical and extraordinary gifts, and other
conceived Prayer.
Where there were such extraordinary motions of the spirit, for the composing
Prayers, Psalms or Hymns, these were free from those disadvantages I have above
expressed, which attend conceived Prayers of other men. Under those impulses,
the speaker need not be solicitous in his thoughts, about words and composure.
There could be no defects in the matter, or fullness of expression, where these
things were directed by the guidance of the Spirit. And the plentiful effusion
of that Holy Spirit, tended rather more to promote inward fervency, and
devotion of pious men, both speaker and hearers, than to guide their
expressions, since grace and holiness were his chief gifts, and principal
design. And the people could not make any doubts or demurs, about their ready
consent to every part of those supplications, which were directed by
extraordinary inspirations. And the knowing that they were the special motions
of the Holy Spirit, would both excite their attention, and raise the exercise
of their faith and hope, in a firm confidence that those intercessions by the
Holy Spirit, being certainly according to the will of God, were accepted of him.

17. Now though what I have said may be sufficient to answer his Argument, and
to vindicate Forms of Prayer, from being any obstructions to serious piety; yet
with respect to this Argument, I shall desire three things to be observed.

Obs. 1. That Attention, and intention and fervency, as our Author expresses
them, is not the whole business, that is needful to be minded and taken care of
in the public service of the Church, as he seems to intimate, both in the
tendency of this Chapter, and particularly when he says, Reas. Acc. p. 27.
Attention of thoughts is not all our duty in Prayer, intention of spirit, and
fervency of affections is also a prime requisite. Other duties as necessary in
Prayer, as intention and fervency.
But men may be vigorous and earnest in the exercise of all this, while the
matter of their Prayer may not be in all things suitable to the will of God, and
even when several things which ought to be part of our Religious Addresses, are
omitted. Wherefore there must be a chief care that the matter of our Prayers be
rightly ordered, and that our expressions and behavior be such, as manifest a
due reverence to the Majesty of God. And in this Case, a well composed Form
has a manifest advantage above other Prayers.

18. And we must also take care that our zeal and devotion be regular and
orderly, and that they do not cross any other duties, which we are obliged to
perform: and the care of such duties, are in many Cases of greater consequence,
than the degree of fervency. Thus if any man think he can be more fervent in
his private Prayers, than in joining in any public service; he is not thereby
allowed to neglect the public Assemblies, and to retire himself at that time
to his Closet: since this public worship is a special homage we are to do to
God, and is particularly enjoined in the New Testament, Heb. 10.25. as it was
in the Old Testament, and by the Laws of nature: And if any man conceives,
that a different method from that used in the Church, whereof he is a member,
would more conduce to raise his affectionateness, he may not thereupon
separate, and make a Schism: but as a member of the Church he is to endeavor
the preservation of its Unity, and to obey them who have the rule over it, and
not to intrude into the place of the Chief Governors. Otherwise Schisms would
be perpetuated and multiplied without end; and yet must they be all justified,
since they have been generally observed to have appeared under the disguise of
exalting Piety and Religion. Other Cases might be produced to the same purpose
(as if a Minister could be more fervent in the public Assembly, in expressing
such things as are peculiarly his own private concernment, or if the Jews
thought their zeal for God to be the highest, and their service to him the
greatest, in their opposing the Gospel) but these may manifest, that this
pretense, of fervency being hindered by Forms, if it were true, as it is not, is
so ill managed by the Dissenters, in being made a principle of separation, that
it could not justify their undertaking.

19. Obs. 2. There may be in many persons a want of due devotion, or attention
and fervency in the use of a Form; and yet this not at all proceed from the
Form it self, which therefore is not to be blamed; but from other manifest
causes, which ought to be removed. Want of devotion in the worship of God, is
the fault of the person, and not of the service, in a welcomposed Form.
It is not possible, that well ordered expressions of the matters of Prayer,
and Religious service, should of themselves hinder men's affectionate joining in
them. Nor can I think that there is any hindrance in any Christian whomsoever,
of the most Religious exercise of Christian graces, or of the most raised
devotion in the use of a Form of Prayer; unless it be where persons are under
prejudices against Forms, or else are negligent in the exercises of Piety. And
both these are faults of the person, which ought to be amended. It is too
manifest, that the censures our Dissenters unjustly vent, and the outcries and
oppositions they make, against our useful and pious public Forms, has made
many, in their attendance upon the public service of God, more irreverent in
their gestures, and more careless of their devotion; and has caused others to
neglect the public, and I fear all private exercise of Religion too; and have
made others to engage in separation with that giddiness, that at last they know
not where to stand, nor which way to go. And can they think they have hereby
done good service, either to God, or the souls of men, in occasioning the
worship of God to be by many neglected, and the minds of men to be perperted
from true Piety? Our Author speaking concerning Forms of Prayer says, that p.
40.
it is a great cooling to a Christians spirit, when his mind suggests doubts to
him, whether this be a way, mode or method of worship, which God will accept.
This is one effect of suggesting needless scruples against Forms, and which the
Authors of them must Answer for.

20. Obs. 3. Public service being that, That is the best model of worship,
which is most guided by the rules of our Religion.
in which the whole Church is interested, it ought to be so ordered, as may fit
the general temper of the true Christian spirit, but must not be censured, if
it suit not with the inclination of all particular persons (which is not
possible to be done) especially where their minds are disordered by passion or
prejudice. And this due order is best effected, where there is most care taken
of due reverence to God, and of using the best consideration, for the digesting
and ordering all things duly, and according to the rules of Religion. But Forms
have manifestly this advantage, of having been most considered; and of
reverence to God, in not being rash and hasty to utter any thing before God,
Eccl. 5.2.

21. There are several other expressions, in the former part of this Writers
third Chapter, which might deserve some reflections. Some of them I shall
wholly wave. But when he so often inculcates, that we may not use less proper
means, in God's service, p. 22, 43, 44. and passim.
if our superiors command, or if man command, or whoever require it, with
other such like expressions, these things seem to have no favorable aspect
upon our Governors, but rather to insinuate, that the Question under debate is
in the Issue, whether Gods command, or man's which is contrary to it, must be
obeyed? But I hope I have sufficiently showed, that he has said nothing
hitherto, to prove the Sanction of our Common Prayer to be against the command
of God. If it were so, he need not name, nor we would not plead, the commands
of men.

22. When he describes the Souls attention in Prayer, to be its p. 33. and p.
61. In Prayer is required a more immediate intuition and contemplation of God.
immediate contemplation of God: his expression here, and that in the margent
seems to me to be too high for such persons, as have not outdone S. Paul, who
said, now we see through a glass darkly. And I shall only further note, that
our Author is at sometimes more kind and complying to wards, and has more
savourable expressions concerning the use of Forms, than at other times. For
speaking concerning Prayer without Forms, as most exciting fervency of
affections, he says, p. 32.
We believe this will justify it self to the experience of every pious
deliberate soul. But he yields a little farther when he said, p. 44.
We do not think, but the experience of Christians may be different in the
case, and some may find the use of their own gifts the more advant ageous,
others may possibly find Forms more advantageous. And in another place he
says, concerning attention in the use of public Forms, against which he had
levied so many forces, p. 53.
the Minister may (for ought we yet discern) do his work with equal attention
of thoughts: for the attention of the hearers, we yet a little doubt it.

SECT. II. A defense of some things urged in my Libertas Ecclesiastica, to show
Forms no disadvantage to devotion.
FOR trying whether Forms were any prejudice to piety and Religion, I proposed
it Lib. Eccl. B. 1. Chapter 4. p. 121.
as useful, to consult the judgment of them, who are least partial, and yet
able to make a true estimate, and especially to consider the evidences of
Reason, which may be produced. This method this Author approves of; and
undertakes first to examine what I mentioned under the former head.

2. And in the entrance upon it, he tell us (what I lately noted from him) of
the different experiences of Christians. And thence he says, Reas. Acc. p. 45.
every one is bound in Prayer to use that lawful mean, which he finds most
conducive to keep his thoughts attentive, and his affections fervent; so as one
may be under an obligation not to use Forms, another under an obligation for
the present to use them. And then he declares, that things of this nature are
no fit matter for a superiors command; and compares it with superiors making
a law, that all Ministers should pray with their eyes shut.

3. Now concerning his former clause, Sect. II.
I desire it may be observed, that what ever is pretended, there is more of
sincere piety and true Religious fervency exercised, in complying with a well
ordered establishment, than by breaking it. For the preserving Unity, and
giving due reverence to superiors, are duties which our Religion enjoin. And
that Argument whereby p. 24. More of piety and fervency in the keeping peace
and unity, than in breaking them.
this Writer proves attention and fervency to be necessary, because we must
love the Lord our God with all our heart, and with all our soul, does also
require an universal practice of all piety and Religious obedience: this being
the love of God to keep his Commandments. And he who seriously minds his duty,
must have a conscientious regard to Unity, order and the duties of due
submission; and the observing them are not the way to make him less devout and
fervent, unless we can imagine, that the breaking some of the divine Precepts,
is a way of preparation to fit and dispose us for the keeping others. Whereas
in truth, all practices of sin do more or less indispose men for the pious
discharge of their duties; but Religion is so Uniform, that the exercise of one
part of our duty, will never hinder a pious man from the best performance of
another; nor can it, unless the duties of Religion should thwart and cross one
another; to assert which, would be a reflection upon God himself. And I have in
Libert. Eccles. B. 1. Chapter 1. p. 16, 17, 18.
another place observed, that the promises of Gods grace and presence, are
chiefly made to them who embrace Peace and Unity; and that therein is the
greatest increase of Christianity, in persons who are serious and diligent.

4. And concerning the acceptable worshipping of God, I desire that it may be
further considered, that when our Savior commands him, ^^^king V(...)nd
(...)ing superio^rs ^^in (...) s^^^ces.
who brings his gift to the Altar, if his Brother has ought against him, to go
first and be reconciled to his Brother, and then come and offer his gift, Mat.
5.23, 24. this Precept must needs be of the greater force, when it has respect
to the whole Church, or Society of Christians, and also to our superiors. For
if the Church of which any one was a member, has this against him, that he
has unwarrantably broken its peace and unity, and forsaken its Communion; and
if his superiors have this against him, that he has disobeyed that authority,
which God and our Savior has established, and has not yielded due submission
and respect thereto; he must according to our Saviors direction, first return
to his duty, and be reconciled to those whom he has injured, before he can
expect that God will receive his service.

5. Concerning the fitness and reasonableness of superiors making laws about
Forms of Prayer, I shall discourse somewhat in Sect. 4. a. (...).
another place. But whilst he compares the enjoining a well-ordered Liturgy,
(...) est^^^^ment of the order of ^^^^hip to be honored.
which is really of great use to Religion, with making a law that all Ministers
should pray with their eyes shut, which can be of no advantage: this looks too
like a design of humouring the vain fancies of unruly men, in exposing the
pious actions of superiors, to their contempt and derision; as if they were
empty and foolish things. But these are not things to be sported with; when
according to S. Peter's doctrine, 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. the speaking evil of
dignities, is one part of the description of them, whom God chiefly reserves to
the day of judgment to be punished.

6. And there can be no public worship in any Congregation, unless it be first
determined to be either with, or without a Form. And is it allowable, and
necessary for order, that he who officiateth in any Christian Assembly, should
determine this by his authority; but only unsit, that our Governors should
determine any thing herein, though God has charged them with the care of his
Church, and has fixed in them a supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical? Without
this, great confusion.
But if our Authors opinion be, as it seems to be by his discourse, that all
private Christians ought so to determine themselves, as to join in the several
different modes of worship according as themselves are inclined (and
consequently they must change these too, as often as their inclinations vary; and
all their Church-Covenants and obligations to continue in Communion with any
particular Society, will be as unjust encroachments upon Christian Liberty, as
penal Laws and an Act of Uniformity) this also is very unaccountable. For this
makes our Saviors constitution of his Church so far void, as to account the
members born and baptized in an established Church, to be under no obligation
to the guides and Pastors of the Church, but that they are wholly left to
themselves, to seek or found a new one, and it takes away all possibility of
any furture establishment. And the Issue of any future establishent. And the
Issue of this must also be at last, that it shall be necessary, that there be
as many several ways of public worship, exercised in every Precinct, as there
are different opinions and fancies of men living in it, that none of them may
be at a loss, for such a public worship which themselves best approve. And
likewise there must be no care of establishing such things, as may express most
reverence to God, or tend most to the real prosit and advantage of men, but in
Religion every man must do what is right in his own eyes. But this is such a
way of confusion as gratifies the fanciful inclinations of men, but does not
provide for the honor of God, and the care of true piety.

7. That Forms of Prayer are not disadvantageous, but useful and profitable to
piety, I Lib. Eccl. p 121.
produced two testimonies, against which I supposed our Dissenters would not
object. The first was of the Leyden Professors, who say, they contend, Of the
Leyden Professors.
that they are not only lawful but very advantageous, because every Christian
cannot fitly conceive new Prayers, and the attention of Auditors in great
Assemblies, is not a little helped by usual Forms. Now o^^ Author does not deny
that they (...) to this purpose, but first says, Reas. Account, p. 46.
(...) without reason signifies nothing. But it signifies as much as I
intended, that is, to express the sense of such persons, whom he cannot charge
with partiality; but my reasons I afterward expressed. But he further
observes, that they recommend the ability Syn. Theol. Di^ 36. n. ^.
of praying without previous Forms upon emergent occasions. But does their
adding this, deny what they before declared with some earnestness, concerning
the ordinary public service? We do esteem such abilities also in their proper
place, and do set a value upon those Books of devotion, which are composed by
them, with prudence and piety. And how far Prayers without Forms are desirable
to be used, I shall give my sense in Chapter 5.
another Chapter, where he treats of them.

8. The other testimony I produced, Of the Walachrian Classis.
was from the Walachrian Classis, who commend Forms, for helping the attention
of the Anditors in great Assemblies, and for Consid. Cont. in Angl. c. 7. p.
173, 174, 176.
keeping Uniformity, preventing scandals, and increasing edification; and they
declare how piously God may be worshipped in the use of them. Now though our
Author says little to the former testimony, he has much to say to this.
Sometimes he seems ^o acknowledge them, to speak against his sense and
opinion. And therefore Reas. Acc. p. 51. and 54.
he sets himself, to answer some few of their Arguments, which they urge for
the use of Forms. And speaking concerning a prescribed Form promoting
attenting, says, p. 53.
He admire, that our Reverend B^^iren should so much as mention it, (...) a due
medium in the case. And he acknowledges, p. 54.
They have some expressions, which would make one think, they judged it lawful,
for some Ministers, having the gift of Prayer, in public to use the prescribed
Forms of others, commended to them sometimes. In which words he uses a great
deal more wariness of expression than will appear agreeable to their sense. And
again he says, p. 55.
authority apart from the reasons they give, signifies little in the case.

9. And now I must entreat my Readers patience a while, that I may examine his
exceptions he enters against this testimony, or its being intended to the sense
for which I produced it. And though some of these lie scattered in his
Discourse, I have so collected them, as to digest them under particular heads.

10. He first objects that Reas. Acc. p. 46, 47, 48.
the Cons. Cont. in Angl. p. 171.
Walachrians profess themselves to agree with Amesius de Cas. Consc. l. 4. cap.
17. qu. 4. and with the Leyden Professors. And then he takes pains to prove,
that Amesius was not for preferring the use of public Forms, as of most
advantage to Piety, but in the place cited, speaks of them, as the less perfect
way of praying. Now I acknowledge this to be the sense of Amesius. But it
should have been observed by our Author, that the Walachrians only declared
their Agreement with him, in that Question which was by them proposed, viz.
Whether Forms were lawful, and not superstitious, and whether it be lawful to
communicate with them who use them? And in the resolution of this Question,
they agree with Amesius: in hac controversia faciles accedimus iis quae ab
Amesio super hac Quaestione scribuntur. But it is another Question, Whether
praying by public Forms, be the most useful way of performing that service;
and though Amesius in the same place, seems by general expressions to take in
this Case, they could not in this agree both with him, and the Leyden
Professors, and their own sense of this they fully express, Cons. Cont. p. 173,
174.
that Forms in public worship help the attention of Auditors and are for
edification. And they declare not their own sense alone, but p. 178, 179.
in omnibus pene Ecclesiis Reformatis approbantur Ecclesiasticae Liturgiae
precumque formulae, ut utiles, and aedificationi Ecclesiae conducentes; In
almost all the Reformed Churches, Church-Liturgies and Forms of Prayer are
approved as profitable, and conducing to edification. And more concerning their
sense may appear from n. 13, 14, 16.

11. Secondly, he says, Reas. Acc. p. 48.
the Walachrians rejected our English Common Prayer Book, and therefore their
testimony ought not to have been produced, to countenance it. Now I acknowledge
that they did rashly condemn Cons. Cont. p. 172.
the English Service, nor did I produce their testimony, as if they had
particularly favored it. I am inclined to think, it was misrepresented to
them. But their evidence is the more considerable, in what they say concerning
Forms in general, for which purpose only I cited them, since they were so far
from being partial on our side, that they closed too far with them, who were
for the subverting our Liturgy, and censured it as Idolatrous and superstitious.

12. Thirdly, he says, they, Reas. Acc. p. 53.
and the Leyden Professors, speak rather of the lawfulness of Forms in general,
than of Ministers using them. Whereas they propose their Question, concerning
Forms, Consid. Cont. p. 171.
in publico cultu, in public worship: They and the Leyden Professors declare
their usefulness, in magnis praecipue Ecclesiarum conventibus, especially p.
173.
in the great Church Assemblies, and in publici cultus exercitiis, in the
performances of public worship: and they discoursed of them, as p. 179.
Forms of Prayer and of administration of Sacraments. Now in these Cases they
must have special respect to Ministers using them: and the same appears from
what I cited concerning Liturgies, n. 10. and also from the following Paragraph.

13. Fourthly, He says, Reas. Acc. p. 53, 54.
there is not a word in them, to justify the lawful use of Forms imposed upon
all Ministers. Now the Reader may observe these words; say they, Cons. Cont. in
Angl. p. 179.
Mascula est sententia J. Calvini in Epistola 87. ad Protectorem Angliae. Quod
ad formulas, inquit, precum, etc. It is an excellent sentence of Calvin, in his
87th Epistle to the Protector of England. Concerning Forms of Prayer and
Ecclesiastical Rites, I much approve, that it may be certain, from which the
Pastors may not depart in their function, both to provide for the unskilfulness
of some, and that the consent and agreement of all Churches may be more
manifest, and that a stop may be put to the changeable levity of some, who
affect novelties. And they add, Ibid.
there ought to be a stated Catechism, statam Sacramentorum Administrationem,
publicam item precum formulam, a stated Administration of Sacraments, and a
stated public Form of Prayers.

14. Fifthly, He says, they say Reas. Acc. p. 50, 51.
holy affections may accompany a Form, This says he, touches not the
Question, which is about the magis and minus. And so he excepts against them,
as not speaking an equal intention and fervency to be exercised in Forms. Now I
might say, that they do speak of due attention and reverence, in the use of
Forms, p. 174. and our Author says, due attention must be equal attention, p.
52. And when they declare Forms to be profitable, and that by them attention is
helped, p. 173, 174. this not only speaks the devotion to be equal in the use
of Forms, to what it might otherwise be, but that it may be hereby the greater.
And they commend them, Cons. Cont. p. 174.
ad majorem Ecclesiarum aedificationem, for the greater edification of
Churches; and this must be for the making them the better.

15. Sixthly, He says, Reas. Acc. p. 53.
they speak not a word of the lawfulness or utility of reading Prayers. And
what they speak of Forms, he would it seems have meant, not of Forms read, but
gotten without Book, of which he discourses, p. 25, 26. But they judge Forms
profitable, Cons. Cont. p. 174. and p. 176.
modo cum debita attentione, reverentia, etc. ex libro pronuncientur, if they
be with due attention and reverence pronounced out of a Book. This our Author
but half a page before p. 52. thus expressed, so they be read with attention:
so the Walachrians. If this be not enough, they further declare p. 176.
sacras Scripturae literas legunt fideles, etc. Christians read the holy
Scriptures, with understanding, humility, reverence, zeal, etc. and why may not
Prayers be pronounced in the same manner, Chapter III.
out of prescribed Forms? And here again our Author but two pages before, p.
51. translates these words of the Walachrians, quidni and orationes eodem modo
ex praescriptis formulis pronunciari possunt; and therefore why may not Forms
of Prayer be so read. These frequent contradictions in this Discourse, make me
sometimes apt to think, that whereas it always speaks in the plural number, as
we believe, we judge, we say, it may possibly be, that some part of it may be
written by one hand, and something added by another, and that may be the cause
of its so many disagreements with it self.

16. Lastly, We are told, Reas. Acc. p. 53.
the Walachrians in stating the question, profess only to speak to the case,
where men want an ability, or a liberty to exercise it. But the Classis of
Walachria tell us, they discourse of Prayers prescribed, Cons. Cont. p. 173.
ut utiles etc. as profitable for them who want ability, or a liberty of
exercising it, and ut attentio auditorum, etc. and that the attention of the
Auditors in great Assemblies, may be helped and guided. And again they commend
them as p. 174.
profitable, non tantum in necessitatis casu, etc. not only in a case of
necessity, where fit ability is wanting; but also that the Auditors attention
may be helped and directed, etc. And their sense herein may be also manifest
from n. 13.

17. Now though I laid no great weight upon this testimony, as is manifest from
the words immediately following it, Libert. Eccl. p. 122.
But the surest way of trial, is from considering several Arguments; yet the
Reader may easily see, that they spoke fully enough to the purpose, for which I
produced them. And though our Author when he first mentioned this testimony of
the Walachrian Classis, promised Reas. Acc. p. 46.
We will give our Reader a full account of what is said by them; he has not
only been very defective in his account, but has uttered diverse manifest
falsehoods. This must discover either an high degree of carelessness, which is
not to deal faithfully with his Reader, especially after his particular promise
to the contrary; or else which I am not willing to suspect, a design of
imposing upon those, who will take things of this nature upon his credit. And
if all these things were mere mistakes and oversights, as I am most inclined to
believe, it pitieth me greatly to see, how strangely some men's minds lie open
to them, against very plain and clear evidence.

18. To prove Forms of Prayer to be no disadvantage to piety, I urged in my Chapter
4. p. 122, 123. Arguments to show Forms of Prayer to be no hindrance to piety.
1. From God and our Savior prescribing them.
Libertas Ecclesiastica three Arguments. My first Argument was, That God
himself prescribed a constant Form of Prayer, for the Jewish offerings, and for
the Priests blessing, and our Savior directed the Lords Prayer as a Form: but
the Holy God and our blessed Savior, would not enjoin what is of its own
nature an hindrance to godliness, piety and Religion.

19. In answer to this Argument, our Author turns every way. He sometimes
misrepresents my sense, as if I affirmed, that God and Christ had appointed the
Forms of Prayer which are now ordinarily used, p. 56. or as if the scope of my
Argument was to prove, that men may lawfully appoint what God may appoint, and
says the same Argument would prove a liberty for men to make new Scriptures,
p. 56, 58. But the Question under debate, was not at all concerning the
authority of men, nor concerning the lawfulness of appointing Forms merely, but
it was whether the use of them be an advantage or prejudice to Religion. Nor am
I so void of all reverence to God, as ever so much as to think, that any
Creature has an authority to do or command, whatsoever God himself can do or
command. But the substance of what he further Answers, is reducible to two
heads.

20. First, That God Reas. Acc. p. 56, 57, 58.
may legitimate some things by his Precept, which otherwise would be unlawful:
and then such things being commanded, will be no prejudice to devotion, since
God will secure his own institutions. And here he tells us God might direct
Images of Oxen and Cherubims to be in his Temple, and the people might worship
before them; but Aaron might not make a golden Calf. And God might command
Abraham to offer up Isaac. And therefore this will only conclude, that Forms of
Prayer are not in themselves unlawful as murder (though by his instance, they
may be as unlawful as for a Father to kill his Son) or incest.

21. Now the sense of this part of his Answer, is, That the God of infinite
goodness and purity, may appoint and enjoin, and consequently may be pleased
with, such things as are in their nature hurtful to piety, and oppose goodness
and purity in the World. And I desire our Author upon his further thoughts, to
consider what high reflections these things cast upon the divine majesty. Indeed
God did appoint the Ceremonial worship of the Israelites, Nothing which God
commands is a rule of practice, can hinder piety.
which was a more imperfect way of serving God, than that under the Gospel; yet
considering the state of the World as it then was, and how God condescended
therein to the infirmities of men, and that this was typical of Christ to come,
it was at that time a real help to Religious Piety. But it is contrary to the
divine nature to assert, that God should give institutions and rules, for
ordering that part of his worship, which is moral and perpetual as Prayer is,
and these to be of force both throughout the Jewish and Christian Church; which
yet are a disadvantage to Piety. But besides many other Forms, those in Deuteronomy.
21.8. and Deuteronomy. 26.3, 5.... 10. and v. 13, 14, 15. were to be of use throughout
the Jewish State; and the Lords Prayer throughout the Ages of the Christian
Church. It was called the daily Conc. Tolet. 4. c. 9.
Prayer, by one of the Councils of Toledo, and to be used thrice a day, in the
time of the Constable. Ap. l. 7. c. 25.
Constitutions called Apostolical.

22. The pretenses on which our Author relies are very weak. How far Gods
institutions are secured from men's making ill use of them.
For it is unreasonable to imagine, that God should establish standing
institutions, which in their own nature tend to hinder piety, and then should
undertake by some extraordinary method, to preserve them from being abused;
when it is plain, he does not further secure his most excellent institutions,
from being abused, than their own excellency and the piety of the Christian
Spirit does conduce thereunto. The holy Scriptures have been wrested, and
perverted by evil men, and Prayer it self has been abused to Hypocrisy; and
yet both these are divine institutions.

23. And concerning the Images of the Oxen and Cherubims, he is mistaken in
saying, that the people might lawfully worship before them which were in the
Temple: for the people might not come within the Sanctuary where they were, and
so might not so much as see them. But there is a greater mistake than this, Of
the Images of Oxen within the Temple; and of Cherubims upon the walls and doors
thereof.
concerning their use in worship. There were indeed Cherubims graven upon the
walls, and doors of the temple, 1 Kin. 6.29, 35. but God never allowed or
appointed these to such ends and purposes, as the Golden Calf was made and
used, but for the adorning the Temple. They were not intended as
representations of God himself, nor might the people give to them any part of
divine honor, or say to them, these are thy Gods O Israel, Ex. 32.4. But
molten or carved work, when it was not made to be worshipped, or to be a
Symbolical representation of God, was never forbidden to the Jews, as many of
the Jews themselves have by mistake imagined; nor were those pieces of art,
when secured from these abuses, any disadvantage to Piety and Religion. There
was anciently the stamp of a Castle, and other resemblances upon the Shekel of
Solomon, and other Jewish Medals, as appears from the representation of them in
Waser. de Antiq. number. Hebr. Walton. in Supplem. ad Brerewood de Pond. etc.
Waserus and Bishop Walton; and neither this, nor the Lions about Salomons
Throne, were to be condemned as unlawful, 1 Kin. 10.19, 20. Nor did the second
Commandment forbid the likeness of any Creature to be made; so as in general to
condemn the Arts of limning, carving, and engraving; but only forbad it to be
made, so as to receive any part of that worship, which is due to God, as Ant.
Jud. l. 3. c. 4.
Josephus truly gives an account thereof.

24. Nor will the command given to Abraham, to offer up his son, prove that
Gods Precepts require any thing to be performed, which is in its own nature
prejudicial to Piety. For this was only a Precept of trial, God did not desire
that the Father should slay his Son, but as Amb. de Abr. l. 1. c. 22.
S. Ambrose said, tentabat si Dei praecepta praeferret filio, made a trial,
whether he esteemed the commands of God above his son. Of the Precept for
Abraham's Offering Isaac.
And this Trial was no disadvantage to Abraham's Piety, but a great evidence,
and high exercise of it. But Gods withholding Abraham from slaying his Son, by
giving him a countermand, after he had tried his obedience, is a considerable
instance to show, that nothing is grateful and pleasing to God, that is not
every way reconcilable to goodness: and the ancient Christian Writers
accounted justly, the bloody, inhumane, and obscene rites, of many of the Pagan
Deities, to be a sufficient objection, both against them, and their worship.
And besides this, Isaacs bearing the Wood, and being laid upon the Altar, has
been accounted Aug. de Civ. Dei. l. 14. c. 22. First Lesson on Good Friday, in
our Common Prayer.
a figure of the suffering of our Savior, and this act of Abraham's obedience,
might be commanded with some respect thereunto: and upon this obedience,
Abraham received some peculiar instructions, and promises concerning the
Messiah, Genesis 22.16, 17, 18. all which tended to promote, and advance his Faith
and Piety. Now as it is unsafe, from such instances as this, to censure the
usefulness of any of Gods ordinary Precepts, which he appointed to be of
continued use; so I desire our Author to consider, whether this branch of his
discourse be an help or hindrance to piety and Religion, in teaching men to
slight and disesteem, and consequently to neglect and break, any of the least
of Gods Commandments.

25. But he further says, Reas. Acc. p. 57.
it is not unquestionable, whether God and Christ prescribed Forms of blessing
and prayer, to be used by Ministers and people. Gods command is express in the
Old Testament for Forms of Prayer.
Now the Forms of Prayer I above mentioned out of Deuteronomy, are so plainly
and expressly directed, that he who will be so bold as to assert, that God only
intended that they should use those words, or such others as themselves should
think more fit for that purpose; he may as well say, that when God appointed
his particular Sacrifices, his meaning was, that they should either offer those
sacrifices, which he had appointed, or some other, which they should think more
expedient. For the injunction of the special sacrifices God appointed, is not
more express, than of those Prayers which he commanded.

26. And as the particular Form of the Priestly benediction is plainly
appointed, Number. 6.23, 24, 25, 26. so it has been observed by Buxt. Synag.
Judaic. c. 21.
Buxtorfe, Drusius, and other learned men, that upon the day of atonement, the
High Priest solemnly pronounced this Form of blessing the people in the Temple,
And for the Priests blessing.
and did then peculiarly pronounce the name of Jehovah. And some Christian
Writers have thought, that the name Jehovah being thrice expressed in that
Benediction was some intimation of the Trinity. And the Par. Chald. Jon. in
Number. 6.23, 24, 25, 26.
Chaldee Paraphrase under the name of Jonathan ben Vziel, to express the
constant and strict observation, of the very words of this solemn Benediction,
in the Hebrew Tongue, recites all the words thereof in the Hebrew, before he
gives the sense of it in his Paraphrase, but does not do the like in other
places of the Law. And this very blessing is not only used as a Form by the
Church of England, in the Office for the Visitation of the sick, but the same
is in the Geneva Liturgy composed by Prec. Eccles. Form. Genev.
Calvin, and also in that drawn up by Luther. Tom. 3. f. 10.
Luther, at the beginning of the German Reformation. And the members of that
Assembly, which set up the Directory in the place of our Liturgy, did so far
assert the Form of this Priestly Benediction, that in their Assembl. Annot. on
Number. 6.23.
Annotations on those words, On this wise ye shall bless saying, they say, Or
thus, in a set Form of words.

27. All that our Author has against this, is to declare in these strange
words of Mr Cotton, Reas. Acc. ubi sup.
The Priests are indeed directed to a Form of blessing, Number. 6.22. etc. but
that they used that, and no other Form, does not appear; It is certain, the
Apostles used diverse other Forms. Now though what I have said be sufficient, to
give an account of the use of this Benediction; yet it is very unreasonable to
suppose, that Gods Precepts have not authority enough, to make what they
prescribe a duty, unless we can prove, that men undertook the ordinary and
constant practice of them. Nor is the Apostles using other Benedictions, at all
to his purpose; since this Benediction was not prescribed for them, but only
for the Priests, Aaron and his Sons in the Temple Service. And besides this, a
Benediction prescribed for any solemn public service, does not hinder the use
of other Benedictions out of that particular service, and upon other occasions;
though they be given by the same person, as was the Benediction of Eli the High
Priest, to Hannah and Elkanah, 1 Samuel 1.17. and Chapter 2.20.

28. He goes on to tell us that they p. 57.
do not think, that ever our Savior intended the Lords Prayer to be used
syllabically. And De Casib. Consc. l. 4. c. 17. qu. 5.
Amesius also declares, that our Lord did not intend to prescribe a Form of
words, to be constantly observed, in the Lords Prayer. Now it may well seem
strange, that any persons should harbor such an opinion as this, if they had
not some interest, which inclined them to have such apprehensions concerning
the Lords Prayer. But as our late Gracious Sovereign observed, (...). c. 16.
its great guilt is, that it is the warrant and Original Pattern of all set
Liturgies in the Christian Church. And I cannot but wonder, that Grot. in Mat.
6.9. and in Luc. 11.1.
Grotius should entertain this extravagant and unreasonable conceit.

29. But that our Savior delivered this Prayer as a Form, to be of ordinary
use, I gave manifest evidence, Libert. Eccles. p. 100, 101, 102.
from the expressions of his precept, from the occasion of his delivering it,
from the manner of its composure, and from clear testimonies, concerning the
usual practice of the Primitive Church, in the first, second, and third
Centuries, in observing it as a Form. And our Author thought not fit to answer
any thing to these proofs, The Lords Prayer was directed to be a Form.
nor indeed to take any notice of them, unto which I shall refer the Reader.
But this novel and groundless notion, is also greatly opposite to the sense of
the ancient Church, in the following Centuries, and would have been then
earnestly exploded; since they looked upon the Apostles themselves, and all
other Christians, to have been enjoined by divine Precept, to make use of this
Prayer as a Form. S. Hierome declared, Hieron. adv. Pelag. l. 3. c. 5.
Docuit Apostolos suos, ut quotidie in corporis illius sacrificio credentes
audeant loqui Pater noster, etc. He taught his Apostles, that every day
believing in the sacrifice of his body they should say, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc. And Aug. Epist. 89.
S. Austin says, Omnibus necessaria est Oration Dominica, quam ipsis arietibus
gregis, i. e. ipsis Apostolis suis, Dominus dedit, ut unusquisque Deo dicat,
Dimitte nobis debita nostra, etc. The Lords Prayer is necessary for all, which
the Lord gave to the chief of his flock, that is, to the very Apostles
themselves, that every one should say to God, Forgive us our trespasses, etc.

30. Among the Protestants, as their Writers do generally acknowledge it to be
a prescribed Form, so Apollonius and the Classis of Consid. contr. Ang. p. 177,
178.
Walachria observed, In omnibus Reformatarum Ecclesiarum Liturgiis, etc. In all
the public Liturgies which are extant of the Reformed Churches, the Lords
Prayer is prescribed to be used. But our Authors Assertion not only contradicts
the sense of the ancient Catholic Church, and the generality of Protestants
abroad; but he herein clasheth as well with the Directory, and with that
Assembly at Westminster which rejected our Common Prayer, as with the Church of
England. In the Direct. Of Prayer after Sermon.
Directory they said, The Prayer which Christ taught his Disciples, is not only
a pattern of Prayer, but it self a most comprehensive Prayer, and we recommend
it to be used in the Prayers of the Church. And the members of that Assembly in
their Annotations affirm, that Assembl. Annot. on Luke 11.2.
It is the most exact and sacred Form of Prayer, indicted and taught the
Disciples (who were to teach the whole World the rules and practice of true
Religion) by Christ himself, who is best able to teach his servants to pray.
And again, Christ prescribed this Form of Prayer to be used by them.

31. Now it is an unreasonable confidence and presumption, to oppose and
contradict the general sense of the Christian Church in all Ages, and even the
truly Primitive and Reformed Churches, if it be not upon great evidence.
Wherefore I shall now examine, what this Writer has to say for his opinion. He
says, Reas. Acc. p. 57.
If the Apostles had apprehended it left for a Form of words and syllables, we
should have found some after record of the use of it. But if he mean, there
would be some record of this in the Scriptures and writings of the Apostles;
this is very vain, since it is certain, they do not contain such Prayers as
were used in the public Assemblies: and it is as unreasonable to expect this
in them, as to expect that all Books of instruction, written by any of our
Church, should repeat our Public Liturgy: and it is very usual for such Books,
to have other expressions of Prayer and Supplication, than those of our
Common Prayer. And if this objection were of any weight, it would as much
prove, that our Savior never intended, that Christian Baptism should be
administered, in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost,
as that the Lords Prayer should not be used, though he plainly commanded both.

32. But if by record, The Lords Prayer used as a Form in the Primitive Church.
he means evidence beyond all exception, from authentic ancient Writers,
concerning the practice of the Primitive Church; though the producing such
evidence is not necessary, to make the Precepts of our Savior valid; I have
sufficiently manifested so much, in the place lately referred unto; but if he
took no notice thereof, I cannot help that. And besides what I mentioned above,
n. 29. S. Aug. assures us, Hom. 42. inter 50.
Ad altar Dei quotidie dicitur Oration Dominica, The Lords Prayer is daily said
at Gods Altar. And in another place, speaking of the Communion Service, he
says, that the Prayers thereof, Ep. 59. ad Paul. Qu. 5.
fere omnis Ecclesia Dominica Oratione concludit; almost every Church does
conclude with the Lords Prayer. And the use of it after the receiving the
Sacrament was also observed by De Sacr. l. 5. c. 4.
S. Ambrose.

33. But our Author says. 2. If Christ intended it for a Form, Ibid. p. 57.
all that can be concluded is, that Christ may appoint a Liturgy for his
Church, which surely none denies. But it will also follow, that Forms of Prayer
are not to be rejected and condemned, but ought to be esteemed of profitable
use. It gives an approbation to other public Forms.
For since such Forms were of use among the Jews, in our Saviors time, as I
have observed, and shall more particularly manifest in the end of the next
Section, our Lord was so far from reproving this practice, or John the Baptist
his conforming to the like, that himself taught his own Disciples a Form also,
as the Baptist had taught his. Wherefore this manifestly declares an
approbation of Forms of Prayer, taught and directed by others, who have the
chief authority in the Church.

34. The last thing he urges is, p. 57, 58.
that supposing that Christ intended this as a Form at that time, whether it
was to last beyond his Resurrection, and the descent of the Holy Ghost, is a
farther Question. And though he does not positively assert this, yet he would
have his Reader to be of this opinion, and offers in proof of it, what he
says, was well observed, which I shall by and by consider. The Precepts of
Christ which all ancient Churches reverenced, may not now be laid aside.
But first, Is it not a strange boldness and irreverence toward any Precept or
Institution of our Savior, for him to suggest to men, that it is expired and
antiquated, when our Lord himself gave no intimation of its being temporary,
and the Universal Church has understood it otherwise? Is not this a new piece
of Pharisaism, in teaching men how to make void the Commandments of God, by
looking upon them as out of date? This Author may by these means, do some
service for them, who contend that the Sacrament of Baptism was only intended
for the first admission of Nations into the Christian Church, so far as the
reputation of his bare authority will go. Yea, and for those also who look upon
the Lords Supper, the Ordination of Ministers, and many other Christian duties,
not to be needful for the succeeding Ages after the Apostles.

35. The Apostles had extraordinary assistances and abilities before the
Resurrection of Christ.
Secondly, His supposing Forms might be requisite for the Apostles before
Christ Resurrection, and the coming of the Holy Ghost, but that no such low
things are since that time fit to be continued, does too plainly manifest, that
some persons are strangely big with swelling conceits of themselves. Dare our
Author speak out the plain sense of this suggestion? which is this, That
himself and other dissenters are men of far greater abilities than the Apostles
of our Savior were, before his Resurrection, though they were then called to
be his Apostles, were sent forth to preach his Gospel, and were enabled to work
miracles, and cast out Devils: and consequently that these men now, may
reasonably look upon such directions and precepts to be of too low and
inferior a nature for them to observe, which yet were enjoined upon, and were
fit for the state of the Apostles before the Resurrection.

36. Thirdly his pretense of proof for this opinion is very shallow, which is
p. 58.
that Christ left out his own name in the Lords Prayer: Of praying in the name
of Christ.
but in that name his Disciples were afterward enjoined to ask: Joh. 14.13,
14. Joh. 16.23. But to ask in his name, is to ask through his mediation, upon
the encouragement of his merits, and his being our intercessor, and advocate at
Gods right hand in our nature, which is a privilege peculiar to the time since
the ascension of our Lord; and also to ask sutably to the rules and doctrine of
Christianity. This is the sense which is generally given, of this expression,
of asking in the name of Christ: and even the Assemblies Annotations declare,
asking in the name of Christ to be Assembl. Annot. on Joh. 14.14. and Chapter
16.24, 26.
through his mediation, and they also add from S. Gregory, si id quod non
expedit petitur, non in nomine Jesu petitur pater; if that be desired which
should not be, God is not asked in the name of Jesus. And this sense of this
phrase, In his name, that it signifies upon his account, and though him, is
evident from Joh. 1.12. Joh. 20.31. and many other places. But the Apostles
under the guidance of Gods Spirit, did not always verbally express the name
Jesus, in all their Prayers, as Romans 15.13. 2 These. 3.16. and elsewhere.

37. Now in the Lords Prayer, we know that what we ask, is according to the
will of our Lord, being directed by him. We call not God Our Father, but upon
the account of Christ, and upon his account we desire all our Petitions in the
Lords Prayer to be granted. And our desiring that Gods name may be hallowed,
that his Kingdom should come, and that our trespasses may be forgiven, etc.
have particular respect to our Mediator. And in this whole Prayer, we according
to the direction of our Church-Catechism, trust that God of his mercy and
goodness (...) do what we ask, through our Lord Jesus Christ, and therefore we
say, Amen. And this is also the general sense of all Formula a Resormatis
usurpata ante illius Orationis recitationem. Haec and alia quae nosti Domine
nobis esse necessaria, a te postulamus in nomine Christi ea Orationis formula
quam ipse nos docuit. Pater noster, etc. These. Salm. Par. 3. loc. Com. 47. n.
13.
sober Protestants.

38. My second Argument to prove Forms of Prayer to be no disadvantage to
devotion, was Libert. Eccles. p. 122, 123.
because it is generally acknowledged, that the singing Psalms of Prayer and
praise, may be advantageously performed in a set Form of words: and the
Scriptures are not the less edifying because they are contained in a set form
of words. But concerning singing Psalms this Writer says, p. 59.
this is a mistake of the Question; and p. 60.
that these are such Forms, as God has Canonized. And he tells us he is
against singing by any Forms not made of God, which he calls p. 18, 19. and p.
60.78.
Apocryphal Anthems, as much as he is against Liturgical Forms of Prayer. And
yet he allows p. 78. and p. 60.
singing the Psalms in Meter, though the words be not dictated of God, My
second Argument was, that the Psalms in a set Form of words are useful to
devotion; and so are the Scriptures.
because the sense and matter in the Psalms in Meter is so directed.

39. But when he says, this Argument mistakes the Question, the Reader will
easily see it was proper enough, for the Question or Case of which I was
discoursing, which was in general, whether Forms of Prayer are disadvantageous
to Piety. But our Author, that he might avoid the force of this and some other
Arguments, has put the Question into another method, but has not done it
solidly, nor has he avoided the force of this Argument thereby. For first when
he grants, concerning the Psalms of Prayer and praise, that God has Canonized
those Forms; he here asserteth, what in Answer to the former Argument he would
not own, viz. that God ever appointed or prescribed any Forms of Prayer. And as
the matter of many of the Psalms is Prayer; So S. Hierome observes, there are
Hieron. Epist. 139. and Comment. in Ps. 189.
four Psalms, which bear the title of Prayers, to wit as he counts them
according to the Septuagint, Psalm. 16.85.89.101. but in our English Bibles,
Psalm. 17.86.90.102. And from hence we may infer the usefulness of Forms, for
the promoting piety, according to the purport and design of my foregoing
Argument.

40. Liturgies justified, by allowing Psalms in Meter to be sung.
Secondly, Whilst he allows the using set Forms of Prayer, and praising God in
meter, to be good and Religious, because the matter is directed by God, though
the expressions are not; he does hereby, so far as concerns reason and
Argument, yield that which will necessarily infer the usefulness of Liturgies,
to be in like manner generally used. For the like allowance may certainly be
made to the use of words in prose, which may be made to them in meter; which is
according to his sense, that they may by all Christians be profitably used,
where the matter of them is none other, than what God himself has directed us
to pray for, and the words such as are fit to express that matter, which is
according to his will. And there is greater security of the matter of a fixed
well-considered Liturgy, being such as God approves of, than there can be in
the usual variations of the conceived Prayers of some thousands of persons.

41. Thirdly, Whilst our Author declares, he p. 78. Ecclesiastical Hymns of
public use in the Christian Church.
abhors any singing in public worship, or what is not composed by the
Penmen of holy Writ, even this also is very unreasonable. The Scriptures
indeed direct us both to pray, and to sing praises to God: but it is the matter
and pious performance of them, and not the different tone, or flexure of the
voice, which God regards. And it is certainly as hard a task for him to
prove, that we may sing to God in no other Hymns, but what are expressed in
Scripture, as it would be for him to prove, that we may pray to God in no other
Prayer, than what is contained in Scripture; which would be as much against
other conceived Prayers, as against Forms. Especially when in some ancient
Churches, as well as modern, their practice was, what Aug. Cons. l. 10. c. 13.
S. Augustine commends in Alexandria, in the time of Athanasius, that their
reciting Psalms or Hymns, was modico flexu vocis, with a small alteration of
the voice, and the manner of uttering them was, pronuncianti vicinior quam
canenti, more a deliberate speaking, than a proper singing. But there must be
an extraordinary acuteness of nicety to discover, why any person may express
the praises of God, according to his own conceptions, in his ordinary way of
speech, but may not do it in somewhat a more deliberate way of pronunciation.

42. Fourthly, If it had been for our Authors purpose, he would have thought it
a sufficient proof from Scripture, for the composing new Hymns; that the
Prophet Isay, with respect to the Gospel times, commands to sing to the Lord a
new song, Is. 42.10. And that the Angelical Hymn, Luke 2. and those of the
Virgin Mary, of Zechary, and of Simeon, were all of them newly composed for the
special occasions; that the Apostle declared he would sing with the spirit, 1
Cor. 14.15. and that S. John, in his Vision of the Gospel worship, represents
the Church, as singing a new song, Rev. 5.9. and chapter 14.3. And however this
Writer censureth this, the general practice of the Christian Church has ever
admitted and used some hymns composed by men, having a particular respect to
Christianity, as our Church orders the Son of S. Ambrose. Very many such
Ecclesiastical Hymns are collected by Cassand. Hymn. Eccl.
Cassander. And this practice was as early in the Church, as the end of the
first Century, when Pliny upon Examination of the practice of the Christians,
in their Assemblies, found that they were wont upon a set day, to meet together
before it was light, Plin. Epist. l. 10. Ep. 97.
carmenque Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem, and to say an hymn to Christ
as being God, one toward another. Now in that it was their usual practice to
say such an Hymn, and that this was expressed by the generality of the
Assembly, this speaks it a Form which they used: and the phrase of secum
invicem is a considerable intimation, that they expressed it by parts, or
Responsals, one toward another. And its being said to Christ as God, makes it
highly probable, that it was an Hymn, particularly composed under Christianity,
in honor of Christ. But this is fully confirmed, in that it was part of the
charge against Paulus Samosatenus, by Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. (...).
the Council of Antioch, that he suppressed the use of those Hymns, which were
upon our Lord Jesus Christ, as being new things, (...), the compositions of men
of late days. And that there were various Psalms and Odes composed before that
time by Christians, concerning the Divinity of Christ, is also declared in Eus.
Hist. l. 5. c. (...).
Eusebius.

43. But the true cause, why our Author does not allow of any Hymns, composed
since the Apostles time, is not from any Reason or Scripture, but because this
would not serve the interest of his opinion, and withal secure the practice of
our Dissenters. For he acknowledges, that the whole Congregation joining in
singing, Reas. Acc. p. 78.
cannot possibly be done but by a set Form, without notorious confusion: and
therefore the allowing new Hymns to be composed, would include an allowing men
to appoint Forms of Prayer and praise. And besides this, he is sensible, that
they cannot without running into many indecencies, pretend to abilities of
constant varied conceptions in the making Hymns, since as he says p. 78.
not one of many attain the gift of Hymn-making.

44. Concerning the Holy Scriptures, he says p. 60.
there are Precepts for reading them, and also promises in the same case. But
this does the more strengthen my Argument; because such Forms as are so far
appointed and approved of God, can be no hindrances to Piety. He says also p.
61.
that there are different workings of the Soul to God in Prayer, and in
reading. But though there be different acts of the mind, exercised in these
duties: yet that consideration, reverence, faith, submission, and other
gracious dispositions, which suit the special parts of divine truth, does
require as much seriousness, diligence and care, in reading the Holy
Scriptures, as in Prayer. And however, having showed that a Form of words in
Prayer, does not hinder any exercises of piety therein, I do not think this
exception to deserve any further answer.

45. But what he says, Ibid.
that there are different workings of the soul toward God in singing and in
Prayer, I suppose he will upon further consideration, discern to be an
oversight: Since the application to God, for the same things, require the same
pious exercises of mind, whether it be in prose, or in meter. And it was
another oversight that he declares me to know and confess, what he thus
asserts; when I never declared any such thing, but know the contrary.

SECT. III. Of the Antiquity of set Forms of Prayer.
MY third Argument for Forms being no hindrance to Devotion, was Libert. Eccl.
p. 123.
that all the Ages of the Christian Church, from the first Centuries, have used
them as an advantage to Religion. My third Argument was, from the use of Forms
of Prayer, in all the Ages of the Primitive Church.
And when I added that it is not at all probable, that such excellently devout
and judicious men, as the fourth and fifth Centuries abounded with, should be
so stupid and dull-spirited, as not any of them to discern between the helps
and hindrances of devotion, in matters of most ordinary practice; This Author
first says p. 62.
Certainly it was possible, i. e. possible all those judicious men should be so
stupid. Now this is a rash and contumelious expression, and if this be true
concerning such men, as S. Athanasius, Basil, Ambrose, Hierome, Eusebius,
Chrysostom, and S. Austin, and others such like, all pretense from experience
must in this case be laid aside. For though our Author sometimes intimates,
that these famous men are now outdone by those for whom he pleads; there is so
little appearance of the truth hereof, that this needs no particular answer.

2. When I said Lib. Eccl. B. 1. Chapter 4. Sect. 1. n. 9. p. 106.
that Forms of Prayer were of use in the Church about thirteen hundred years
since, is acknowledged by them who plead most against them, from Conc. Laod. c.
18. 3 Carth. Can. 23. and Con. Milev. c. 12. he p. 66.
somewhat misrepresenting my words, says, we hold no such thing. But whatever
singular and unreasonable conceit, he or some other persons may have, Smect.
Answ. to Remonstr. p. 7.
Smectymnuus derive the Pedigree of Liturgies from those three Canons,
acknowledging that the Church in the Laodicean Canon ordained, Our chief
Dissenters own Forms of Prayer to have been used 1300. years.
that none should vary but use always the same Form; that the Carthaginian
Canon further limited the Form; and the Milevitan Canon would have none other
used than what was approved in the Synod. Thus they. And the Presbyterian
Commissioners at the Savoy say, they Grand Debate. p. 11.
cannot find any Records of know credit, concerning any entire Form of
Liturgies, within the first three hundred years. And their fixing this period
of time, is sufficient to justify my assertion.

3. But our Author says, he believes p. 67.
they might have denied any such Record of a Liturgy generally imposed for six
hundred years, and fixes the Original of Liturgies upon p. 69.
Gregory the Great, under the protection of Charles the Great, and this eight
hundred or a thousand years after Christ; Liturgies not first established by
Gregory the Great, under Charles the Great.
Of which gross mistake in History, having taken notice of it in my
Introduction, n. 4. I shall say no more here, but that we may not reasonably
expect any accuracy in the right computation of the time, of the birth and
first production of Liturgies, from him who talks so loosely and falsely, about
the Age in which Gregory the Great lived, whom he would make the Father of
them. And it is speaking enough at random to fix their original now at six
hundred years after Christ, and then at eight hundred, or a a thousand years
after Christ: but if in which soever of these periods they began, it must be
under Gregory the Great, he must then suppose against the credit of all certain
History, that Gregorius Magnus was Pope for above four hundred years, in
imitation of the Jewish fancy that Phinehas the High Priest lived R. Dav.
Kimch. in Mal. 2. v. 5. V. Scalig. in Eus. Chron. an. ab Abrahamo 861.
above three hundred years. And if this could be true, which I never saw so
much as hinted in any Author before, then Gregory the Great might become
contemporary with Charles the Great, and being by that time unable to govern
himself, by reason of his extreme Age, might be put under his protection.

4. Now though something was done by Gregory the Great, in the new modelling
Sanction of Charles the Great, for the enjoining the Roman Offices: I shall
before the end of this Section, produce as much evidence as is necessary, for
the satisfaction of the unprejudiced Reader, concerning the use of set Forms of
Prayer in the Christian Church, in the several Centuries, before the six
hundredth year of Christ. And thereby I hope to give a fair proof, for that
assertion of Cappellus (and for a more early practice also) who said Syntag.
These. These. Salm. Part. 3. Loc. Com. 47. n. 49.
Earum (formularum) usus in universa Ecclesia Christiana, toto terrarum orb,
jam a plusquam 1300. annis perpetuo obtinuit. A public Form of Liturgy has
obtained in the universal Christian Church throughout the whole World for above
thirteen hundred years. And he adds in the same place, that it does now every
where obtain, nisi apud novitios istos Independentes, but amongst them who
embrace the new upstart Innovations of Independency.

5. But our Author will not allow all the three Canons above mentioned, to have
any respect to Liturgies, and their establishment: and herein he has engaged
himself against what Smectymnuus asserted, to whom my words had a particular
respect. He first excepts against what is inferred from the Canon of Laodicea,
which Council Baronius (though he had sometimes thought Annal Eccl. An. 125. n.
158.
otherwise) upon a more accurate consideration, as he thought, In Appen. ad
Tom. 4. n. 1, -- 7.
concludes to have been before the time of the first Nicene Council. But I must
confess, the other opinion that this Council sat about the year 364 is the
more probable, from the observation of de Conc. Sacerd. and Imper. l. 3. c. 3.
n. 5.
De Marca, That Conc. Laod. c. 7. condemns the Photinians, when Photinus
himself lived in the Reign of Constantius.

6. But he says, The Bishops Reas. Acc. p. 64.
in that Council may not be called the Church in that Age. Indeed, this was a
Provincial Council, yet many Bishops from the several Asian Dioceses were here
assembled, The eighteenth Canon of the Council of Laodicea considered.
as appears from the title of that Council. And this may appear a remarkable
testimony concerning the general state of the Church, if we consider that this
very Canon was taken into the Code of the universal Church, being the 122d
therein, which Code was extant at the time of the Council of Chalcedon, An.
451. (which was the greatest of the four first General Councils) and was so far
approved therein, that that Council cited some Canons of Provincial Councils,
which were taken into that Code, as general and authentic Rules, not taking
any notice of the Provinicla Councils, by which they were first made; but only
citing them according to the number and order they were in that Code. This is
manifest from the testimonies produced out of that Council, which are prefixed
to Justellus his Edition of the Codex canonum Ecclesiae Vniversae: and thereby
it appears, that the Canons of this Code were owned to be of universal
authority, by this their reception, though they were many of them only
provincial, in their first Constitution.

7. And this Code or Collection of Canons, was also confirmed and established
in this Conc. Chalced. Can. 1.
General Council: and therefore this Canon, which was one branch thereof, is
sufficient to acquaint us, what was generally approved in the Christian Church,
at that time when this Code was composed and received. And we have this further
argument, to prove that this Canon was of general approbation, when it was
first composed; because there was no appearance of any part of the Christian
Church then opposing it, or declaring against it. For it was then usual, that
when any Bishops or Synods, asserted or determined any thing, either concerning
doctrine, or rules of order, wherein other Bishops or Churches thought them to
err, they would withstand them. Thus concerning the receiving penitents, the
Novatian errors were condemned by Libel. Synodic. Syn. 21, 22, 23.
Western, Eastern, and Carthaginian Councils: and the oppositions against the
general rebaptizing Heretics, and the contests about the Roman and Asian time
of celebrating Easter, are obvious in the Histories of those ancient times.

8. Our Author further tells us, p. 65.
that Council of Laodicea says nothing of stated Forms of Prayer, c. 18. only
orders Prayers to be poured out, Morning and Evening. Thus he clasheth with
Smectymnuus above produced. And to clear this matter, this Canon declares,
(...), that there ought always to be the very same service of Prayers, both in
the Mornings and in the Evenings. That is, there must be the same Morning
service, and the same Evening service continually, and as Zonar. in Conc. Laod.
c. 18. etc Balsam. ib.
Zonaras expounds it, that those Prayers only should be used in their public
service, which had been received in the public Assemblies; and to the same
purpose Balsamon. And for further confirmation, that this Council had a
particular respect to set forms of Prayer then in use, in its next Conc. Laod.
c. 19.
Canon it gives an account of some part of the order of their service, that
after the Sermon or Homily, they had first the prayer for the Catechumeni, and
when they were gone out, the prayer for the Penitents, and when they were gone
away, three prayers for the Fideles, the first (...), in silence, the second
and third (...), by open pronouncing. And all this was performed before the
Communion or Consecration thereof, the whole Assembly, as I conceive, being to
join in heart and affection, but silently in the first prayer, but in the two
other they were to join in vocal expression. Now this cannot be otherwise
understood, than to enclude the use of a form, and also an obedience to orders
and rules established by the authority of the Church.

9. He next takes some notice of 3. Conc. Carth. c. 23. which enjoins,
Quascunque sibi preces aliquis describit, etc. Whatsoever prayer any one shall
copy out for himself, he may not use them, unless he first confer with the
understanding Brethren. Our Author says, p. 65.
This plainly hints that Ministers were wont to compose their own prayers. But
if he had considered what account I gave concerning this Canon, in my Libert.
Eccles. p. 119.
Libertas Ecclesiastica, he might have seen reason to have been of another
mind. But he takes no notice at all of what I said concerning it, when I
particularly considered it, and did show, that that Canon gives no proof, that
constant forms were not in use before that time: but he observes only that I
quoted this in Libertas Ecclesiastica p. 106. where I only mentioned it, as
being owned by our Dissenters, to have contributed something toward the
establishing of forms.

10. The next Conc. Milev. c. 12. Liturgies established by the Council of
Milevis.
Canon which Smectymnuus allow to give a full establishment in the African
Territories, to Liturgical forms, is something (though not much) differently
expressed, in several Copies thereof, both in the title, and in the body of the
Canon. But as it is in the African Code, which is the most authentic and of
highest authority, its Title is, Of Prayers to be said at the Altar. And the
Conc. Carth. Gr. in Zonar. c. 117. in Balsam. c. 106. Cod. Can. Eccl. Jusicl.
c. 103.
Canon it self requires, that the prayers which are approved in the Council (in
the several parts of public worship) should be celebrated of all persons, and
that none other which be against the Faith be at all used, but those shall be
said which are collected by the wiser men. But that which our Author says to
this Canon is, p. 64, 65, 66.
that the African Ministry being tainted with Pelagianism, Prayers agreed by
the Council, were thereupon decreed to be used in that Province: and yet they
do not say, no other, but no other against the Faith, should be used.

11. Now in the sense he takes it, it does go as far for the establishing
Forms of Liturgy, as agrees with the practice of our Church. But when I
consider, what S. Austin, who was a Member of this Council of Milevis,
declares, Aug. de Bapt. cont. Donat. l. 6. c. 25.
that the Prayers used by many persons were daily amended, when they were
declared to the more learned men; and that many things were found in them
contrary to the Catholic Faith, -- and that many persons took up with Prayers
composed not only by unskilful persons, but also by Heretics; I say when I
consider this, I incline to another sense of this Council. And that is, that in
the former part it makes constant provision, for the use of Forms ordered by
the Council, in the public service of the Church; and in the latter part it
takes care, that no private Books of devotion, which were composed by
Heretics, should be entertained by any Catholic Christians; and the same
thing was very probably taken care of in 3 Conc. Carth. c. 23. above mentioned.

12. But though both Heretical and Schismatical Principles had spread
themselves in Africa, it is no way probable, that their Ministry was at this
time tainted with Pelagianism, nor could that be the foundation for enjoining
Forms. For it appears by this Council of Conc. Milevit. 1. c. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8.
Milevis, that the Bishops and chief of the Clergy, were very severe against
it, and yet they obliged themselves to constant Forms. And when Coelestius an
African Presbyter, had before this time earnestly espoused Pelagianism, there
was Oros. de Arbitr. Libert. p. 621, 622.
no stay for him in Africa, but he was forced to desert those parts. I shall
only add further, that the vast Precincts of the African Church, who were
directed by this Canon, were much larger than our national Church, and might
equal a considerable part of Europe.

13. And whereas I gave several testimonies, in my p. 106, 107, 108, 109.
Libertas Ecclesiastica, of the use of Liturgies, before the time of those
Canons abovementioned, our Author takes no notice at all of most of them, and
what he does mention, is with great oversight and carelessness. I declared, that
I yield it most probable, that the ancient Roman, Jerusalem, and Alexandrian
Offices, Of the Liturgies under the name of S. James, etc.
were called the Liturgies of S. Peter, S. James and S. Mark, because of their
certain early use in the Churches where they presided, though it is not certain
that they were composed by them, this being mentioned by no ancient. Writer of
the first Centuries. But our Author intimating as if I did assert these
Liturgies to these Authors, adds Reas. Acc. p. 66.
what a lamentable shift it is to tell us that they have undergone diverse
alterations: but those words were not at all used by me, concerning any of
these Liturgies, but concerning those of S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and S.
Basil, Libert. Eccl. p. 107. But I might well have used them concerning these
other Liturgies also. He speaking of Ibid.
the horrible imposture of these, and other Liturgies of S. Andrew, S. Matthew,
Clemens, Dionys. Areop. etc. which I did not so much as name, declares, they
are so generally rejected by all sober and learned Authors, both Papists and
Protestants, that we stand amazed (it seems a little thing will affright him)
to hear our Reverend Brother so much as naming them.

14. Now I grant, that these Liturgies according as they are now exhibited,
under the names of S. James, etc. are manifestly proved, not to be entirely
their genuine offspring, both from several doctrines, and names, which are
expressed in several of them. But this is not enough to prove, the other parts
thereof to be of no primitive composure. For so far as concerns the mention of
some names of persons, living in after Ages; it seems to me no sufficient
Argument to prove, that our English Liturgy which was in use at the beginning
of our Wars, was not in substance established, under King Edward the Sixth, or
Queen Elizabeth; because there were then Prayers for King Charles, Queen Mary
and Charles Prince of Wales. And concerning doctrines (for instance, that the
Liturgy now extant, under the name of S. James often expresses the Blessed
Virgin to be (...), which yet was never urged against the Heresy of Eus. Hist.
Eccl. l. 5. c. (...).
Artemon, or against Nestorianism, by the ancient Fathers, who made use of all
the testimonies they could meet with; whereas this must have been a testimony
very obvious, and of great authority, if this had then been in that Liturgy as
received from S. James) I think it but reasonable to imagine, that when a
general Council had declared any doctrine to be Heresy, some such expressions
might thereupon be added, to the constant Liturgies then in use, as may
manifest their holding the Catholic doctrine, in detestation of those
Heresies. And in like manner, when corrupt doctrines became generally received,
especially if they concerned any thing of worship, (as of adoration of Saints,
etc.) it cannot but be expected, that they should be inserted into the Liturgy
of that Church which embraced them.

15. But I fear our Author spoke without his Book, when in general and with
respect to all the Prayers therein, he said, these Liturgies are generally
rejected, by all sober and learned Authors, both Papists and Protestants. To
instance particularly in the Liturgy of S. James. Amongst the Romanists, it is
asserted to him by An. 63. n. 220.
Baronius, and De Ritib. l. 2. c. 3. n. 6.
Durantus, and very great numbers of other Authors. The same is affirmed in a
peculiar Tract, written to that purpose, by Allat. de Liturg. S. Jacobi.
Leo Allatius, who also produces the testimonies of Sixtus Senensis,
Possevinus, Pamelius, Sanctius, and many other Latin and Greek Authors, even as
early, as to Proclus, who was Bishop of Constantinople in the next Age to S.
Chrysostom, being educated under, and ordained Deacon by Socr. Hist. l. 6. c.
(...). and l. 7. c. (...).
Atticus, who was Bishop of Constantinople, the next year after S. Chrysostom
was thence banished. And Bellarmine also owns it to have been S. James's,
though he admits it to have been greatly altered.

16. Amongst the Protestants also, many appear inclined to own Liturgies, to
have been established from and by the Apostles. Even In Annot. minor. in 1 Cor.
11.34.
Beza says, Quae ad ordinem spectant ut precum formulae, and caetera
hujusmodi, -- disposuit Apostolus in Ecclesiis; The Apostle did set in order in
the Churches, such things as had relation unto order, as Forms of Prayer, and
other things of like nature. And the Walachrian Classis acknowledged, that the
Churches Cons. Contr. in Angl. p. 180.
ab Apostolicis and Primitivae Ecclesiae temporibus, from the Apostolical and
primitive times unto this day, have performed the public worship of God, out
of certain and prescribed Forms. And if they were from the Apostolical times,
it may well be that some Apostles had an hand in making them.

17. And more particularly in our own Church, Annot. on S. Jude, v. 20. and
View of the Directory, Sect. 17.
Dr Hammond judged that the Apostles and they whom the Holy Ghost set apart to
plant the Churches, had miraculous gifts, and by them they prayed; he adds,
some of these special Prayers thus conceived, were received and kept by those
whom they thus taught, and are they which the ancients mean by the Liturgy of
S. James, etc. And Eccl. Angl. Vind. c. 10.
D. Durel concerning these Liturgies of S. James, etc. says, mihi dubium non
est, I make no doubt but some things are found in them, which do proceed from
the Authors to whom they are attributed. And Salmas. contr. Grot. opus Posth.
p. 254.
Salmasius as was observed by Dr Hammond in his view of the new Directory, said
Jacobi, Clementis, Basilii, Chrysostomi Liturgiae, partim verae sunt, partim
falsae; the Liturgies of James, Clement, Basil, Chrysostom, are partly true,
and partly false. Which words show that he accounted some things to be genuine
in them, but with an addition of other things spurious. See also Mr Of
Religious Assembl. c. 7. p. 248.
Thornedike to the same sense.

18. Our Author also takes a slight notice of that weighty evidence I produced,
for the proof of Forms of Prayer, Lib. Eccl. p. 107, 108.
in the time of Constantine. And he only tells us, that Reas. Acc. p. 67.
Constantines composing Godly Prayers for his Soldiers, is a good Argument
that the Church had then no public Liturgies: for surely Constantine need not
then have made any, and it had been a great derogation from the honor of the
Church.

19. But if our Author had duly observed what I produced, Forms of Prayer used
in public service in Constantines time.
and consulted Eusebius in the places to which I referred, he would have found
1. That these Prayers which Constantine made, and Eusebius applauded, were
peculiarly fitted for his Soldiers, as is manifest from that particular Prayer
related by De Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 20.
Eusebius: and therefore his inferring from hence, that the Church had no Forms
before that time, is as if he would conclude, that because we have had Prayers
lately framed, to be used at sea, that therefore we never had before that time
any Common Prayer. And besides this, Ib. c. 19.
Eusebius declares, that these Prayers he composed were to be used on the
Sunday, by that part of his Soldiers, who had not embraced the Christian
Religion, whilst the other part of his Army who were Christians, did attend
the Assemblies of the Church, and join in its Prayers. 2. He might also have
further observed, that Constantine was said by Eusebius, de Vit. Constable. l. 4.
c. 17. to order his own palace, according to the manner and usage of the
Church; in that taking into his hands the Books, he either applied himself to
the Scriptures, or expressed, (...), those Prayers which had received an
authoritative sanction. But this clear evidence for the use of Forms of Prayer
he was willing to overlook; as also what I produced from Origin, Cyprian, and
others.

20. But because this Author pretends, Liturgies more ancient than six hundred
years after Christ.
that there was no established Liturgy before the time of Gregory the Great,
nor till six hundred years after Christ; that the Reader may see, how much he
would be imposed upon, by giving credit to any such untrue and groundless
Assertion, I shall (waving very many Citations of some Clauses of Liturgies in
St. Austin, St. Chrysostom, and many other of the ancient Writers) produce as
many testimonies as are sufficient to satisfy an indifferent Reader, that in
all the first Ages of the Christian Church, for the first six hundred years,
there were public forms of Prayer, and Liturgies established.

21. Justinian the Emperor began his Reign above seventy years, -- Enjoined by
the Imperial Law An. 541.
and ended it almost forty, before the year 600, and his Imperial Sanctions
were of as large extent as his Empire. He accounts it a great fault, Novel.
137. in Praef.
that there were some persons of the Clergy and Monks, who were not versed, as
his Canons required, in the prayers of the usual Service, and of Baptism. And
he declares that he would have things canonically ordered, which if it had been
before done, they would every one have acquainted themselves with the holy
Liturgies, ibid. c. 1.
(...). And he also by his Imperial Sanction required, that every person
ordained Bishop ibid. c. 2.
should recite the office for the holy Communion, and the prayer for Baptism,
and the other prayers. And he also enjoins ibid. c. 6.
these prayers in the performing public offices, and in the administering
Baptism, not to be said by the Bishops or Presbyters silently, but so as they
may be heard. Which things are plain testimonies, both that the Church then had
Liturgical Forms, and that they were established and enjoined by an Imperial
Law.

22. And besides this, it was enacted by Justinian Novel. 131. c. 1.
that the Canons of the four holy Synods, (...), both such as were made by
them, and such as were confirmed by the Council of Nice, Constantinople,
Ephesus and Chalcedon, should have the force of laws. And therefore if there
was any Canon, which enjoined the use of forms of prayer, confirmed by the
Council of Chalcedon, (for the proof of which, I refer to n. 6, 7, 8. and 23.
of this Section) then by virtue of this Constitution, that Canon had an equal
authority with a law of the Empire, throughout all the Dominions thereof. And
both these Constitutions of Justinian bear date in the same year 541. which is
fifty nine years before the period our Author fixes upon.

23. In the middle of the foregoing Century, from the year 400. and downwards,
Their ordinary and established use in the fifth Century manifested.
was the General Council of Chaladon, An. 451. in which that Code, wherein was
the Canon of Laodicea, which required the constant use of Liturgies, was both
approved and confirmed, as may appear above, n. 6, 7, 8. and therefore the use
of Liturgies was hereby established in the Christian Church, as far as the
authority of a general Council did extend. In this time Proclus, a Bishop of
Constantinople of good note, declared forms of divine service, to have been
Procl. Constable. de Tradit. Liturg. in Bibl. Patr.
delivered from St. James and Clement, and to have been ordered by St. Basil
and St. Chrysostom. But how far soever his authority may prevail, concerning
the time almost four hundred years before him, when St. James and St. Clement
lived, he being the first Writer which I have met with, who mentions the
ancient Liturgies under their particular names; yet for the later times, his
authority is unquestionable, that there were then Liturgical forms, and that
these had been so long in the Church, as not to be then accounted new upstart
things. And he could not but have sufficient opportunity to understand fully
what he delivers concerning St. Chrysostom especially, since (...) was Bishop
in the same See of Constantinople, and was educated there about the en^^ of St.
Chrysostom's time. And at the beginning of this Century, was the Council of
Milevis, whose Canon enjoining se^ forms of Prayers, is n. 10, 11, 12.
above produced i^ this Section.

24. In the Century beginning An. 300 the attestation to the Liturgy of St.
Chrysostom, in the foregoing Paragraph, (...) the more considerable in this
Case, because, as Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 28.
Theodoret informs us, his Government and Authority extended it sel^ over
Thracia, Asia and Pontus, and he established excellent laws, (...), to twenty
eight Provinces, within those Regions. The like in the fourth Century.
St. Basil's ordering a public form of Liturgy in this Age, is not only what
has been generally received and acknowledged in the Greek Church but has a
further confirmation from Pr^clus above mentioned, and also from the testimony
of the Conc. in Trull. c. 32.
sixth General Council, commonly so called, where they also mention the Liturgy
of St. James. And when Julian, for the begetting a greater respect to
Gentilism, ordered many thing therein, Soz. Hist. l. 5. c. 15.
(...), after the order of the Christian worship, one thing which Sozomen
declares, they were to imitate the Christians in, was (...), in their
constituted prayers: which Naz. Or. 3. p. 101, 102.
Nazianzen calls (...), a form of prayers to be expressed by parts: this must
manifestly prove the use of such forms then, in the ordinary offices of the
Christian Church. Concerning this Age, the Reader may add what I above
mentioned, from Eusebius, n. 19. and from the Council of Laodicea, n. 5, 6, 7,
8.

25. In the preceding Age from the year 200. what I cited in my Lib. Eccl. p.
108.
Libertas Ecclesiastica, from Origin in his Homilies on Jeremy, urging a Clause
out of their usual Forms of Prayer, and speaking in his Books against Celsus,
of the Christians using, (...), And in the third Age, beginning An. 200.
the appointed prayers, with what I there added from St. Cyprian and
Tertullian, may be considerable evidences, that the Church then used forms of
prayer. To this may be added, what I above observed, Sect. 2. n. 41.
concerning the ordinary public use of set Hymns, composed by pious men, under
the time of Christianity; which the Council of Antioch against Paulus
Samosatenus censured him for disuseing.

26. In the two first Centuries, Public forms in the two first C^^turies.
we meant with few Christian Writers, and yet the^ are some things expressed in
Justin Matyr, and Ignatius, which seem to favor the use of forms of prayer, as
I noted in my Libertas Ecclesiastica. But the testimony I produced Sect. 2.
ibid.
above from Pliny, in his Epistle to Trajan, at the entrance of the second
Century, does sufficiently show, that the Christians in their public
Assemblies, used a set form in Hymns of Ecclesiastical composure. And the words
of In Philopat. ver. sin.
Lucian, who also lived under Trajan, give us a fair intimation, if not certain
evidence, of a form of Liturgy then used by Christians. Where he brings in
Tr^^phon in his Dialogues, expressing several things concerning the doctrine
and practice of the Christian Church, and at last he directs, (...), for the
beginning, the prayer from the father (the Lords prayer) and adding at the
ending the Ode with many names, or the famous hymn. Indeed, a learned man was
of opinion, that J. Greg. Not. and Observe. in Scr. c. 38.
the (...), was the Clause at the end of the Lords prayer, For thine is the
Kingdom, etc. but it is much more probable, if not certain, that there must be
more than one single Clause, in that which he called an Ode; and it is very
likely, that (...), may here strictly imply the expressing many names, or many
titles. According to this sense View of the Direct. Chapter 1. Sect. 17.
Dr Hammond thought, that Ode or Hymn intended, might be that in the end of our
Communion service, Glory be to God on high, etc. And an Hymn much like to this
appears to have been very ancient, being expressed in that Collection, under
the name of Constable. Apost. l. 7. c. 48, 49.
Apostolical Constitutions. And that this Clause in Lucian, has respect to a
particular Hymn, composed for the giving Glory to our Lord and Savior
especially, I am inclined to believe, from the testimony of Pliny, lately
referred unto, from whence it appears, that such an hymn, (which he expresses
soliti sunt carmen Christo quasi Deo dicere secum invicem) was at that very
time looked on, as a remarkable thing in the Christian service, and was of
ordinary use in the Christian Assembly. Now though I cannot be positive in
determining the particular Hymn; it is a considerable evidence, that the
Christians then used a form of public service, in that they began it with the
Lords prayer, (which Tertul. de Orat. c. 9.
Tertullian also shows, to have been anciently used before any other prayers)
and ended it with a particular known; and remarkable hymn.

27. And as before this time, Our Savior joined in a form of prayer, and
taught his Disciples a form.
our Savior instituted that excellent form of the Lords Prayer; so that is the
greater warrant for the use of forms of prayer, if we consider, that such
public forms, composed by such men, who had chief authority in the Church,
were before our Saviors time, and in his time, of ordinary use in the Jewish
worship. But our Lord complied so far with the use of these forms, that himself
usually joined in this Synagogue-worship. Luke 4.16. being of another temper,
as to the honoring of Gods public worship, than this Author, and others of
his mind; since the farthest that they will go is, as he tells us, Reas. Acc.
p. 21.
that some of them at a pinch can hear prescribed forms. And moreover, our Lord
thought fit, as John the Baptist had done, to continue this practice, of
directing forms of prayer amongst his Disciples; and thereby gave a general
approbation to this ancient usage in the Jewish Church, and gave his own
example for the like practice in the Christian Church, of praying to God in
forms piously composed, and to be devoutly used.

28. In their temple service, their sacrifices and offerings were rites of
Phil. de Vict. p. 842, 843.
supplication and thanksgiving. But these sacrifices being always the same,
upon the same occasion, and the manner of performing them being unvaried and
uniform, The Temple-Sacrifices were real expressions of Divine worship in an
unvaried form.
they were as constant forms of supplication, or the same expressions of the
same thing, in the worship of God. And as the daily service was constant and
invariable, so the several extraordinary Sacrifices, were as different offices
for special occasions. And herein it also appears, that God is so little
pleased with variety of expressions, that amongst the several numerous sorts of
Cattle and Fowls, ibid. p. 835.
only three sorts of the former, as Philo observed, viz. Oxen, Sheep and Goats,
and two of the latter, Pigeons and Turtles, might be presented to God in
Sacrifice. Nor was there any alteration in the method of their ordinary
service. For whereas there was sacrifice and incense daily offered, the same
Author acquaints us, that the Priests strictly observed this order, Phil. de
Victim. offerent. p. 850.
first to offer the incense, as a rite of thanksgiving; and after that their
Sacrifice. And their incense was daily offered, before the rising of the Sun,
as Anriq. Jud. l. 3. c. 10.
Josephus declares, which is also agreeable to the direction of the Law it
self, Exodus 30.8. But in the evening service, the incense was constantly
offered after the Sacrifice.

29. And their Sacrifices were attended in the Temple with particular prayers
and praises. The Levites in the Temple sung praises, in a set form of words, 2
Chr. 29.27, 30. And the Priests joined prayers with their Sacrifices; and that
these in their constant and ordinary service, were set forms, (besides what
has been by Thornd. of Rel. Assemb. Chapter 7.
some observed from the Samaritan Chronicle) has probable evidence from Philo,
who describing the Priest in this action, says he is De Victim. p. 843.
(...), making common lauds for all the people, Public forms of prayer
accompanied their temple-sacrificis.
in the most holy prayers. And we can produce instances of set forms of prayer,
used not only by the people, but even by the Priests themselves, upon the most
high and solemn occasions. Such is that, when in case of a great impendent
danger of sad calamity, the Priests weeping between the Porch and the Altar,
were to say, Joel 2.17. Spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine Heritage
to reproach, etc. And both the Talmud and other Jewish Writers, declare how
upon the day of atonement, the High Priest himself used several stated prayers,
as Hor. Heb. in Mat. 6.13.
has been observed by learned men; and the very prayers themselves, are thence
expressed by de Sacrif. l. 1. c. 8. p. 95. etc. 15. p. 169, 170.
Dr Outram. And the forms of prayer used at the Jewish Passover, have been
noted by Scaliger, Buxtorf, Syn. Jud. c. 13. Ainsworth in Exodus 12.8. Dr
Lightfoot on Mat. 26.26. and diverse others.

30. In their worship in the Synagogues and their Schools, besides other
prayers added of latter times, the eighteen prayers, which are much mentioned,
and of great account amongst the Jewish Writers, are asserted by Seld. in
Eutych. Buxt. Syn. Jud. c. 5.
the Rabbis to be as ancient as the time of Ezra. But that little or nothing
of this whole number of the eighteen prayers, is of any later date than the
time of our Savior, Dr. Lightfoot Hor. Heb. in Mat. 6.9.
affirms, might be proved at large if need did require. And I shall think it
sufficient for me further to observe, The like used in the Jewish Synagogues.
that it is certain they had forms of prayer of ordinary and common use, in the
Jewish Nation, as early as the times of our Savior, from the testimony of
Josephus, concerning the Essens, expressing before Sunrise in their
supplications, de Bell. Judaic. l. 2. c. 7.
(...), some such prayers as were delivered to them from the foregoing Ages, and
were received amongst the Jews. And upon a view of what I have now produced in
this Section, the Reader may see reason to believe the truth of what was
asserted by in Loc. Theol. de Precat.
Melancthon, concerning forms of prayer, Ecclesia semper eas proposuit, and
public and privatim eas exerceri jubet, The Church of God has always proposed
them, and thought them fit to be used, both publicly and privately.

SECT. IV. Some expressions vilifying Uniformity, and charging forms of prayer
to be an engine of perpetual discord, with others in the latter part of his
third Chapter, reflected on.
HAving sufficiently, I hope, answered what has been urged in this Discourse,
to prove the use of forms of prayer, to be any hindrance to piety and
devoutness in religious worship; and vindicated my arguments, whereby I
undertook to prove the contrary; it is but expedient to consider some other
reflective expressions, which are in the latter part of this his third Chapter.

2. When our Author observed, that the Walachrian Classis commended forms of
prayer, as conducing to several good ends; and particularly to this, Sect. IV.
That uniformity in public worship may be in all Churches observed: Of
Uniformity, or the having the same form of worship throughout the whole Realm.
he takes occasion to fall foul upon that Uniformity, which they thought
valuable, and which is established in our Church. But he first declares his
approbation of p. 54, 55.
Uniformity in the ordinary matter of prayer, pursuant to an unity in Doctrine,
and this he tells us is necessary. And then he thus expresses his contempt of
Uniformity, in that sense our Church approves it, and our Laws and Government
establish it, calling it Reas. Ac. p. 55.
that pitiful thing now called Uniformity, which lies in an oneness of
syllables, words and phrases; a thing which never came into the heart of God to
command. And in another place, he enquires how it shall be proved, that p. 149.
that pitiful thing called uniformity in words and syllables and phrases, was
ever desired of God, or that it ever came into his or his Sons heart. Thus he
can come very nigh to a form of words and phrases, in reviling them in others.
And here is one part of the difference between us, that whilst we use a form of
words in the holy exercises of Religion, he uses his form of words in scoffing
at this religious exercise, and the Constitution of our Governors: and to us
it appears, that the deriding religious exercises, is not so good a work as the
practicing them.

3. But whether God or Christ ever commanded a set form of words to be used in
prayer, which our Author so confidently denies, Excellent benefits by the
establishing this uniformity.
may be sufficiently discerned from what I have said in the foregoing Sections.
But is this Uniformity, in the use of a devout and pious form, such a pitiful
thing, as he represents it, when by this means almost all the advantages in the
use of forms, which I have above mentioned, are obtained? Hereby a decent and
regular way of worship, in full and comprehensive sense, and fit words, is
secured in all Assemblies of the Church of England. Hereby sober and
understanding Christians are assured, that they can heartily join in the
public service, which is to be presented to God. Hereby the minds and
affections of the people may be particularly prepared beforehand, to go along
with the several parts of worship. Hereby both Ministers and people are
relieved against various distractions, which new variety of words and
expressions do suggest. Hereby the Unity of desiring the same things, in so
many several Assemblies, may quicken a considerate man's devotion. And hereby
all unbecoming and scandalous expressions, which disturb the soberest
Christians, and administer matter for derision to others (of which too many
instances might be given) are in the chief parts of Divine service and worship
prevented.

4. And besides this, how much this Uniformity, which is una and eadem publici
Divini cultus externi forma, in the expression of These. Sal. de Liturg. Par. 3.
n. 32.
Cappellus, does contribute toward the promoting Unity, Peace and Charity, I
shall represent in his words. It is that, says he, qua arctius colligantur, in
eadem sincerae Religionis, Fidei and Charitatis communione, inter se fidelium
animi, etc. in which the minds of the faithful are more closely knit together,
in the same communion of sincere Religion, Faith and Charity amongst
themselves, and thereby in the Church in every Nation, etc. there is less of
disturbances, factions, contentions, schisms and divisions, from that infinite
diversity and multiplied variety of external worship, which must necessarily
arise, if there be no certain and prescribed forms of that worship, to which
all are kept. And now is it a pitiful thing, that our Governors should in the
best manner take care for the preventing so much evil, and the promoting so
much good? or is it not rather an unworthy thing, to reproach and calumniate
the good deeds of others, and especially of our Superiors?

5. But whereas our Author declares for an Uniformity in matter of Prayer,
pursuant to an unity in doctrine; and calls that a Reas. Acc. p. 149.
beauteous Uniformity, when we all speak the same thing, as to the matter of
Prayer; do the same thing, in the same specifical acts of worship; and on the
same day, the Lord's Day, I desire two things may be here observed: First, that
our Author does not pretend that men ordinarily ought to pray for other things,
than what may be contained in a well-disposed Form, so that the Question only
is, whether, where the matter is the same, we are to prefer fixed, known, and
well deliberated words, or sudden, uncertain, and changeable expressions. Now
all the great advantages mentioned in the foregoing Paragraphs, and in the
first Section of this Chapter, are on our side: when on the other side, men may
have the greater opportunity of showing what a volubility of speech they have
attained unto, and what store of good expressions they are furnished with;
which may gratify the inclinations and fancies of some ^^en, but are not of
chief advantage to piety.

6. Secondly, Let it be considered, Ill effects of the want of such an
Uniformity.
whether it can be reasonably expected, that Uniformity in the matter of
Prayer, and the worship of God, and Unity in doctrine, should be continued,
where public Forms are rejected. Now no better trial can be made of such a
case as this, than by experience, unless it can be proved, that the minds of
men are now otherwise disposed than they were in those days, when this Kingdom
had a plain experimental proof hereof. But concerning Uniformity in the matter
of Prayer, it is a thing notorious, that in our late times, when the Liturgy
was taken away; the Presbyterians, Independents, and other Parties, prayed one
against the other, and against the establishing that way of Government which
others of them prayed for: diverse persons made their own passions, singular
opinions and errors, a considerable part of their Prayers: others rejected all
confession of sins, as not owning it to be any part of their devotion. In many
places of this Kingdom, that great part of Christian worship, in the
Administration and participation of the Lords Supper, was for ten, twelve,
fourteen and sixteen years together totally laid aside: the administering Infant
Baptism, was by some Ministers disused, and by others appropriated to a select
Company. I might instance in other things, wherein the matter of Prayer then
varied too generally from what our Liturgy and the rules of our Religion direct
us to; particularly concerning our Prayer for the King: it being not amiss
observed, by our (...). c. 16.
late gracious Sovereign, that one thing which made many be the more against
our Liturgy then, was on this account.

7. And they were then so far from Unity of doctrine, that one who professed
himself a Nonconformist acknowledged about 1646, Gangraena. Part. 1. p. 175.
We in these four last years have overpast the Deeds of the Prelates, in whose
time never so many nor so great errors were heard of, much less such
blasphemies and confusions. We have worse things among us, more corrupt
doctrines and unheard of practices than in eighty years before; denying the
Scriptures to be the word of God, denying the Trinity, and the Divinity of
Christ, the Immortality of the soul, the resurrection of the Body, Hell, and
Heaven, etc. And I know no sober Christian will call this unity in doctrine.

8. But though our Author thinks fit unreasonably to vilify uniformity, I
suppose some Readers will be apt to think, that of the two, his words may be
the more truly returned upon himself, That the affecting that pitiful thing
called va^^ing of words and phrases, never entered ^^o the heart of God to
command, to ^^e a part of his Religion; and it should not enter into the heart
of any good man (...) think that such things will please him.

9. In another place this Author expresses much evil to be produced by
Liturgies. As that they are Reas. Acc. p. 63.
an engine of perpetual discord, and are made use of to deprive the Church of
God of hundreds of ^^dly and painful Ministers: and to the like purpose he
speaks p. 130. Of the causes of ourdiscords and divisions.
elsewhere. Now ^e who shall consider, that there have been Liturgies in all
ages of the Church of God from the beginning, and that no discord was
occasioned by them; and that they are of themselves of excellent use; and that
when our Liturgy was laid aside, almost forty years since, this was far from
procuring concord; he will be apt to think that our Author has mistaken the
true cause of our discords and divisions. But there are other plain and
manifest causes thereof, viz. from an ill temper of mind, whereby men neglect
the due reverence they owe to their superiors, and the care they ought to
maintain of peace and Unity in the Church; when some men set themselves with
eagerness to oppose regular establishments upon slight grounds, and others
yield themselves to be led by the passions and errors of those whom they
esteem; and when many causlesly affect new things, and indulge themselves to
set up for new models, of ordering the Communion of the Church, and the way of
divine worship; These things will indeed perpetually cause divisions, unless
they be removed. And if any Ministers shall rather forsake their Ministry, than
admit of any Forms of Liturgy; the true cause of this will be from some of the
things now mentioned: or else from their own great mistakes, in being persuaded
by such weak Arguments, as his discourse may furnish them with: or else from
their going too far to comply with and please other men.

10. But in truth, the establishing Liturgies does in a considerable measure
put a stop to discords and divisions. To this purpose Cappellus accounted it
very fit, that as far as may be, there should be These. Salm. ubi sup. n. 46.
una in Ecclesia externi cultus divini fermula; the same Form of public divine
worship in the Church, and this he thought of great use, ad unitatem spiritus,
and charitatis, inter fideles, quantum obtineri id potest, conservandam, for
the preserving, as far as that can be obtained, the unity of the spirit, and of
charity amongst believers. And though our Author would be content that some
should use Liturgies, but other Ministers should use their own words and
method, Cappellus in the same place declares, that this is by no means
advisable, and that this would be so far from procuring peace, that from hence
would arise, contemptus, odia, rixae, contentiones, etc. contempt, hatred,
clashings, contentions, strife, and infinite quarrels to the great scandal of
the Church.

11. But plain experience does beyond all authority prove, that concord is
never like to be the effect of the laying aside all Forms of public worship.
For when this was done in our late sad times, thereupon all manner of errors,
sects, heresies and blasphemies, were broached and vented. After this it was
that Jus div. Min. Evang. Ep. to Read. 1653.
the Presbyterian Ministers complained of the bitter, woeful, and unutterable
fruits of divisions, which, say they, have almost destroyed, not only the
Ministry, but even the very heart and life of Religion and Godliness.

12. Our Author says also, that Forms of Prayer p. 63.
hinder Ministers care to study the Scriptures: which he before urged, and I
before answered, Chap. 1. n. 47.

13. He says also, Ibid.
that hereby many such Ministers have crept into the Church, of whom every one
who has any concern for Gods glory, or the Churches repute, has cause to
blush and be ashamed. Now I shall leave him to consider by himself, whose work
he is doing, whilst he takes all occasions to reproach that Ministry, and
thereupon to hinder their labors whom our Savior has called to serve him in
his Church. And we have so little reason to blush and be ashamed of the
generality of the English Ministry, that we have abundant reason to bless God
for their great worth. And besides this, the faults which can be chargeable
upon any particular persons in the Ministry, must be either from their being 1.
not sound in doctrine, or 2. not of a holy and good life, or 3. from their not
being men of sufficient abilities, and such as diligently ^^charge their
Ministerial work. But set Forms of Prayer piously composed, and instantly used,
can contribute nothing (...) either of the two former, when they manifestly
promote the contrary good. And for the last, as the great abilities of our
Ministry is very evident; so I shall answer this, where he does more
particularly insist upon it in Chapter 8. n. 10.
another place.

14. This Writer in the end of this Chapter declares, p. 70.
that he thinks he ^^th fully answered whatsoever I had of^^red, but I leave it
to the diligent Rea^er to judge, how little reason he has to think so. But he
there says, his strict design is not to answer me, but to show they ^^ve
probable Arguments, inducing them to believe, that it would be sinful for them,
ordinarily to use the prescribed Forms of others: and therefore he proceeds to
add further Arguments. Nor is it my design in this discourse mainly to
vindicate my self, much less to oppose him; but to vindicate the truth, and
therefore I shall add my Answer to his remaining Arguments, contenting my self
only to give an account of the main substance of them, if I may so call it, and
not to interpose my self, in what he speaks against other particular persons,
or in any digressions, which are of no necessary concern, to the Vindication of
fixed Forms of Prayer, or defending other public Constitutions.

CHAP. IV. Chapter IV.
Forms of Prayer are not forbidden either in the Second Commandment, or by any
other Divine Precept.
HIs third Argument is, that it is Sinful for Ministers, having the gift of
Prayer, to use prescribed Forms, no necessity compelling; because God has
Reas. Account, p. 71.
neither by the light of Nature directed them, nor in his Word prescribed them.
Now it is acknowledged, that all the parts of Divine Worship must be such, Of
the parts of Divine Worship, and the manner of performing it.
as the light of Nature, or the revealed Will of God do direct. By the former,
our dependence as Creatures, does oblige us to acknowledge and honor God; and
to call upon him, and pray unto him: And the holy Scriptures give us further
Precepts, and encouragements in these Duties. And in the parts and duties of
Divine Worship, the manner of performing them, and our outward expressions
therein, must be such as is suitable to the Duty it self; as swerveth from no
Divine Precept, or Institution; and is recommended either by the light of
Nature or Scripture. But from what I have said in the former Chapter, it may
appear, Forms of Prayer are agreeable to the light of Nature and Scripture.
that Forms of Prayer in the public Worship of God, are recommended by the
Light of Nature, as it directs us to choose the best, and most expedient and
profitable way of performing that Worship; and that the Scriptures also do
encourage us in, and give their approbation of the use thereof.

2. But there is yet a further design in this Argument, which is, That nothing
may be used in God's Worship, which he has not himself prescribed. To this
end, he says, the sense of the Second Commandment is this, P. 73.
Thou shall worship in no other Way, by no other Means or Religious Rites, than
what I have prescribed: And again, P. 75. and the like P. 74.
We judge all Acts, Rites and Means of Worship prohibited by God, which either
in express Terms, or by first consequences from Scripture, are not prescribed.
Now if he will be consistent with himself, and conclude any thing in the Case
under debate from these things, which are rather Positions, And are not
forbidden be the the Second Commandment.
and unproved Assertions, than Arguments; his Inference must be, That no words
and expressions (for of these we are now discoursing) ought to be used in the
Worship of God, which are not by him prescribed. But concerning this Argument,
I shall observe three things.

3. Obs. 1. That he here contradicts, what he declared in the stating his
Question, and has often repeated, having as he tells us, P. 91.
Again and again, said, That they do not think Forms of Prayer unlawful. This
Argument Clasheth with himself.
But if they be not prescribed, and all means not prescribed be prohibited,
they must be asserted to be unlawful. And being thus prohibited, no pretense of
necessity on Man's part, can make them lawful. For according to that ancient
rule, Nulla est necessitas delinquendi, quibus una est necessitas non
delinquendi, Tertul.
It can be never necessary for them to sin, for whom it is only necessary that
they do no sin. And it is more necessary, to forbear any present external
expression of Homage to God, than to make use of that which is unlawful and
forbidden, as is manifest in the instance of Readiness sacrificing.

4. Obs. 2. By this way of arguing, the particular conceptions and expressions,
of him who prays without a Form, are as much forbidden, And will conclude
Prayers without Forms to be fitful.
as the use of a Form is pretended to be; since God has not prescribed these
Expressions. But here our Author tells us, that the light of Nature shows our
own invention to be a mean, and a sufficient mean in this act of Worship. Thus
Men who talk at this loose rate can tell, when it serves their own turn, how to
allow what God has not prescribed, and to justify it upon this very account;
because it is the Invention of Man, though they can declaim against
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, under the very name of Inventions of Men. But if
we may use words and expressions, and a method and composition of Prayer, not
particularly prescribed of God; what an unreasonable vanity is it, to argue
from this Topic against a Form of Prayer, because these particular things in
this Form, are not appointed of God.

5. But possibly he may tell us, as some have done, that by keeping to the
constant use of a Form of Prayer, we make that a proper part of Divine Worship.
Now though this was answered These. Salmur. Part 3. de Liturg. n. 35.
by Cappellus, and in part by Lib. Eccles. B 2. p. 305, 306.
me elsewhere, I shall here say, That we are far from thinking, that any
particular Form of Prayer, appointed in any part of the Church, is necessary to
be used in all Christian Churches in the World; who all of them are obliged to
perform all the proper parts of Divine Worship. Nor is Religion, and the
Worship of God placed in the bare reciting the words of a Form, but chiefly in
the pious devotion of the Heart, of which these words are an expression and
guide. And thus much must be allowed to the use of words in those Prayers,
which for distinction sake, I call Conceived Prayers. I hope he will not say,
that it is the constant and prescribed use, of the same thing not commanded of
God, which only is forbidden in the Second Commandment; as if the worshipping
an Image was only forbidden, where there is a constant Adoration given to the
same Image, but that it is allowable where there is so great a number of them,
that men sometimes make choice of one, and sometimes of another, with various
changes. We allow the Second Commandment, and the Rules of Scripture concerning
God's Worship, to require that no act of Divine Adoration be given to any thing
else besides God himself; What God has forbidden, or commanded concerning his
Worship.
and that that Homage and Service which is suitable to his Nature, and according
to his Will, be religiously performed; and that no such pretended Worship,
which is unsuitable to his Nature, or disagreeing to his Will, ought to be
presented to him. But this suggestion, that Forms of Prayer are forbidden by
the Second Commandment, as included under Idolatry, is so unreasonable, that
View of Direct. Chap. 1. Sect. 22.
Dr. Hammond might justly wonder, at the strangeness and prodigiousness
thereof; and Cappellus might well declare, concerning them who urge this, as an
Argument, Ubi sup. n.
Crasse admodum hic homines isti hallucinantur; These Men are herein exceeding
grossly deceived.

6. Obs. 3. This Position, That nothing may be used or appointed in God's
Worship, but what is particularly enjoined by God himself, (besides Reas. Acc.
p. 75, 76, 77. and p. 86, 87.
necessary circumstances to humane actions as Humane) is that, concerning the
falseness and dangerous consequence of which I discoursed largely in my
Libertas Ecclesiastica B 2. c. 1. throughout, and c. 2.
, to which I refer, nor is any answer given thereto by this Writer. And I shall
here note, that as it is improved, That Position that nothing not prescribed,
may be used in Gods Worship, is destructive of all Rellgion.
it is destructive to public Worship and Religion. For since God has
commanded us to pray, but has not in all acts of Worship, enjoined our Words,
or the performance of this Duty with or without a Form; it must according to
this Position, be done in neither, since each of these are by consequence
sequence pretended to be forbidden, being not prescribed. The same may be said
of our Savior's Precept, concerning the celebrating his Supper in Bread and
Wine, but he has not prescribed or determined the sort of Bread, or the kind
of Wine. And though God has commanded us to sing Praises to him; whatever this
Writer says, he can never prove, the singing continually the Psalms of David,
and others recorded in Scripture, to be particularly enjoined by a Divine
Institution, under the Gospel; though the Church of God has very generally and
advantageously used them. Wherefore the result of this assertion is, for men to
contradict themselves, in the performances of Religion, and (which is far more
intolerable) to look upon God, as having contradicted himself, in giving such
Laws, which so clash with one another, that they cannot be obeyed, and that by
the one he has set us free from observing the other.

7. But if these things may be determined by men, as they indeed must be, the
common rules of Prudence will not allow that it should be lawful and fit, for
every Minister by his more sudden and vario thoughts, to determine these things
for the Congregation where he ministers; Things necessary to be determined in
Religion, may be best determined by public Constitutions.
and that it should be unlawful and unreasonable, that any such things should
be considered and resolved on, by the deliberate Consultations of the most
prudent Men: And if we consider the Authority of our Superiors, to reject
pious Forms of Prayer by them appointed, and which I have showed to be of
excellent use, speaks a wnat of just Reverence and Submission to them, and a
not yielding to them that due Superiority in matters Ecclesiastical, for the
right ordering the exercises of Religion, which belongs to them; of which I
have in another Book discoursed somewhat.

8. But whilst this Author in this Chapter observes, that some urge the Duty P.
74, 85, 86.
of obeying Superiors in things lawful, and not forbidden of God, as an
obligation upon Inferiors in our Case, to join in our public Forms of Prayer;
besides what he urges against this, that Forms of Prayer are things forbidden
of God, as I above noted, he has some other expressions, concerning the Power
and Authority of Superiors, and our obedience to them, which I shall reflect
upon.

9. He grants that the Superior may in some cases determine of such a thing,
P. 88.
which both he and the Inferior confess to be in it self indifferent; but not
in things, P. 77.
which the Superior acknowledges not necessary, and the Inferior thinks are
forbidden. Useful things are fit to be stablished, tho some by mistake may
rashly Condemn them.
Now if any Inferior, or any Person whosoever, account any thing to be
forbidden, and proceed in his judgment upon good and true grounds; no such
thing may be appointed, being in it self evil; whether the Superiors
acknowledge it not necessary, or by mistake think it is so. But where any
Superiors do upon good grounds, judge any thing to be of good and profitable
use for the public good, though not absolutely necessary in it self: And some
Inferiors out of mistakes, or forwardness to censure, will condemn such things
as sinful and unlawful; it is no way fit that such good Orders be laid aside;
and many others, and the Church it self, be deprived of the good they might
receive from them, by yielding a Compliance to these mistakes. And whereas he
here urges P. 77.
the duty of Charity, he ought to consider, that real charity in providing for
the good and profit of the Souls of Men, is of far greater value, than that
which he calls Charity, in gratifying the Opinions, and complying with the
Errors of Men, in their mistakes. But of the appointments of such things as are
scrupled, I have treated more at large in another Libert. Eccl. B. 2. Chapter 2. 3.
throughout
Discourse.

10. Concerning obedience to Superiors, he says, P. 80.
Does this make a sufficient reason for practice in Divine Worship, that Man
commands it? And he produces P. 81.
Bishop Jewel's Testimony, that God is to be obeyed, rather than Men; which we
assert: And P. 82, 83, 84.
Bishop Davenant, condemning the blind obedience of the Jesuits, and asserting
unto all men such a judgment of discretion, that they may consider whether the
things be true, or lawful, which are directed by their Superiors. And then he
tells us, That P. 84.
blind Obedience is the very foundation of Popery; but the judgment of private
and practical Discretion, is the foundation of the Protestant Religion.

11. Now it is true, That to yield such a blind Obedience to Superiors, as to
account them Infallible, and thereupon to account that all they deliver must be
received, without any liberty to examine the truth, and lawfulness thereof, is
a foundation of Popery. But to own the due Authority of our superiors and
Spiritual guides, and to acknowledge, that they may determine matters of Order
and Decency in the Church, and that it is the duty of Inferiors to submit
themselves to such Determinations, if they be not contrary to the Will of God,
is that which Christianity requires, and is a necessary foundation of Peace
and Unity. What judgment of discretion, the true principles of Religion do
allow in all Men.
And to make use of our own judgments and understandings, so as to reject
whatsoever we certainly know to be false and evil, is that which all true
Religion and good Conscience, and the Christian and Protestant Principles will
direct. But for any to think it their duty, to close with such Arguments as
seem to them probable, but are weak and fallacious, and are of no clear
evidence and undoubted certainty; and to account themselves warranted thereby,
to pursue what is against the established State and Order of the Church, and
its Peace and Welfare; and against the Authority of their Superiors, or any
rules of Duty; this will lead Men into all manner of evil Faction, Schism, and
Fanaticism, and such Principles cannot justify themselves in the sight of God,
or good Men, as I have Chapter 1. n. 9. etc.
above showed.

12. This is that which the Writers of our Church declare against, and so do
Protestants generally, and so does particularly Daven. de Judice Controvers. c.
1.2.
Bishop Davenant, who first reserving to god the Supreme power of judging,
ibid. c. 16.
asserteth to our Superiors, the ministerial judgment, whereby, besides other
things, they have Authority to judge, de constitutionibus ad externam Ecclesiae
politiam pertinentibus, of Constitutions belonging to the external Polity of
the church. And he then declares the necessity of a judgment of discretion in
all Christians: which he understands, according to the sense I have in the
former Paragraph expressed, as is manifest both from that Treatise, and the
other cited by this Writer, In Epist. ad Colos. c. 2. v. 23. And he
particularly acknowledges it, to be the general sense of Protestants; ibid.
cap. ult.
Judicium hoc discretionis vanum, falsum, fanaticum esse concedunt, quando ex
privato sensu and phantasmate ipsius judicantis dimanat; verum, firmum and
legitimum, cum oritur ex lumine infuso Spiritus Sancti, and dirigitur ad normam
verbi: That they acknowledge that judgment of discretion to be vain, false and
Fanatical, when it proceeds upon the private sense and fancy of him that
judges; but that it is true, firm and allowable, when it is enlightened by the
Holy Spirit, and directed by the rule of the word. Wherefore he gives no
allowance to men's proceeding upon probable and uncertain arguments, but only
upon manifest and clear evidence, in opposing what is established by Superiors.
And indeed disobeying upon such grounds as are not manifest, is but a blind
disobedience, which may well be ranked with blind Obedience. We and all sober
Protestants are against both; and if the former should be followed, by Children
to their Parents, and Servants to their Masters, especially in working Fancies,
and weak Judgments, it would bring nothing but confusion into Families.

13. This Author also tells us, That to justify the Subjects obedience, p. 89.
there must appear to him, some reason from a Divine command, requiring the
thing. Here if the Precepts of Unity, Peace, Order and Obedience be sufficient,
these are frequent and clear; but if he still mean, that no particular thing
may be established, unless, it be some way determined, by a Divine Precept,
this I have above refuted, n. 2. etc.

14. He declares also ibid.
that Gestures or Actions, that are idle or insignificant, are in worship
sinful; and therefore may not be submitted to. Now it is well, he hereby
disallows the fond notion of them, who decry our Rites or Ceremonies, because
they are significant. The app^inting Liturgy in what sense to reckoned among
things indifferent.
But this can make nothing against Forms of Prayer, where the words express the
sense of the Prayer, and are not only significant, but very useful. And though
such thngs as are appointed, in the due order of the Church; as the Forms and
Order of Prayer, Hymns, and such like, have been usually and frequently called
things indifferent: the word indifferent here, is only to be understood in
opposition to what is in it self absolutely necessary, but not in opposition
to, or distinction from what is good, useful, and profitable to Edification. so
that such things are, if I may so call them, in themselves legally indifferent,
being particularly established by no Divine Law, and which may as things of
Ecclesiastical liberty be appointed by Superiors, not morally indifferent, as
if the appointment and practice of them, was not useful, profitable and good.

15. He says also, that ibid.
an appropriated habit is in worship sinful (the contrary I have sufficiently
proved in my B. 2. chapter 1. p. 320, 321. and chapter 4. p. 492, etc.
Libertas Ecclesiastica) and that for the Superior to command any such thing,
will be a sin unto him, as Gideons Ephod was a snare to his house. Jud. 8.27.
But the Scripture says, concerning Gideons Ephod, which he made and put in his
own City; that all Israel went thither a whoring after it; which thing became a
snare unto Gideon, and his house. So that public Idolatry in which Gideons
family did in all probability join, was that whereby ^^ became a snare unto
them. Of Gideons Ephod.
But neither was the Ephod of Samuel, 1 Samuel ^. 8. nor of David, 2 Samuel 6.14.
nor the Levites garments, 2 Chr. 5.12. at all blamed in the Holy Scriptures,
but approved, though none of them were appointed by the Law of God: and
therefore it must be something of another nature, than the bare making an habit,
that was of so ill consequence to Gideon and his Family. And as this at last
came to a manifest and general Idolatry, so there was probably something
blameable in its first Constitution. St. Austin Quaest. super Judic. c. 41.
from the great proportion of Gold, allotted tot he making this Ephod, Jud.
8.26. thinks that other ministerial things, relating to Gods service, were
made therewith: and others think that Gideon making an Ephod, like the high
Priests, intended to worship God, and enquire of God thereby, in his own city,
and not in Gods Tabernacle, which was to erect a Schism. Now Schism and
Idolatry, whether they be commanded by Superiors, or practiced by Inferiors,
jointly or separately, will be a Snare unto them, as they were to the house of
Gidcon.

16. Our Author takes notice, that p. 91.92.
commands in Scripture, and examples, are urged for forms of Prayer; and says,
it can never be proved, that there were forms of Prayer in the Jewish Church,
or that the Lords Prayer was intended as an ordinary form: and however what is
produced from these things, concerning the State of the Gospel, he calls
pitiful inconclusive Arguments. And says he, if David made Psalms (which are
Prayers) he was a Prophet, but did he make an Act of Uniformity too? But that
the Jewish Church had forms of Prayer; that the Lords Prayer (which surely was
delivered under the Gospel) was delivered as a form, and that the Arguments
from hence are cogent, I have proved in the former chapter. And since the
ordinary practice of the Jews, in using forms, was approved by our Savior, it
is not considerable, whether any of them were established by David, or other
persons in Authority. Yet David did in some things appoint rules and orders for
the service of God, 1 Chr. 25.2, 6. And Hezekiah and his Princes, ordered in
what form of words the Levites should sing praise to God, 2 Chr. 29.30.

CHAP. V. Chapter V.
Of other Prayers, besides those in the Liturgy, and public service of the
Church.
HIs fourth Argument is, That the admitting, or agreeing Reas. Account. p.
93.94.
Ministers to use ordinarily prescribed forms of Prayer, is of sufficient force
to restrain the total exercise of the gift of Prayer, which is sinful. And that
by this principle, Ministers may not pray otherwise, before and after Sermon.
And that if the Magistrate shall hereafter make a Law, p. 95. Of the use of
other Prayers, besides forms.
of the Latitude of that of Nebuchadnezzar, to tie men to pray no where to God,
neither in Family, or Closet, but in the use of a form, or the Churches
Prayers, they must obey this also, by the same reason, which obliges them, to
use set forms in the public use of the Liturgy. And, says he, p. 97.
who shall determine, how far the Magistrate may impose, or not impose? Now in
this Chapter he produces nothing new, to prove it a Duty, for men to use their
own abilities of expression in Prayer; but says, p. 93.
he takes this to shine sufficiently in its own light.

2. Wherefore, in answering this Chapter, I shall premise three things, First,
That I have above showed, Chap. 1.
that men's abilities of expression, which are not properly the gift of Prayer,
are not on other accounts necessary to be used; unless, where they be
requisite, for the better performing the worship of God.

3. Secondly, that since I have manifested, the usefulness of set Chap. 1. and
2.
forms in themselves, for the public offices of Religious worship, and do not
found their lawfulness, and expediency merely upon Obedience to our Superiors;
therefore I can be no way concerned here, to determine, or enquire after, the
extent or boundaries of the Authority of our Governors, in ordering things
relating to the worship of God.

4. Thirdly, The extent of Governors Authority, not requisite to be
questioned, in every act of Obedience.
That it does not express any great reverence to Superiors, for any to deny
submission, to the lawful and useful Constitutions by them established; and to
plead for this, by putting other Questions, about their power of commanding
things, which seem disadvantageous to Religion, and by declaring, that the
extent of their Authority, is not sufficiently stated. What confusion would it
bring into Families, if when Children, or Servants, are commanded there to join
in any exercise of Religion, as in prayer in the Family (which our Author
grants, must be a form to them, who join in the words of others) they may be
allowed to answer, they will not comply therewith, because, by so doing, they
may be imposed on in Religion, from one thing to another: and they must first
know the strict bounds of that Authority they are under, and who shall fix
them. And the like may be said, of the several conventions of different
Separatists. But if it be enough, to say in the case of a Family, that they may
then deny actual obedience and subjection, when any thing is required of them,
which they know to be evil; we acknowledge the same in our case.

5. And thus much might be sufficient, Whether it be a duty, to use other
Prayers besides form^.
for answer to this Chapter, as it has a particular aspect upon the Authority
and commands of our Governors; yet because, I would not avoid any thing, which
may seem material and useful, I shall farther here consider, Whether, and how
far, Christians, or Ministers, are under any obligation to Duty, to use any
other prayers, besides set forms, in all those particular cases mentioned in
this chapter; before and after Sermon, in the Family, and in the Closet. Now
comprehensive and well ordered forms, being with deliberation fitted to the
common state of Christians, and the ends of our Religion; are as I have above
showed, to be preferred, in the public worship of God. And that before or
after Sermon, there should ordinarily be new and varied Prayers, I know no rule
of reason, or precept of the Christian Religion, which requires this, and
makes it a Duty.

6. Before Sermons.
Before Sermons Of Religious Assembl. c. 7 p. 237. and 252.
Mr. Thorndike observes, That in the flourishing times of the Church, Preachers
were wont to commend themselves, and their labors to Gods blessing. But this
was frequently, at least, done by a set form. A short form to this purpose, of
St. Ambrose is, as Mr. Thorndike there observed, yet extant, may be seen in
Ferrarius de ritu concion. and from thence in Alliance of Divine Offices. Chap.
6. p. 183.
Mr. Hamon L'estrange, and the form of Aquinas, is published by Casland. Prec.
Ec.
Cassander. And some of the most eager of our Dissenters, ahve formerly kept
themselves ordinarily to set forms before their Sermons. And our Church in her
Can. 55
Canons, has given direction for a form of Prayer, to be used before Sermons,
as is there expresed, or to that effect: but among the different practices, it
is not necessary for me here, to consider what liberty is hereby allowed to
Ministers.

7. In the close of the Sermon, After Sermons.
many Homilies of the ancient Writers, had some supplicatory expressions,
interwoven as a conclusory part thereof, and sometimes with particular respect
to the subject of their Discourse. Such things were in some of their popular
Discourses, practiced by Basil. Hom. 2. and 6. in Hexaem. De Jejun. Hom. 1. de
Mam. Mart. and de Lib. Arb.
St. Basil, Naz. Orat. 2.6, 10, 28, 42. V. Schol. Gr. in Not. Billij in Naz.
Orat. 18.
Gr. Nazianzen, St. Chrysostom, in some Homilies, ad Pop. Antioch, and others,
and also in St. Augustine, St. Gregory, Bernard, and diverse others: and our
Church does not seem to dislike this Method, which is imitated in some of her
Homilies. But yet this was used but in some, either of the ancient Homilies, or
of those of our Church; St. Austin used most requently the same conclusory
Prayer, or Collect, which is extant in Aug. Tom. 8. page ult.
his works. The method used by several persons, of the several persuasions
among our Dissenters, who frequently have prayed over the several heads and
parts of their Sermons, that their Auditors might be persuaded of them, stands
chargeable with this fault among others; that as Disc. Prayer extemporet.
Bishop Tailor observed, as their Sermons according to their different parties,
were often directed against one another, and in contradiction to one another, so
by consequence were their Prayers, and therefore the matter of Prayer must be,
in many of them unsound. But that excellent Collect, Grant we beseech thee
Almighty God, etc. much used in our Chnrch after Sermons, (besides, the
expressions in the Prayer for the Church militant, to the same purpoe) is so
pithy, in desiring the blessing of God, for obtaining the best effect of the
Sermon, that no pretense can remain, to charge any blame upon those, who use no
different concluding supplicatory expressions of their own.

8. Indeed there are sometimes extraordinary cases and occasions, which are
proper matter for our public Prayers and Thanksgivings, and ought not to be
omitted. It is observed by Ann. Eccl. An. 37. n. 7.8.
Banonius, that the Church presented their especial Suffrages to God, for the
good success of Gratian against the Alemans: and Athan. Apol. 2. ad Constant.
Athanasius did publicly do the like, for Constantius against Magnentius. Such
cases as are most weighty, or usual, are provided for by particular Collects in
our Liturgy; and if they be cases of particular persons, they may be comprised
in the Prayer for all conditions of men, and the general Thanksgiving,
according to the directions in our Liturgy. And these parts are as blameless,
and as commendable in their use, as the ordinary parts of the Liturgy. And if
there should yet be some great and extraordnary case, which is not sufficiently
contained, under any of these Prayers or Praises: Dr. Hammond declared, Pract.
Catechism l. 3. Sect. 2.
The Church sometimes permits, and upon incidental occasions prescribes, other
forms in the Congregation. Such are upon great special reasons, the Prayers for
particular public days of Humiliation and Thanksgiving. And if says Mr.
Discour. 1. on Mat. 6.9.^
Mede, There be any sudden unexpected occasions, for which the Church cannot
provide, the spirit of her Ministers is free. Who will forbid her Ministers to
supply in such a case, that by a voluntary and arbitrary form, that the Church
could not provide for in a set form? But such cases where this is necessary,
will be very rare, and must keep their place.

9. And for Family, and Closet Prayers, what ever freedom of expression any man
has, whenever he devoutly and piously addresseth himself to God in a form of
words, in the daily and constant matters of worship, Of Prayer in Families and
Closets.
as acknowledging, and adoring the Divine excellencies and perfections,
blessing God for daily benefits, and seeking to him for such mercies, as we
always stand in need of; I do not see, how the least blame can be charged upon
such a Person, but his mind may be enlarged, his memory helped, and his
affections quickened thereby.

10. And so far as I can discern, the ordinary use of a well composed form, may
usually in a Family, most conduce to the promoting inward and serious Piety,
upon many of the same grounds that prove it expedient in the public service.
and the disparaging the use of forms of Prayer in Families, is both
unreasonable, and really hurtful to Religion: Forms of Prayer of great use in
Families.
it being the probable occasion of the total neglect of such Religious services
in many Families; many persons on this account, omitting the use of all Prayer
in their Families, rather than to expose themselves to be censured as weak, in
using a Form. And other persons of greater confidence, perform this much worse,
both as to matter and words of Prayer, and the profit of others, than they
might do in the use of a good form. And I desire, that this thing may be
seriously and carefully considered, it being of concernment to the real profit
and good of men, however it may be slighted by some conceited and self-pleasing
Persons. To this purpose, Cappellus declared his dislike of them, who These.
Salmur. de Liturg. n. 30.
certas orandi formulas, etiam in privatis familijs damnant, condemn fixed
forms of Prayer, even in private Families. And what Melancthon speaks, in
approbation of forms in private, as well as in public, I have Chapter 3. Sect. 3.
n. ult.
above noted.

11. But because, many private cases, which may be of great concernment to
particular persons and Families, may be more properly taken into the subject of
Family Devotions, than of public Assemblies: it is expedient, and ordinarily
necessary, that such things also be upon emergent occasions presented to God,
for obtaining his help and blessing, in as suitable words, as the person is
able to express, and without affecting variety of words. And in the Closet,
many things concerning the persons own particular case and wnats, which cannot
be comprised in a form, are needful matters of his private and retired
Devotion: which may either be by vocal expressions, or only by the inward
lively motions of a contrite spirit, as the person himself finds most
expedient. Wherefore Dr. Hammond declared, ubi sup.
That it is supposed by the Church, that in the Family and Closet, every man
may ask his own wants, in what form of words he shall think fit. and what he
said, and the liberty therein expressed, was observed as an instance of the
moderation of our Church, by my worthy friend Moderat. of the Chur. Chapter 7.. 6.
Dr. Puller. And I acknowledge, That if any Superior should forbid all such
private Confessions and Petitions, this being against the duty of a Creature,
and a Christian, ought not to be submitted to. But blessed be God our Governors
are far enough from any such thing, nor ought our Author to propose it.

12. Wherefore the result of this matter, is this, That the performing the
public offices of the Church by a set-form, is that which is really profitable
to Christianity: and the appointing them to be so performed, ought not to be
looked on, as mere act of Power and Dominion, in our Superiors, which is
designed no farther than to try the Subjects obedience; but in this case, it is
a pious act of their Christian care and prudence. If all Ministers should
perform these Offices, without prescribed Forms, how many inconveniences,
Constant use of Liturgies is advantageous.
and what impediments to piety must constantly in some things, and might
frequently in others thence ensue, is easy to be considered; and in many
things has been, and in part will Chapter 9.
farther be expressed in this Book. the celebrating these Offices by some with
a Form, and by others without one, would be an engine of Discord and Faction;
and men of high conceit and rash confidence, who are most apt to miscarry,
would be most impatient of that restraint, from which others are free. And if
any one person under a wel-constituted order, use his own different way of
celebrating Divine Offices, (being member of that, and not of any foreign
Church) even this would be against the peace of the Church, and so not to be
desired of any good man. And this man also, whoever he be, unless he keep
himself to the same seriously premeditated things, will not perform these with
that exactness, that is in a Form, and may be sometimes liable to defects of
memory or expression. And Forms of Prayer are also of excellent and singular
use in Families and in Closets.

13. Yet we account other Prayers, besides Forms, in their place Dr. Hammon.
Pract. Catech. of Prayer.
allowable. God forbid, that any should speak, against the general matter and
design of such a Work, as St. Austins Confessions, or the pious Meditations and
Soliloquies, Other Prayers in their place useful.
of many ancient and modern devout men. And we esteem it so useful an exercise
of Religion, for Christians frequently to set themselves to take a strict
account of themselves, and penitently to confess their particular neglects and
trespasses, and to implore the needful mercies and blessings of God, that none
need to fear, that any Christian Governor will ever prohibit such things. And
whereas by a constant strict course of Piety, some persons have arrived in a
tranquillity of mind, to an higher degree of Mortification, Of the highest and
most raised Devotions.
and holy sublime affections to, and sense of God, and his Goodness, than the
generality even of other pious Christians; it is fit that in their private
Devotions, they express, as they think most expedient, the noble, grave and
sober sentiments of their Souls, in acts of Adoration. But such things are
unfit for public conventions, being too high for the common state of men, who
can more easily admire them, than join in them. And all En. husiastical
pretenses, and the methods of speaking mystical nonsense, deserve no where
either commendation or any allowance.

14. And I humbly beseech Almighty God, in the name of his only Son, who
founded his Church in Unity, that all men who have any love of God or goodness,
may at length learn to study, and to do and speak those things, which tend to
peace in the Church, and not to make breaches therein, and to divide it. And
that we may all more thankfully acknowledge the signal mercy of God to us, That
we have the privilege of having been educated, in so excellent a part of the
Christian Church, as our Church is. And God grant that this Discourse, may have
some influence toward these ends.

15. But it would be diligently considered, No peace and order, where every
person or party will undertake to new-model the Church
That no Church can enjoy Peace, but that whose members keep their own station,
and the governing and ordering part, is left to the Governors and Superiors, to
be determined by them, others yielding due submission in things lawful. But if
every man, or every several club, or distinction and party of men, may claim to
themselves a power, of new-modelling the state of the Church; this not only
tends to confusions, but speaks them to intrude themselves into the office of
the Supreme Governor; Chapter VI.
and that they may overlook and overturn, all the foundation and fabric of a
well ordered Church.

CHAP. VI. Of Preaching, and whether it be as reasonable, to preach in a Form
of Words composed by others, as to pray in a prescribed Form?
HIS fifth Argument is, Reas. Acc. p. 98, 100.
that if Ministers may obey Men, in performing their Ministerial Acts of solemn
Prayer, by the prescribed Forms of others; upon the same principle may all
Ministerial Gifts in preaching be suppressed, and Ministers may be appointed to
read some Discourses of others to the People. Now what I premised to the
foregoing Argument, may be again useful to be considered here. But since I have
manifested, the ordinary and constant usefulness, of set Forms of Prayer in
Public Worship, for the advantage of Religion; if he be able to prove the
same, concerning the ordinary using the Discourses of others in Preaching, (as
I conceive he never can) he has then, and not till then, made the Cases
parallel.

2. The different practice of the Christian Church, Forms of Prayer, being most
expedient, do not prove it best to have constant Forms of Preaching.
which for many Ages before the Romish Corruptions overspread it, constantly
used set Forms of Prayer, when their Sermons were composed by the Preachers
themselves, and the like usage in our own Church, may incline modest men to
think, that these Cases are not alike. The Apostolical Doctrine required of the
Clergy, that they should be apt to teach, and so does our own Book of
Ordination, and the Can. Ap. 58. Syn. in Trul. c. 19.
Ancient Canons required their diligent practice herein: And the use of such
Instructions or Exhortations, in the Christian Assemblies, is of as early
Original as from the first Ages, as appears from the Testimonies of Just. Mar.
Ap. 2.
Justin Martyr, and Tert. Apol. c. 39.
Tertullian; and the continuance thereof is evident from very many Homilies,
Tractates and Orations of following Ages, which are yet extant. And our Author
may, if he please, consider such differences as these.

3. First, Preaching is directed to Men, but public Prayer to God in the name
of Men. And therefore as both Disc. 1. on Mat. 6.9.
Mr. Mede, and Of Prayer extem. n. 57.
Bishop Tailor, observe, It is convenient the People should know beforehand,
what the Minister puts up to God in their names, but there is not the like
reason for Preaching. And variety of Words and Expressions, have a considerable
efficacy upon the minds of Men: Whereas it is a thing unworthy of God, as
Instit. l. 3. c. 20. n. 29.
Calvin observes, to think that he is humano more persuadendus, to be wrought
upon by words as Men are. For while he searches the Heart, his attention is
not to be procured by arts of Speech, or himself moved, affected, or pleased by
a new composure of words. Several things which make the case of Prayer and
Preaching herein different.
And besides this, a pious reverence not only in our Hearts, but in
well-deliberated words, and in gestures also, is considerable in the sight of
God; and this is more due to God to whom we pray, than to Men to whom we preach.

4. Secondly, As the matter for Sermons, or popular Discourses, is of so large
extent, as to include all the great and necessary Doctrines and Rules of
Religion, so that are too often corrupt Notions and Opinions which subvert Piety,
and ill practices which may be apt to prevail, at some special times and
places. Now here a watchful Minister, will endeavor to beat down all such
Notions and Practices, which cannot well be done but by his own Abilities, in
answering all their Pleas, Pretenses and Objections.

5. Thirdly, By this means he can acquaint his People with such things as he
thinks, in the Matter of them, most proper and suitable to them, and can propose
these things in such a manner, as is most agreeing to their Capacities; which
thing was noted by Tr. 13. Chapter 1. Div. 7,
Bishop Whitgift, to be of great advantage in order to profiting. And to this
purpose also it is reasonable, that the Method and manner of Composure, of
popular Discourses, be such as suit the Place, Time and Age, wherein we live.

6. Fourthly, It is not only requisite that our Public Service of God be at
all times so comprehensive, as to take in all the usual parts of Religious
Worship: Adoration, Thanksgiving, and Supplication, for all ordinary Blessings;
but this also seems enjoined by Apostolical Precept, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and
therefore it is expedient to secure this Comprehensiveness, by a public Form.
But it is no way needful, that every Sermon should contain all the necessary
points of Doctrine and Practice, but such a particular Branch thereof, as the
Speaker thinks most proper. But was he to declare or express all the Articles,
or Doctrines of the Christian Faith; certainly a known Creed is more fit for
this purpose, than a new Composure. And besides this, as the temper of the Age
accounts it a Disparagement to preach a Sermon composed by another Man; this
temper having nothing of hurt in it (as the condemning Forms of Prayer has) is
fit to be complied with, for the benefit of the Hearers. And these things will
show, that able Ministers ought ordinarily to preach Sermons of their own
preparing. See also Chap. 7. n. 4.

6. But notwithstanding this, Instructions and Exhortations in some cases best
performed by a Form.
it is far from being a Sin, for Ministers in their instructing others, to make
use of what is Composed by others, in such cases, where this may tend to the
greater profit or advantage, of the Persons to be instructed. In acquainting
others with the principles of Religion, or Catechizing them, it is certainly
best, that this be done in the use of a known set Form of Catechism. The short
exhortation in administering the holy Communion, (and the like may be said of
other Offices) where the Graces to be exercised, and the Duties to be
performed, are constantly the same, may be better performed in a well composed
pithy Form, than by a continued varying.

7. And for Sermons, as it may be very allowable, to cite one or more sentences
from an approved Author, when this may be of good use: So I know no reason, why
in some cases the using a larger portion of another Discourse, openly and
freely owning the Author, may not be done without any blame, where the
authority of the Person, or the Discourse it self, might have a greater
efficacy, on the promoting Goodness and Religion, than what the Speaker might
express in his own words. It was Aug de Doc. Chr. l. 4. c. 29.
St. Austin's judgment, that such of the Clergy who could not compose
Discourses, so well as they could speak them, might do good service to the
Church, by publicly pronouncing what was made by others. And I doubt not, it
had been much better for many Teachers, and for the Church of God too, if they
had sown good Seed, received from other faithful Hands, rather than to have
dispersed their own Tares, Errors, and unsound Doctrines. In the Primitive
Times, it was ordinary, to read publicly on the Lord's Days, in the Christian
Assemblies, the Epistles of some eminent Men, and some Historical Relations
which concerned the Church: And there would be the same reason for a Sermon or
Homily, where that might have a remarkable influence on the Churches good. And
it is most probable, that the Apostle Whitak. Controv. r. 1. Qu. 3. c. 4.
Daven. in Loc.
requires an Epistle written from the Church of Laodicea, to be read in the
Church at Coloss, Col. 4.16.

8. But though I have a due value and esteem for Preaching, yet I can by no
means come up to our Author's height, who not only calls Preaching the Reas.
Acc. p. 99.
greatest Ordinance of the Gospel; but he also declares P. 108.
from the Commissioners in the Savoy, that Preaching is such a Speaking in
God's Name to the People, and a speaking his Word, Truth, or Message, that we
make God a Liar, if we speak a falsehood in his Name. Surely he who thinks, Of
the due esteem and value for Preaching.
that every expression he uses in Preaching, must be a Divine Oracle, and that
if he be guilty of any Mistake, he becomes thereby so horrid a Blasphemer, as
to make God a Liar; had need confine himself to the manifest Articles of the
Christian Faith, and the clear and plain rules of Practice, or to some certain
form of sound words; and for other things had need shut and seal up his lips,
until he have surely attained (what he must never expect) the gift of
Infallibility: and our Author, if he preach at that loose rate which he
writes, has reason then to tremble and stand amazed.

9. In preaching, the Minister by considering the general rules of Goodness and
Truth, and the particular Doctrines of the Scripture, and divine Revelation, is
conscientiously toward God and man, to declare what he discerns to be useful
and wholesome Truth. And in the main and necessary things of the Christian Faith
and Life, there is such certain evidence thereof, that I do willingly call it
infallible: and other Expositions, Directions and Notions, he is to express
with pious care and sincerity, but not with any pretense to Infallibility. I do
acknowledge, that it is matter of Lamentation, that very many persons are much
wanting in that due Reverence, they ought to have for their spiritual Guides,
whom God has set over them; and their Counsels, Instructions, Exhortations and
Discourses are not received with such an humble temper of mind, as is suitable
to be expressed, to Gods officers and Ministers, unto whom he has committed a
very great Authority. And there is also another great miscarriage on the other
hand, in them who lay too high a stress upon preaching and hearing, and too
little upon practicing; or upon the fearing God, and keeping his Commandments;
upon honoring the peculiar Institutions of our Savior, in reverencing the
Ministry he sent, highly esteeming the Unity and Communion of the Church which
he founded, celebrating the Sacraments which he instituted; and in being
peaceable, humble, meek and charitable toward men, and obedient to Superiors.

10. I shall take no further notice of any thing in this Chapter, save of one
clause wherein he reflects on the Ministry of our Church, and their preaching,
says he p. 107
How many Discourses of late years, have we had in Pulpits, pretending to
prove, men have a natural power to things spiritually good; That we are not
justified by the imputed righteousness of Christ, but by our own works? How
many perfect Satyrs, Railleries, and evomitions of the lusts and choler in the
Preachers hearts? These are the kind words and meek expressions, of one who
judges and censures the sharpness of other men; and in almost every Chapter,
he breaks out into the same temper and spirit of Reproaching. Now whosoever
they be, Our Author no fit person to complain of contumelious expressions in
Sermons.
who are over fierce and Satirical in their words, I shall neither justify nor
excuse them. But thus much I shall add, that within these Twenty years last
past, I have heard very many Sermons, preached by Reverend and worthy persons
of the Church of England, besides what I have preached my self; and in all
these Discourses, I do not remember, that I ever heard so many Contumelious
expressions, toward our Dissenters, as may be found against the Ministry of
our Church, in this one little Book of our complaining Author.

11. And concerning Discourses, to prove that men have a natural power to do
things spiritually good, Of the power of men to do things spiritually good.
it is easy to see through his mistake. All the Ministers of our Church, with
thankfulness believe and profess, Jesus Christ to be the Savior of the World;
and that the new Covenant of grace is confirmed through him, and that we are
now under this day of grace and Salvation; wherein God gives his aids and
assistances, besides the instructions of his word, the mighty motives of his
Gospel, and the benefits of the Ministry of reconciliation, and his holy
Sacraments. And surely all this, is more than the power of Nature. Now to say,
That men under these helps, if they be not wanting to themselves, may work out
their own Salvation, believe and submit themselves to the Doctrines of the
Gospel, and live Godly, Righteously and Soberly: this is not to exalt the power
of Nature, as our Author mistakes it, but it is to own the advantages of the
Gospel Grace, and of the mediation and undertaking of our Savior. But if under
these gracious circumstances, men are in no capacity of doing any spiritual
good, or of being persuaded to it; I cannot understand to what end Preaching
can tend, when it must be in vain to exhort them to their Duty, and
unreasonable to reprove their neglect of it; Nor can they act without natural
powers and faculties.

12. And concerning Justification there is as little reason for his complaint,
as in the former head. We disclaim every where merit in our own works and
actions, and do here acknowledge, That our Savior has, as our mediator,
interposed by his Obedience, Righteousness and Sacrifice, to expiate our Sins,
give the sanction to the new Covenant of Grace and Righteousness and to assure
the mercy of God, and pardon and forgiveness upon the terms thereof. Of the
terms arnd condition of our justification, an its dependence upon the
Righteousness and Sacrifice of Christ.
But if we speak of the Gospel-condition of Justification, that must be
performed by us our selves, and we do account, that as Repentance, which
excludes forsaking evil and doing good, is a necessary condition to the
obtaining pardon of sin (which I presume no sober Christian will deny) so
consequently, it must be necessary to our being justified; unless we can be
justified, and yet unpardoned.

13. Or to speak plainly, all sin whatsoever stands forbidden by the Holy rules
and precepts of the Gospel, as much as by any other Dispensation: but the terms
of the Gospel Covenant, are so gracious and extensive, that they admit
Repentance, tender pardon, and accept the sincere obedience of the Christian
faith and life; yet all that is necessary, as the condition of the Gospel, in
order to our being accepted into Gods favor, is necessary to our
justification. And that a renewed and Holy life is necessary hereto, is
manifest, from that wrath and threatening, denounced against workers of
Iniquity, and from the impossibility for them to find favor, in the sight of
God, who do not do the Will of our Father which is in Heaven.

14. Yet the Gospel- justification, upon these terms of Grace in the new
Covenant, is still through the redemption of our Savior, and faith in him: and
from the benefit of his Sacrifice, we receive the pardon of our sins, in the
Holy Sacraments of the Gospel especially; in the administration of which
Sacraments, is a principal part of the benefit of the Ministry of
Reconciliation. But it cannot be, that the Righteousness of Christ, should be
so imputed to us, that we should be looked on, as having done or suffered, what
he did or suffered: for then must every Christian be reputed and looked on, as
having performed the office of Mediator, and having paid to God the price of
Redemption, for the sins of the World, and as having made Reconciliation, and
obtained thereby Remission: and then besides many other gross absurdities, they
might be invocated on this account, for the dispensing the same. And they who
are reputed to have performed complete actual sinless Obedience, need no such
Grace, whereby they must receive pardon and Remission. But the Holy Jesus by
his Sacrifice, has made a way of Reconciliation, and, as our Mediator, has by
his Blood established that new Covenant of Grace, whereby through his
Redemption, we may be justified, upon performing the Conditions of his Gospel.
And I see no other blame can be charged on this Doctrine, unless it be, that it
is consistent with it self, and with what was delivered by the Apostles of our
Lord.

CHAP. VII. Praying by a Form, is very rashly and injuriously charged with
mocking of God.
IN his seventh Chapter, he produces his sixth Argument, which is, That for
Reas. Acc. p. 115.
Ministers who have the Gift of Prayer, to perform public Vocal Prayer, by the
prescribed Forms of others, is to pretend to do an act of Worship, and at the
same time not to do it, and is P. 115
to mock God and deceive their own Souls.

2. Now this is a very heavy Charge, if it be true, and can be proved; but if
all this shall appear to be a false Accusation, and to be untrue, Chapter VII.
it is then no little Slander and Calumny, upon the Religious Worship of God;
Praying by a Form no mocking God.
and upon all those Churches of God, and Pious Christians, who make use of
Forms in their Prayers. And to make good his Charge, our Author must here recall
and deny, what he has so often granted, That the use of Forms of Prayer are in
themselves lawful, and that they may be lawfully used by Ministers in some
cases. For if they be a mocking of God, and the duty of Prayer is not really
performed, in the use of them, but is only pretended so to be, to the deceiving
men's own Souls, then they are certainly unlawful.

3. Now his chief and yet trifling Argument, to make good this very weighty and
heavy Charge, is this, P. 116, 117.
That the command to go and Preach, requires the Ministers exercise of his own
Inventing and Composing, and therefore so must the Command to make public
Prayers. Now in answer to this, it may be sufficient to say, The nature and
exercise of Prayer is sutably performed by a Form.
That every Duty is to be performed, sutably to the nature of the Duty it self,
or in such a manner, as may best tend to the pleasing of God, and the
exercising true Piety therein. But in public Prayer, Religious Devotion, and
gracious dispositions and desires toward God, are the great things to be
practiced; and to that end, the use of a Form of words in public Service, is
well accommodated, as I have showed, and therefore may be not only fitly, but
profitably used.

4. And with respect to Preaching, though our Author will find it a difficult
task to prove, that in every Instruction, a Minister is bound to have new
matter of Invention and Composition; yet his greatest mistake is, in supposing
the cases of Instruction, Exhortation, or Preaching, and of Praying, to be
parallel. For where in instructing others in the knowledge of Religion, Of the
comparing Preaching and Praying.
it is the Ministers duty to teach them what they before understood not, and to
that end to use new Words, that they may learn Knowledge; it can never be
imagined, that he ought also to acquaint God in Prayer, with what he before
understood not. And when in Exhortations to Men, to make them better, and to
change their Tempers, it may be of good use, to suggest to them, and urge upon
them, such Arguments and Considerations, as before they either never thought
of, or at least did not duly consider the weight and force of them; there is
not the like reason of using frequently new words and expressions to God, as if
men were to put him in mind, of the force of such things, as he had not
considered. Surely nothing can be more weak, than to insist on such unlike
Comparisons, instead of Arguments.

5. But besides this, he tells us, that those words in Scripture, which are
used in commanding public Prayer, are not used concerning the reciting or
reading the words of others. Thus he says when Prayer is commanded, Hos. 14.2.
and Joel 2.17. the word is (...), say, and he says, P. 118.
He is not awar of any Text in the Old Testament, where that word signifies the
Recitation, or repetition of Words formed by others. Of the words of Scripture
which enjoin Prayer.
Now if this was true, it would be very little, or not at all to purpose,
unless he could prove, that the using of the words of a Form, is not Speaking,
or Saying. But yet in truth, notwithstanding his pretense to Critical
Observations, in which he is also very unhappy, this very word (...) to Speak,
or Say, is very frequently in the Old Testament, used for reciting the words
prescribed by others; as in Genesis 32.4. Deuteronomy. 26.5. Deuteronomy. 27.14. and in many
other places.

6. And he tells us, P. 119.
That in the New Testament, the Precepts for Prayer are expressed, by (...), to
Pray, and (...), to Say, to wit, in Praying. But what means he? Are these
words never made use of for the reciting a Form of Prayer, when they are the
very words, by which the Lords Prayer is prescribed? The former (...).
Mat. 6.9. and both of them (...).
Luke 11.2. And the former of them, together with the Noun derived from the
latter, is used (...).
Mat. 26.44. to express our Savior his Praying the third time, saying the same
words. I might also mind our Author, that giving thanks to God, is in Scripture
expressed to be done, in reciting the words of others, 1 Chronicles. 16.7. But
though I was not willing to pass by any thing which he urged, though but under
the appearance of an Argument, I must entreat the Readers pardon, in giving him
the trouble of perusing a thing so very inconsiderable, as this Argument is.

7. Indeed he tells us, p. 120.
he lays a greater stress upon his former Arguments, than upon this: but what
little reason he has, to lay any such stress upon them, may, I hope, by this
time appear. But he says, he cannot think this altogether vain and
impertinent; but of that, let others judge. But withal, this Argument had need
to be of great force, when upon the account of this, he tells us again, in the
Ibid.
close of this Chapter, he makes it a great question, whether if we think to
fulfill the command of God, for vocal Ministerial prayer, by reading Forms, we
should not come short of what God requires, and both mock God, and deceive our
own Souls. Thus some men with extravagancy enough, can speak great and swelling
words, supported, or rather unsupported, by weak, feeble and impotent
Arguments. And his last words of this Chapter are, That there is neither
Precept nor President, for praying by Forms; which assertion, he has
peremptorily avowed again and again, though it be plainly against both the
Scriptures, and the sense of the Universal Church, and the contrary thereunto I
have above Chap. 3. Sect. 2, and 3.
plainly proved.

CHAP. VIII. C. VIII.
Forms of Prayer are falsely accused, of debasing the Ministry, and of several
unblest Effects.
HIs seventh Argument is, Reas. Acc. p. 120, 121.
That Ministers performing their Ministerial acts in Prayer, by prescribed
Forms, tends to level the sacred Office of the Ministry, to the capacity of the
meanest of the People: but says he, p. 121.
God would never have erected an Office, to do what the meanest person in the
Church, has a natural ability to do. And he there adds, there is nothing
plainer in the whole Book of God, than that God has established a peculiar
order of persons to be his Ministers, to declare his will unto his People, and
on their behalf to intercede with God in Prayer. And he says, if this p. 122.
might be performed by Forms, there would be no great reason for any peculiar
maintenance for the Ministry, nor for Honor and Reverence to them. Now in
answer to this, I shall observe four things:

2. Obs. 1. That he gives a very defective description, of the work and
business of the Ministry; as if it only consisted in being Orators, and in the
well using words and expressions. Of the work and Office of the Ministry.
And this is no more than a master of a Family may do, to instruct and pray for
those of his Family: but it must be the exercise of a special power of Office,
which must be the chief Ministerial performances, of those who are in the
Sacred function of the Ministry. Wherefore by special Authority and Commission,
to receive persons into the Church, in the name of Christ; and to govern them
in it, to exercise the power of the Keys, to consecrate the holy Sacraments,
and therein to exhibit in Christ's name, the tender and seal of remission of
Sins, and by his Authority Ministerially to dispense Absolution and Remission,
to them who are qualified to receive it, by performing the conditions of the
Gospel; these and other such acts of Authority, are the great and chief parts
of the Ministerial office, which he wholly omits. And even instructions and
prayers, performed by those who are in this Sacred function, are of greater
moment, because of their Office. But what God works by their Ministry, is
especially to be regarded; and if this was nothing, as Chrysostom. in 2 Timothy c. 1.
Hom. 2.
St. Chrysostom argues, (...), etc. Thou thy self neither have any Baptism,
nor do thou receive the Sacraments, nor do thou enjoy Benedictions, nor
indeed art thou a Christian.

3. Obs. 2. The use of Forms of Prayer is far from rendering learning, knowledge,
and such like abilities useless, or needless for the Ministry: nor can any man
that knows the work and duty of a Minister, judge so. Besides his preaching, so
as to approve himself a workman that need not be ashamed; he is by his Office,
to be a spiritual Guide to the consciences of others, Learning and knowledge
greatly requisite to the Ministry.
when they apply themselves to him for Counsel and Advice, not only for their
comfort, but chiefly for their practice. He is to direct and oblige Offenders,
who are under his care, to observe the due rules and exercises of Repentance;
and this with respect to conscience, men ought to take more notice of, than
most persons do. And in a time, when the Church and Truth has many enemies
(and this Author might have been better employed, than to have appeared as one)
the Ministers of the Church are to be able to convince, or at least to confound
their Adversaries, and detect their errors, and the danger of them. They are
also to watch over their charge, and as much as may be, to preserve them from
being led aside, by the slight and cunning craftiness of them, who would
deceive them. And these are things, which require far greater abilities, study,
care and diligence, than is needful to enable any man, to use fluent
expressions in Prayer.

4. The weanest persons A^^ristred in the Church, when forms of Prayer were
dis^^ed most.
Obs. 3. The time when Liturgies were laid aside in England, was that time when
many of the meanest of the People, both men of weak abilities, who yet could
speak confidently, and also men of bad and erroneous Principles, were thought
fit to be taken into the Ministry, in the place of many sound and able men, who
were cast out. And the performing Prayer, and popular Sermons, after that
method our Author contends for, in expression of their own, may be effected, to
the satisfaction of great numbers of ordinary hearers (whatever may be
pretended to the contrary) by a man who has a forward tongue, and but
indifferent parts, without any considerable learning or study, and without much
knowledge of the Doctrines of Religion and Christianity. There are so many
evidences of this, among the several parties of our divided Separations, that
the chief persons among our Dissenters, do very well know the Truth thereof.

5. Obs. 4. Our Author's assertion, That God would never erect an Office or
Order of Persons, to do what the meanest of the People, have a natural capacity
to do, is also certainly false. The Priests Office under the Law.
For under the Law, the office of the Priests, was particularly appointed to
minister before the Lord, by offering Incense and Sacrifices, though Corah and
his Company, and any other of the Israelites, had Natural Capacities of knowing
how to order the Incense and Sacrifices, as well as the Priests. And the High
Priest was to offer the Sacrifices for Atonement, and to enter into the Holy
of Holies, with the Blood thereof; and performing other Rites of Expiation, to
bless the People; and upon occasion to ask counsel of God by Vrim and Thummim.
The Levites also, were to wait on the service of the Tabernacle. And these and
such like Rites, were accompanied with Prayers and Praises; but I have Ch 3.
Sect. 3.
above showed, that prescribed Forms were used in that Service. But none of
these Persons were by their relation to the Tabernacle, or Temple, or by virtue
of the Offices of Divine Appointment, Scribes or Rabbis, or Doctors of the
Law, and Sons of the Prophets, to teach the People in their Synagogues. Indeed
after the time of David, when the Ark had rest in the Tabernacle he pitched,
many of the Levites were made Officers and Judges of the People, and were
therefore to direct them in the Law of God, and the knowledge of his Will, and
some of their Scribes might also be of this Tribe, as well as of any other. But
this was not their Original Office, further than as good Men, and the special
Servants of god to attend upon his Worship, they would by their Example, and no
doubt by their Counsel also, excite others to perform carefully the Service of
God, and to keep his Law.

6. And with respect to what our Author speaks, God's Law made a large
provision for the Maintenance of the Levites
concerning the Maintenance of the Ministry, it is worthy to be observed, that
God himself then thought fit, for the Honor of his Worship and Ministry, to
allot and appoint a greater Income, for the support and plentiful subsistence
of the Priests and Levites, than our Clergy now enjoy, and the Revenue of their
Priests, was greater than that of our Bishops. For the manifesting of which, it
may be considered, that after the Israelites came out of Egypt, the other
Tribes besides the Levites, had males from twenty years old and upward, six
hundred thousand, three thousand, five hundred and fifty, Numb. 1.45, 46, 47.
But the Levites being numbered from a month old and upwards, were only twenty
and two thousand, Numb. 3.39. And in reasonable conjecture, those of them who
were under twenty years old, might be near as many, as those who were above it.
But if there were thirteen thousand Levites, who were twenty years old and
upwards, we will proceed upon that Supposition as probable. Now God gave the
Tribe of Levi all the Tenth, or Tith of the Land of Israel, Numb. 18.21, 24.
and the other nine parts being reserved to the other Israelites, these thirteen
thousand Levites, who were grown Men, had a larger provision, from these Tithes
alone, than sixty seven thousand grown Men of the other Israelites had, though
every one of these Israelites, was to have their inheritance of Freehold, and
none was to be poor among them. So that every man of the Levites, had from this
Revenue alone, a more ample Provision and Subsistence, than five Men of the
other Tribes, who were heads of Families, taking them one with another. But
then if to this be added, their own Flocks, and the Suburbs of their Cities,
Numb. 35.2, 3. and their share, in the extraordinary Tithe of the third Year,
Deuteronomy. 14.28, 29. and in some other Oblations, Deuteronomy. 12.12. Chap. 16.11. These
things with other Accessions and Privileges, which they had, make their
proportion much more considerable.

7. The great Revenue appointed by God for the Priests.
And whereas at that time, there were only five Persons consecrated Priests;
Aaron the High Priest, and his Sons, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar,
Exodus 28.1. Nadab and Abihu being dead without any Issue, Lev. 10.2. Number. 3.2,
3, 4. there remained then only three Persons, who ministered as Priests, in the
Service of God. I confess their number after increased, and so did the number
of the other Tribes. But these Priests had the tenth of the Tithe allotted to
them, Numb. 18.26, 28. and upon this account alone, there was appointed by the
Divine Law, for these three Priests, a much greater Revenue, than for six
thousand Men fit for War, of the other Tribes. But besides this, the Priests
had the First Fruits of the Land, which God gave to them, Numb. 18.12. which,
as Philo. de Sacerdot. Proem. and Honor. p. 830, 831.
Philo, agreeably to the Scripture observes, included even the First Fruits of
their Bread, and the best of their Corn, Wine, Oil, and other increase. And it
has been observed from other Jewish Writers, that some gave the Fortieth part
of their increase, others the Fiftieth, and others the Sixtieth part for their
First Fruits. The Redemption also of the Firstborn of Men, and of them who
were under a Vow, the Firstlings of the clean Beasts, and the redemption of
other Firstlings; their proportion in the several Sacrifices, in some the wave
Breast, and heave Shoulder, and the Skins of several Burnt-offerings, as Ibid.
p. 833.
Philo noted, and the Scripture it self declares, Lev. 7.8. These things,
besides their interest in Free Will Offerings, and voluntary Oblations, do very
much add to the greatness of their Revenue, which was assigned them by the Law.

8. And we may further note from Josephus, who was himself one of the Priests,
that notwithstanding this ample Provision, God then made for these his Priests,
yet they were not at the expense of the daily Sacrifice, or the Lamb that was
offered every Morning and Evening; but that was defraied Jos. Antiq. Jud. l. 3.
c. 10.
(...), by a public or common Charge: Only the daily Meat Offering was
prepared by the Priests, upon their own expense, and the Bullock offered for
the High Priest, upon the day of Atonement, was at the charge of the High
Priest himself, as Ibid.
the same Author attesteth.

9. Thus whatsoever our Author may think to the contrary, the Wisdom of the
most High God did annex a great, and honorable Revenue, (such says Ubi sup.
Philo, as might resemble the glory and majesty of Princes) for them who were
his Officers, though their Work was none other, than what other Persons had a
natural capacity to do. But other Persons had not a Divine Authority to act as
God's Officers, and to intermeddle in his sacred Institutions. And it is a much
more high and honorable thing, in the sight of all who have any lively sense
of God upon their hearts, to be his Officers, invested with a special and
excellent authority from him, than to be so far popular Orators, as to be able
to speak to the satisfaction of the People, or even to their admiration.

10. Having now ended his Syllogistical Arguments, he tells us, P. 123.
He shall only instance in one thing more, and that is those unblest effects,
which, says he, are matters of Demonstration to us: These P. 131.
he calls, Effects obvious to every Eye; and entering upon them says, P. 124.
Let us instance in some too evident effects of Forms of Prayer, etc. And the
first of these is, The filling the Church of God, with an ignorant, lazy, and
sottish Ministry. He indeed here excepts very many Persons, but yet these are
his reproachful words, reflecting upon the generality of our Ministry, or in
his own expression, those that fill the Church. Now such an open notorious and
shameless Calumny, ought not to pass without just rebuke. The great accuser of
the Brethren, to his grief and indignation knows, that there is now in England
as Learned, Able, The English Clergy falsely aspersed as Ignorant, Lazy, and
Sottish.
and Industrious a Clergy, as this Church ever had, or any other of so numerous
a Ministry: Nor can the main Body of our Clergy, be called Ignorant and
Sottish, but by such Persons as make no conscience of Slandering, and speaking
falsely. And truly, Sir, to say no more, the reason and understanding part of
this your Discourse, which you entitle, A Reasonable Account, etc. is very far
from being above the pitch, of the generality of that part of our Ministry,
which I have had the opportunity to know. And if you were indeed the main Men,
acquainted with Knowledge and Learning, and had the advantage of Truth also on
your side, as you pretend, how easily might you bafle and confute us, by clear
and plain Evidence, which your selves are sensible enough you cannot do. And
therefore your most usual Methods are, to work upon the fearful and melancholy
temper of some, and upon the fierce and angry disposition of others, and upon
the earnest and weak affections, and the prejudices of many well-disposed
People: But you can hope to prevail little, on men of even, calm, and composed
Tempers, and Persons of the best judgment and understanding.

11. A second effect he instanceth in, is, P. 125.
The loss of Ministerial Gifts and Abilities. But blessed be God, there is no
loss in our Church, of any Abilities, requisite for the due discharge of the
Ministry. But he here again falls upon the gift of Prayer; of which, as also of
the lawfulness, and profitableness of using of Forms of Prayer, I have
sufficiently discoursed, in the former part of this Book.

12. His third and last, P. 130.
If not effect, yet experimented consequence of prescribed Forms, is a flood of
Iniquity, for more than an hundred Years, caused thereby, in our parts of the
World. Hence says he, Bitter words in Pulpits, and printed Books, which have
vexed righteous Souls, who have had nothing to reply, but, The Lord rebuke you.
(They it seems wholly imitating the pattern of the Archangel, contending with
the Devil, Jude 9. Ill effects charged upon Liturgies, proceed from another
cause.
Or of the Lord checking of Satan, Zech 3.2.) Hence says he, Are ungodly
representations to Superiors, of Men of whom the World was not worthy; hence
suspensions of so many thousands, and Ruins of so many eminent Servants of God
and their Families, and hence the separations of Christians from one another.
Thus our Author charge a great deal of evil, upon our Laws and Governors,
which according to his rash Position they must stand guilty of, unless all
enjoined Liturgies, and Uniformity be utterly rooted out of the Church, and
unless they will lay aside that care they ought to have, of the due order and
decency of the public Worship of God; and unless an Inlt may be opened, to
such Confusions, Heresies, yea, and Blasphemies, as in these Kingdoms were
brought into the Church, when Liturgies were shut out, and the public Worship
was performed even by men of Erroneous principles, according to the vanity of
their own minds. But that our Author has mistaken the true cause, of that evil
he complains of, I have showed Chapter 3. Sect. 4.
above, to which I refer. But that the violent and ungrounded oppositions,
against lawful constitutions, are too great an inlet into much iniquity, will I
think appear manifest enough, from what I wrote in my B. 1. Chapter 1. throughout
Libertas Ecclesiastica. And I do both heartily pity, and am really grieved and
sorry, for the temper of such persons, who by their mistakes, and too much of
eagerness and passion in them, not only expose themselves to outward
inconveniences, but which is of far greater concernment, both run themselves
into many sinful undertakings, and are the occasion of much hurt and evil to
the Church of God; and make use of the latter, as a remedy against the former.

13. If any persons among us, have spoken or written, with overmuch passion or
sharpness, we will defend no man, wheresoever he deserves blame: but our
Governors, and the Constitution of our Church, are not concerned herein. But
have our Dissenters replied nothing but calmness and meekness, as this Author
suggests? One might be apt to think, upon considering such words, that he is a
stranger in England, and unacquainted with affairs here, and may have lately
come from some unknown Island, separated from converse with other parts of the
world. I heartily wish their party had been as free from all fierceness, as
this Author pretends, Many sad and evil effects from the opposers of our Liturg^
and then both Church and State, would have enjoyed more quiet, and many things
had never been heard of which have been a scandal to Christianity. But if their
writings be reviewed from Martin Mar-prelate to this present year, many of them
will manifest that keen and bitter words, and reproaches and revilings, are no
strangers to their Tents. It seems not wholly to have savoured of the spirit of
Christian meekness, patience and gentleness, when they made such violent
invectives against our Governors, and Establishment, as kindled our late
dreadful civil Wars, when they ejected, sequestered, imprisoned, and put to
Death, great numbers of the Clergy, Gentry and Nobility, for their loyalty to
the King, and their honorable respect to the Church, when they strained their
hands, and more deeply their Consciences in eager and forward shedding the
blood of many thousands of Christians, and dared to stretch out their hands
against the Lords Anointed, and to take away the life of one of the best
Princes, that ever the Christian world enjoyed. All this seems not to speak
only the meekness of the Lamb, and the innocence of the Dove.

14. Besides the writings of particular persons, could it be any other than a
strange fierceness in Answ. to Remon. p. 83.84.
Smectymnuus, in charging the Clergy of our Church, with bringing in a new
Creed, other Scriptures, another Baptism and Eucharist, and another Christ too;
and another Heaven, from what Christianity proposes; which they call an Heaven
receptive of Drunkards, Swearers, Adulterers, etc. Can it be otherwise, than
that passion and uncharitableness made them write, what they could not but know
to be far from Truth? They who have much conversed with very many men of this
way, cannot be unacquainted with their temper of rash censuring, and
uncharitable speaking, and may see reason to conclude, that these are not the
great examples of Christian meekness. These things I should not have mentioned,
but that as a charge against the establishment of our Liturgy, and the care of
our Governors therein, our Author pretends many unblest effects to proceed
from it, Chapter IX.
whilst there is nothing but goodness and mildness in them who oppose it;
though he afterward acknowledges passions in them.

CHAP. IX. The Arguments for set Forms of Prayer, are solid and substantial.
IN his ninth Chapter, he mentions diverse Arguments, produced for Forms of
Prayer, to which he returns his answers. Now since I have above, not only
answered his Arguments, but in several parts of my Discourse, have proved the
profitable use of Forms of Prayer, and have in my third Sect. 2.
Chapter, vindicated several Arguments, which I urged in my Libertas
Ecclesiastica, it is not necessary for me to undertake the defense of others,
which are insisted on by other men. But the five last Arguments expressed in
this Chapter, which were urged by my self, I shall particularly consider,
reflecting also upon some other Arguments and expressions.

2. And indeed my foregoing Discourse, has given a sufficient reply to many of
his answers, Chapter VIII.
to the Arguments he recites in this Chapter. For instance, To the first
Argument for the lawfulness of Ministers using Forms, p. 134. Forms of Prayer
are not forbidden.
that what God has not forbidden is lawful, he answers, that Forms in the case
by him stated, are forbidden by the second commandment; which I spoke to, Chap.
4. that they are forbidden by the precepts to stir up gifts; which I
considered, Chap. 2. and are forbidden by those commands, which require us to
worship God with all our hearts, and with the greatest attention and fervency;
and of this I discoursed Chap. 3.

3. To the second Argument, from the Lords Prayer being a Form, and from the
use of the Psalms of David, and the Priestly blessing under the Law, p. 135.136.
he only repeats what he had before spoken, and the mistakes of which I have
manifested, Chap. 3. Sect. 2.

4. The third Argument (which has respect to 1 Cor. 14, 40.) is, that Forms of
Prayer p. 136. Of matters of order, decency and circumstance.
are matters of mere decency, order and circumstance, and therefore may be
lawfully commanded and practiced. Now though I account them to be more than so,
and not to be only things of external order, but to be more internally of
profitable use, and conducive to the edification and good of the Church and its
members; yet I shall observe what weak answers he gives to this Argument. As to
order he says ibid.
order only respects prius and posterius first and last. This was I conceive
rashly written; for surely he could not be ignorant, that the Apostles (...),
had respect to order of regular constitution and appointment, and not to order
of number and mere succession of one thing after another. Concerning Decency,
he says ibid.
nothing can be decent, but the contrary must be indecent. Now though a Form,
and no Form, are not properly contrary, but rather contradiction; and though
many indecencies have been committed, where Forms of Prayer have been rejected;
and the condemning Forms is worse than indecency, being an hurtful error; yet
his assertion is also false; a white Garment may be decent, and so may a black
one, and yet white and black are contrary. Concerning Circumstances, he says
p. 137.
Forms are no Circumstances relating to the action as humane, because it may be
performed without them. By this reason standing, or any other particular
gesture in reading, is no circumstance, which yet has been usually thought so:
Chapter IX.
and some gesture is at all times, and in all actions necessary. And as for the
words of public Prayer, there can be no such Prayer without any words, nor
unless these words be fixed on, and determined by some person: but the sense
and matter, taken care of in Forms of Prayer, is of an higher nature than a
Circumstance. And he adds ibid.
that he conceives no Circumstances appropriated to an action as Religious, are
left to men's liberty to determine. According to which rule, it must be sinful
for a Father to command his Child, or for any man to determine himself, to
kneel in Prayer, out of any reverence to God, because, this is a circumstance
to the action as Religious. If all this be not trifling, I know not what is.

5. The fourth Argument is, that ibid.
all the essentials to Prayer may be found (I would add, may in public Prayer
be best secured) in a prescribed Form. This Prayer may be in the matter
agreeable to the will of God, it may be put up in the name of Christ, and it
may be attended with exercise of Graces, and sanctified Affections. But he here
answers p. 138. All things necessary and essential to Prayer, may be in the use
of a Form.
that the use of his own gifts is also necessary: but this pretense I have
refuted, Chap. 2. and I presume, no pious man can easily think, that the will
and pleasure of God, should require a man's own abilities to be exercised,
merely to show his parts, when the whole business of Religion, may be every way
as well, or better performed without them; as may appear in every Minister
undertaking to make new translations of Scripture, whenever he cites them,
that his gift may be exercised. But he says also, that ibid.
he has given his reasons, why Praying by Forms cannot be with the same
attention, and intention and fervency: But these reasons I have answered in my
third Chapter, and have manifested the contrary.

6. In his sixth Argument, he produces 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. where the Apostle
commands, that Prayers, etc. be made for all men, and here p. 140.
he takes notice of what I said, in my Libert as Ecclesiastica, p. 109. that
many have thought the Apostle had a special eye to the composure of Forms of
Prayer, agreeably to what the Baptist, and our Savior prescribed to their
Disciples, in this his command to Timothy, the Governor of the Church. And he
observes that I added, though the phrase (...), may either signify, that
Prayers be put up to God, or that they be composed, in this place it may well
intend both. And I now add, That the evidence I have given of the use of Forms,
in the earliest Ages of Christianity, and also in the Jewish Church, makes it
the more probable, that the Apostle might have some eye unto them.

7. But he tells me, but upon what reason I know not, P. 141.
that I am a little critical with the Verb (...), and says he, (...), a Poet
comes from it; but he is but a miserable Poet, who should only read or recite,
Copies of Verses composed by others. Now though I speak of composing Prayers
which might be recited, or publicly used; yet to gratify our Author, I shall
acquaint him, that though the Imperial Law of Justinian, established the use of
Forms of Prayer, as I Chapter 3. Sect. 3.
above showed, yet the praying by these Forms is Justin. Novel. 137. c. 6.
there expressed by (...). But besides this, he is but a little Critical, in
imagining so unreasonable a thing, as that the signification of (...), must be
every where accommodated to (...) a Poet. Our Authors fancy about Poetry.
And he is so unhappy in this his Fancy, as well as in his Arguments, that as
weak as it is, it is not so much as fitted to serve his own Design. I am
persuaded that upon further thoughts, he will not open his mouth, Chapter VIII.
for practicing according to his own little Criticism, or for making Prayers,
after the manner that Poets make Verses; who are for exercising their own
Fancies, and gratifying the Humors of other men, more than for keeping close
to truth, or minding what is serious. And I wish, that no such miscarriages may
prevail with any, according to our Author's way and method, which he contends
for. And with respect to the Speaker, if this Criticism was of any weight; as
they are not the best Poets, who trust themselves to their present sudden
abilities of expression; but rather they, who with great care, consider both
matter and words, and write them down, and have left their Writings for lasting
Monuments; those also must be the best Prayers, which are composed in like
manner. But for the People, they are utterly cut out, from having any part in
making public confessions, or supplications to Almighty God, according to this
conceit, though the Scriptures, and the Language of the Church, admit them to
have a share therein.

8. His seventh Argument, being only intended as a general proof for the
lawfulness of Forms enjoined, is this, Reas. Acc. p. 146.
that a man may lawfully determine himself to the use of Forms, and therefore
may be lawfully determined to them by his Superiors. Here he first tells us,
this does not reach his Question, concerning Ministers who have the gift of
Prayer. But he says further, A Christian has a liberty to determine himself,
where he may not lawfully be determined by his Superior; as in case of
Marriage to a particular Woman, in the choice of his Trade and course of Life,
and a Minister may determine himself, to write his Sermon constantly at length.
Now these words, as many others in this Discourse, being written with
reflection upon the authority of Superiors, I shall consider the weight of
them, with respect to the Case in hand.

9. Wherefore it may be observed, that there are two Cases, concerning the
matter of a Law, which may render it unlawful, Of the lawfulness of being
determined by our Superiors, where we may determine our selves.
to be enacted by Superiors: The one when it takes away the just civil Rights,
and freedoms of the Subject, and imposes unreasonable needless burdens; the
other when it is against the rules of Conscience. In the former case it is
true, that a man's own civil rights, are so far at his own disposal, and in his
own power, that he may here determine himself, to what his Superior may not
determine him. Thus a free Subject of a considerable estate, may if he please
settle his Estate upon another Person, or remove his Habitation into another
Country, or resolve upon a single Life, or put himself into the condition of a
Servant. Another Person of like competent Estate, may determine himself to a
retired Life, a sparing Diet, and a mean Garb; and if he be free from dependent
Relations, may resolve to give the surplusage of his Estate to pious, public,
and charitable Uses. But it is not fit nor lawful for his Superior, so to
deprive him of his civil Rights, as to put upon him so much burden and trouble.
But in things which are lawful or unlawful, according to the rules of
Conscience, where he may lawfully as to Conscience determine himself to any
thing, he may lawfully be determined by his Superior; and if from the
unlawfulness in Conscience, he may not be determined, to any particular thing
by his Superior, neither may he determine himself to it. And the reason of
this is, because if this thing be a Sin, a man may not lawfully determine
himself to it, but if it be no Sin, no principle of Conscience will oblige him,
not to be determined by his Superior. Now the appointing prescribed Forms of
Prayer (taking this in general as our P. 163, 164. In the present Question, we
suppose Forms as good and perfect, as the W^t and Piety of men can make.
Author discourses of it) can be no invading the civil rights of Subjects, or
imposing things burdensome to their outward condition considered apart from
Conscience; and therefore if there be any dispute about the lawfulness hereof,
it must proceed from the rules of Conscience. And therefore if a man may
lawfully determine himself in this case, or any other of like nature, he may
also be lawfully determined by his Superior.

10. He also tells us, P. 147. It is no Popery for People to think their
Spiritual Guides, and Governors wiser than themselves.
That the Author of this Argument, would persuade us to be Papists, in that he
would have men think, that the judgment of Superiors is better than our own.
But he might consider, that since God has appointed Spiritual Guides, it is
both the most prudent course, and the duty of private Persons, in cases of
practice which themselves do not thoroughly understand, to consult them, receive
their counsel, and be directed by them. And his establishing other Governors,
manifests that they are appointed to consider, what within the sphere of
their Power, is useful for the public good, and others are to be directed by
them, and to rest satisfied in their determination. Nor is this any thing of
Popery, but due Christian sobriety. Only this limitation must be admitted, that
as I have Chapter 4. n. 11.12.
above showed, if any thing be proposed by them, which upon plain and certain
evidence appears to be unlawful, those who are under them, ought then to reject
their Direction and Authority, as being contradicted by a greater and higher.

11. The tenth Argument mentioned by him is, That Reas. Acc. p. 149.
Forms are necessary for Uniformity. And here he again declares, against that
pitiful thing, called Uniformity in words, and syllables and phrases, as he
upbraidingly styles it. But having answered this in a Chapter 3. Sect. 4.
former Chapter, and therewith justified Uniformity, and showed the great
benefit of it, and of Forms of Prayer upon this account, I shall not need to
repeat it again here.

12. But that he may vent himself the more, against Liturgy and Uniformity, he
tells us, that in the case of Daniel the Princes resolved p. 150.
it necessary to establish an Uniformity in Prayers; and all must be commanded
to pray only to Darius. Yet here was nothing of Uniformity in words and
phrases, of which he was discoursing; but that matters not, An act for
Uniformity is no such wicked thing, as the prohibitive Act of worship by Darius.
so long as an occasion can be taken to reproach Uniformity. He might as well,
if he had pleased, have called that precept of our Savior, Mat. 4.10. Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve; an act of
Uniformity, only that would not serve his purpose, to insinuate that Liturgy
and Uniformity, are like that act in the time of Darius, designed wholly for
mischief, and to hinder the worship of God, and to establish Idolatry against
the second commandment, though not so grossly as in worshipping the Persian
Kings, who were wont to receive Divine worship, as is evident in the many
testimonies produced by Drus. in Esther. c. 3
Drusius. But these things are so manifestly uncharitable, that every sober
considering man may easily discern them. And since the Holy God appointed
certain Forms of Prayer, to be used under the old Testament, and our Blessed
Savior prescribed the Lords Prayer under the new; and since the ancient Jewish
Church, and the Christian Church in the purest times, used Forms of Prayer; no
considering person, who has any sense of God or Religion, can think that all
these must be condemned of designing nothing but mischievous things, and the
ruining the true way of Religion; how far soever some men's angry temper may be
unjustly displeased, with Forms and Uniformity.

13. This Writer in some following pages, discoursing about the ability or gift
of Prayer, at length says, p. 154.
as we judge, the Apostle, Heb. 5.1. has given us the perfect notion of a
Minister, in the description of the high Priest, he is but a person taken from
men, and ordained for men in things pertaining to God, that he might offer
Prayers and praises, Preach and administer the holy Sacraments. So he. But I
hope he was not knowingly so bold with the Holy Scripture, as to alter and
change both the words and sense of it, as he pleases: when the Apostle speaks
nothing in that place of Prayer, Praise, Preaching or Sacraments, but of
offering gifts and sacrifices for Sins. And therefore I shall pass by this, as
a gross oversight in him; or possibly something may be left out by the Printer.

14. I now come to justify five Reasons, mentioned in my Chapter 4. p. 97.98, 99.
Expediency of set Forms proved.
Libertas Ecclesiastica (besides others which I vindicated, in the third
Chapter of this discourse) for the requisiteness of set Forms of Prayer, which
I there produced, to show not only the lawfulness, but the usefulness and
expediency of Forms.

15. My first Reason was, because hereby a fit, true, right and well ordered
way of worship, in addresses to God, may be best secured to the Church, in the
public service of God. To this he says, 1. That alone is p. 156. 1. as best
securing a fit and right way of worship.
a right way of worship, which God has instituted. And I reply, that Prayer
performed with a devout heart, where the matter is holy, pious and religious,
and expressed without affecting variety of words, is according to his will, and
appointed by him. But he has not instituted the very words we are to use, upon
all occasions, whether we pray by a Form, or by any conceived Prayer, of which
I said more, Chap. 4.

16. He says ibid.
2. That God should be so worshipped is reasonable, but that this should
aforehand be secured, is not possible, in men who may err: nor will Forms
secure it, which may be read falsely and disorderly enough. To which I answer,
That when he requires, that none should be admitted to the Ministry p. 153. and
in other places.
who have not the gift of Prayer, is not the intent of this, to secure as much
as may be, the right performance of that duty? but this may be best provided
for by a Form, as I showed in the second and third Chapters. And what he speaks
of reading falsely, as a disparagement to Forms is inconsiderable, and is one of
the weak Arguments, of the meanest disputants for Oral Tradition, against the
Scriptures. For there may be as many mistakes, Of reading falsely, see also n.
24.
in reading the Scriptures, as the Prayers of the Church: and besides that,
they who would decry their Authority, can talk of their being possibly printed
false, or it may be in some things translated amiss, or that the copies whence
they were translated might not be every where pure and right. But such little
objections, are easily seen through by men of understanding.

17. He says 3. p. 157.
That for twenty years together, the worship of God was performed in a
well-ordered manner, in hundreds of Congregations in England without Forms. Now
though I have showed, ( Chap. 2. and 3.) that it cannot be reasonably expected,
that it should be constantly performed so well in any one Congregation, by any
Person whomsoever, in a way of constant varying, as in the use of a good Form;
yet there ought to be respect had to all our Congregations. And we do not think
that a well ordered Worship, where one or both the Sacraments were in many
places disused, and other considerable parts of Worship and Prayer, (as
confession of Sin) purposely and generally omitted by others, as I observed
above: And the several Sects, ordered the Worship of God according to their own
Errors. And I can as easily be persuaded, that the Papists, Arians, and
Donatists, did rightly order the Worship of God, as that all our several Sects
and Parties did so.

18. My second Reason was, That needful and comprehensive Petitions, for all
spiritual and outward wants, with fit thanksgivings, may not in the public
supplications of the Church be omitted, which can be no other way so well, or
at all secured. To this he says, P. 157.
It is to the shame of our Church, 2 As providing for a comprehensiveness of
Prayers.
if there be not Persons enough sufficient for this, and however there are
some. Now in this Answer he contradicts what in the foregoing Page he said, in
answer to my former Reason, to wit, That it is not possible to secure this
right Worship beforehand. And I have above showed, that no Persons, in using
constant alterations, can perform public Worship, with that due fullness,
comprehensiveness, and pithiness, which is in a well-ordered Form.

19. But that able men may not be under restraint, he is willing that Ibid.
Forms be composed, extant and left at liberty This he again mentions, in the
last Paragraph of his Book. And this method was declared by Didoclavius, Al^ar:
Damasc. p. 613.
whom our Author cites in his Title Page, to have taken place in his days in
Scotland: Who also tells us, that himself having been many years in the
Ministry, had never used them, nor did he think them wise that did. And the
leaving Forms of Prayer at liberty, Ill effects of having Forms left at liberty.
would besides the inconveniences above observed, have this ill issue in the
end. That they who seek to be esteemed of a dividing Party, or are solicitous
to avoid the fierce censures of rash Men, or who are highly conceited of
themselves and affect singularity, or who are Erroneous, and not willing to
walk in the sound path of Religion, will be most sure to avoid Forms, for the
promoting these ill purposes, which will be to the great damage of the Church.

20. He adds that P. 158.
This Argument would hold stronger, for Forms of Sermons. It holds indeed to
prove, a comprehensive summary of the Articles of the Christian Faith, to be
better expressed, in the fixed words of known and received Creeds, then in the
composing of new Creeds, of every man's own making. But for ordinary Preaching,
I have showed the contrary, Chap. 6.

21. My third Reason was, That the hearts of pious men may be more devout, and
better united in the Service of God, by considering beforehand, what Prayers
and Thanksgivings they are to offer up, and come the more ready and prepared to
join in them. To this he says, P. 158.
Such a particular foreknowledg is not needful, and P. 159.
it rather hinders devotion and affection, as he has proved. But this
pretended proof I have answered, 3. As condu^ing to the better preparation of
men's hearts and affections.
and evidenced the contrary, in the third Chapter. And sure the Ministers
premeditation, what he should ask, in the way and method our Author proposes,
which he allows, (and so must every one, who thinks care and consideration to
be useful, in the most weighty things, or who would not be rash to utter any
thing before God, which he would not do before a Prince) must be an hindrance
to his devotion, if the Peoples knowledge beforehand what they shall pray for,
must hinder theirs.

22. He further says P. 158, 159.
there needs no more than a general composure of spirit to seek God, to ask
whatsoever they or others stand in need of, and to confess all Sin. Now I
acknowledge this to be very good and pious. But possibly, what they come thus
prepared to do, as to confession of Sin may be omitted, and also the asking of
many other things, which are reliefs for our constant wants, and other things
may be prayed for, which they cannot so readily join in. And this general
composure or preparation, where these parts of service are omitted, can be of
no more use, than such a general preparation is, in the worship of the Romish
Church, where the vulgar, know not particularly what is expressed by the
Priest. But in a well-composed Form, according to the use of the Reformed
Churches, these things are much better provided for.

23. He says also, P. 158.
If the Minister transgress his Rule, Concerning the People correcting the
erring Minister.
and ask what is not according to the Will of God, the People may withhold
their Amen. But such a worship in others, our Author would be apt to call,
offering the Blind and the Lame; and when they have a Male in their flock, to
offer to God a corrupt thing; when the Speaker in his part does amiss, and the
People at best, must forbear their act of public worship, in the time of it,
and when they come to perform it. But besides this, the people are not able
thus to overruled their Teachers, and it is a great distraction and
discomposure to them, where they must be constantly put upon these doubtful
disquisitions: and it is too plain, that many thousands are misled, by the
errors of them whom they receive as their guides, into Antinomianism, Popery,
Quakerism, and the worst of Sects.

24. But that he may catch at every thing, he says again here, ibid.
that Forms may be read falsely. But beside what I above answered, this is very
unlike, in what is so well known, and constantly used: but if there should be
some words pronounced amiss, the People may more easily help themselves here,
they having often heard and joined in this Form, which is no new thing to them,
and many of them having the advantage of their Books also.

25. 4. As best fitted for the difficultest offices of Sacramental
Administrations.
My fourth Reason is, That such difficult parts of Church-offices, as Baptism
and the Lords Supper, the matter of which requires great consideration, may in
composing a Form be so framed, that men of greatest understandings may with
readiest assent entertain them, and that they may be sufficiently vindicated,
against the boldest opposers. Now this Argument is of the greater weight,
because of the great concernment of Sacramental Administrations. If an error be
committed in any thing essential to Baptism, the Baptism it self, and the
persons membership in the Church, must thereupon be questioned. If the like
happen in the Lords Supper (which without Forms, may sometimes be occasioned by
defect of memory, and some present confusion) there may not only be a loss in
the high benefits and blessings of that ordinance, but (as in Baptism also) a
profanation of the ordinance it self.

26. Here he says, Reas. Acc p. 159, 160, 161.
In the Lords Supper, the Consecration is by reading the words of Institution
and Prayer; the distribution has nothing of difficulty, and the application is
by Exhortation and Prayer, and surely he that can pray and preach can do that.
And for Baptism: the Baptizing in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost, with a foregoing Prayer, and Prayer or Thanksgiving concluding, is, he
judges, sufficient without a Form. Now it is well, that the words of Christ's
Institution in the Lords Supper, and the Form of Baptism, are thought needful
to be retained and observed. But I know not why other persons may not think,
themselves to have a liberty of varying here, with as much reason, as our
Author rejects the use of the Lords Prayer. And therefore it is not certain, if
Forms were laid aside, how far, and how long, he could give any security in
this particular; when some may, as Irenaeus adv. Haeres l. 1. c. 18.
Irenaeus tells us, some who forsook the Catholic Church did, vainly by
obscure Paraphrases, alter the Form of Baptism in the name of the Father, etc.
and the matter also, or the use of Water.

27. And touching Prayer in this case, (and Exhortation also) there is no small
difficulty. For there are various mistakes concerning the Sacraments, which
some would have only significative signs, others will have them to be an
absolute sealing in Christ's name, remission and other blessings, to every
person who communicates in them, and that therefore certain evidence of actual
grace in the Communicants, is necessary to the Administration thereof. And
other mistakes there are, concerning the effects and gracious benefits of the
Sacraments, concerning their efficacy and operation, and the manner of Christ's
presence therewith. Now they who keep a well ordered Form, are in the most sure
and safe way. But they who affect to vary constantly, may from the difficulty
of the Subject, more easily go astray here, than in other cases. And here
particular Persons will be apt to express themselves, according to their own
different opinions, whereby they may err and miscarry, and great inconvenience
and hurt may ensue.

28. My fifth Reason for the expediency of Forms of Prayer, is, That this may
be an evidence to other Churches, and future times, after what way and manner
we worship God, and that such a Church is in its measure a pure and incorrupt
Church. To this he says p. 162.
1. Where has God required the leaving any such Testimony? Now we need not a
special command, 5. As leaving a testimony to others of our right worship.
for every particular thing, which is of good use; and his question might
equally be put concerning Forms of public Confession, which all Protestant
Churches have owned, amongst other ends, for a Testimony of their owning the
true principles of Religion. And the precepts of Christian profession, and the
case of Unity with all true parts of the Christian Church, does at least
greatly recommend such a Testimony as this. And since in all cases of Religion
we are to give an answer to them who accuse us, where that is needful; to this
end, Forms may be of considerable use. Besides the charge of the Romanists,
some earnest Lutherans accused the Churches of the Palatinate, for not having
the Sacraments truly Administered, for the refelling of which, Ursin Praesat. in
Apol. Catech.
Vrsin appeals to their public Forms.

29. He says 2. ibid.
That Forms of Sermons are also needful to this end; but though we have many
volumes of our Printed Sermons, they are no direct part of our common Worship.

30. He says, 3. While we declare our selves Christians, and that we worship
God according to his word, ibid.
we leave a sufficient Testimony, that we are a true Church of God. If this be
true, our Author has now found a precept for giving such a Testimony, if he
allow any precept for declaring our selves Christians: But indeed if persons so
declaring themselves Christians, etc. do enough in this case, then all manner
of Sects and Heretics, who own the Christian name, give sufficient Testimony
of their being a true Church, and of their right worshipping God. But we are
further to profess the true Catholic Doctrine, and to worship God according to
the true rules of Christianity.

31. He says, 4. ibid.
a confession of Faith, is a sufficient Testimony. It is so, as to our
Doctrine, not as to our Worship: since several chief parts of worship (as the
Sacraments) may still be neglected: and there may be many other defects in
worship, performed without the use of Forms, by forgetfulness, or being at a
loss. And withal, no such Confessions of Faith, were kept to in England, by
all those who undertook to guide others in the worship of God, in our late
times when the Liturgy was taken away: nor do all our several dividers, who
reject our Church and Liturgy, agree in any such Confession at this time.

CHAP. X. Chapter X.
A persuasive Conclusion.
HIs tenth and last Chapter, which contains little more than one Page, is has
Conclusion; wherein in some things, he more particularly repeats his own sense,
but adds nothing of any further Argument, which requires my answer. Among
these things he says, Reas. Acc. p. 164.
We do not think it unlawful, to join with another praying by the use of Forms,
provided the matter be good and pious. It is granted that the Congregation may
discharge their duty by joining in public Forms.
We have in such praying nothing to do but to say Amen, whether he who
ordinarily does so, does his ministerial duty, we confess that we question. But
that we may do our duty, though he fails in his, we do not question. From these
words it is apparent, that after all his discourse, he here freely grants, that
all the Congregation, except the Minister who officiateth, may without question
do their duty in the use of Forms of Prayer. And then they cannot be justified
and excused from Sin, who make separation out of dislike of them.

2. But as the conclusion of my Discourse, I shall hence take occasion to apply
my self a little to all those, who dissent and divide from our Church, both
Teachers and People, Our dissenting Brethren entreated (...) consider how they
will answer for such sad divisions.
(and among them to the Author of that Discourse which I have examined, if he
shall please to take notice of it) by serious and earnest persunsion. And that
I would entreat of them is, that they would calmly consider, what good account
they can give to God, and what security they have from the dangers of Sin, in
making that sad separation, wherein they engage, and too much please
themselves. That these Divisions do hinder Religion and Piety, and disorder the
Spirits and Minds of men, is so manifest, that some among your selves have much
complained thereof; That these are the great encouragements to Popery, and that
here is the greatest danger of undermining our Protestant Reformation, both
many Romish Authors, and some of your own Writers do acknowledge: And many other
sad effects there are of these Dissentions.

3. Friends, can you think rending the Church, to be a slight thing? Has God
given you any special leave or authority, to overlook all your Obligations to a
Constituted Church? Or may any Christians at their pleasure, divide themselves
from any Church, When they cannot and mostly do not charge our Commution with
sin.
and frame new Models to themselves? Or will your dislike of some things, upon
highly probable Arguments (as our Author calls them) and yet without any
certainty of truth, secure you? Very few men of any note among your selves,
dare charge any sin upon our Communion, and they who do it, are not able to
give any tolerable proof of their Accusation; and without evidence of sin in
communicating, separation can never be justified. I hope, what this Writer I
have dealt with, has insisted on, for the unlawfulness of ministering by a
Form, will sufficiently appear to be weak enough. And yet his undertaking goes
not so high, as to urge these things against the lawfulness of Communion, or
joining in the Religious Worship, which is so performed.

4. If some things be said in behalf of your Separation, or as proofs that your
withdrawing is no Separation, and your dividing no Schism; which till they be
thoroughly examined and understood, may seem plausible to you, even this is not
enough, Plausible Arguments are no security to them who neglect their duty.
to justify your practices, without certain evidence that Communion is sinful.
Those who are men of any parts and learning among your selves, know how easy
it is, to make some fair pretense and plea for almost any Error; yea, and to
bring some subtle Arguments, against any truth in the World: But no Christian
may hence conclude, that hereupon he may safely neglect his duty, of embracing
that Truth, or rejecting that Error, And I presume that those who are of the
meanest rank among you may know, that there are few causes so bad, but that a
Lawyer, who has used himself to pleading, though he be not a person of
profound skill in the Law, may say something plauble in the behalf thereof. But
this will not justify him who does an injury to his Neighbor in his civil
Rights: Much less will the like secure you, if you act against that which is
really your duty to God, his Church, and other Christians, in matters of
Religion.

5. In reading the holy Scriptures, nothing can be more plain, than that the
Peace and Unity of the Church, The Precepts for Peace and Unity are plain and
weighty parts of of our Christian duty.
is frequently and earnestly commanded and enjoined, and Divisions vehemently
condemned and censured, in the Christian Religion. We profess our selves the
Disciples of that Jesus, who before his Death, expressed his affectionate
desire and prayer for Unity in his Church: And he declared this to be a great
means, whereby his Religion might be propagated, and take the greater place in
the World, John 17.11, 21, 23. In Christianity, while many are eager, in
prosecuting their Contests too highly in other things, the Apostle assures us,
that Peace is one of the great parts in which the Kingdom of God consists, Romans
14.17, 19 And he persuades to Unity in the Church, with very great and
affectionate earnestness, Phil. 2.1, 2. and urges the same in almost every
Epistle: Declaring also, that they who make Drvisions contrary to this
Christian Doctrine, serve not our Lord Jesus Christ, Romans 16.17, 18. But can
any persons be the better Christians, by despising the weighty, and frequently
inculcated Precepts of Christianity? Or can they be the faithful Disciples of
Christ, who are earnest in disobeying him, even in such Precepts, which
(besides his Authority) are intended for the Honor, and the progress of his
Religion?

6. The ancient Church zealous practisers hereof.
How unlike are these practices, to the ancient Catholic temper of
Christianity, which long continued in the Church, suitable to Rules of our holy
Religion; by the ancient Canons of the Universal Church, they who would
withdraw from the established Church, God. Can. Eccl. Univ. can. 65.
and as disesteeming that, would privately, and without the consent of the
Bishop, set up another Church, were under an Anathema. And that the Ancient
Fathers and Christians, accounted the Precepts of the Gospel for Peace and
Unity, to forbid and condemn Divisions and Separations from the Church, and
that they themselves were zealous in rejecting such practices, may sufficiently
appear from what I have showed in Libert. Eccles. p. 17, 18, 19, 20, 23, 24.
another Discourse. But are the rules and practice of Christianity now changed,
and become quite different from what they were in the Primitive Times? Or can
any man pretend to a sufficient Warrant and Authority, for altering the nature
of these Duties, or cancelling their Obligation?

7. I know that some plead on your behalf, that you are not chargeable with any
blameable separation. You meet indeed by your selves, to perform public
worship, in a different way from us, as one Church may do distinctly from
another: but you do not censure the Church of England, to be no true Church,
but profess to own her to be a true Church, and her Communion to be lawful, and
therefore you are chargeable with no Schism, Those Dissers not excused from
schism who professedly acknowledge us to have a true Church, and a true worship.
or unwarrantable division. Now though this profession is not always made, with
sufficient clearness and freedom; the acknowledgment thereof, is so far from
being a plea on your behalf, that it is rather an unanswerable charge against
you. For you reject in your practice, the Rules and Constitutions established
by Authority, concerning the order of the Church and its worship; you generally
express your dislike of our way of worship, or at least your disesteem and
undervaluing thereof, many of you use your utmost endeavors, to draw off
persons from our Communion, and to bring them to your Congregations; and some
of your chief Teachers have written their Letters to that purpose, to such
persons in whom they think they have any great interest, some of which I have
seen, some years since; your party frequently uses sharp censures, against
such pious persons, who will not forsake our Church, to join with you. Your
people ordinarily use reproachful expressions of our service, yea concerning
our Church and Ministry (and so do your Teachers too frequently) and if any
persons forsake you, and return to our Church, they then fall under the load of
your displeasure. And because this behavior is used toward that Church, which
you acknowledge to be a true Church, and her Communion not sinful, this is so
far from justifying your practices, that it renders them unaccountable and
unexcusable.

8. Can it be supposed, The contrary proved, from one end of Christian Unity.
that the Unity and Peace our Savior recommended, for the gaining upon the
world, was only this: that his Disciples and followers should all profess his
Name and Doctrine, but might make themselves of as many several parties as they
pleased, all of them openly before the world, protesting their dislike of the
several models, the other parties embraced, and also of that worship, which was
most publicly used and established by the chief Guides and Governors of the
Church? Now if all this might be done, and care must only be taken, that the
dividing parties, do not charge the main body of the Church, to be no true
Church, or to have no true worship; could this be the way to promote the honor
of Religion, or would it not rather make it appear contemptible? And in our own
present case, do the enemies of the Protestant Reformation, when they observe
your dividing behavior, honor our Reformation, because of our Unity? or do
not you know, that upon this account they upbraid our discord and divisions,
and make ill use of them. And besides this in the Can. Apost. c. 8.
ancient Church, the very forbearance of open Communicating, when this might
only be feared to have such effects, as to cause offenses, and raise suspicions
in the people, was esteemed so blameable, though it might continue but a short
time, that unless a sufficient account was given thereof, it was severely
punished.

9. We know that St. Peter's withdrawing from the Gentiles at Antioch, 2. From
S. Peter's withdrawing at Antioch.
was deeply censured by St. Paul, Gal. 2.11, 12, 13, 14. because of the
disturbance and trouble it might create, to the minds and consciences of the
Gentiles. But none can think, that St. Peter, who immediately before
communicated with them, did now charge them to be no true Church, or that their
worship and communion was sinful: Wherefore it is hence manifest, that there
may be a scandalous and sinful separation from a Church, where there are no
such uncharitable censures.

10. And I appeal unto any party of our Dissenters themselves, whether if any
members of their own number, should new model themselves into different Forms
under several lesser divisions, 3. By appeal to the dissenting parties
themselves, concerning the ill consequences of this their Plea.
and setting up themselves to be new parties, shall desert and declare their
dislike of that Society or Communion, with which they before joined: still
calling them a true Church, and not charging their worship with sin; I say,
whether the Teachers, and remaining members of this first party, will justify
these dividers, who thus separate from, and forsake them. If they will approve
these things, they must profess themselves Patrons of Confusion, and that any
part of a Christian Society may separate it self, when there is no apparent
danger of sin in the Communion, and consequently where no rules of conscience,
will oblige them to forsake that Communion. But if they will blame this
practice, let them reflect upon themselves. And yet these new parties of
dividers are the less to be condemned by them, because they followed their
example.

11. The danger of dividing to be considered.
And now let me prevail with you to consider, what danger they run upon, who
causlesly rend the Church of Christ; whence it will appear necessary, that they
who forsake a well-established Church, must proceed upon necessary grounds. Now
disobedience to any Divine precept, and therefore to this for Peace and Unity;
if it be from carelessness and gross neglect, in not minding the will of God; or
from a temper resolved rather to please it self, than to be obedient; or from
the rule and dominion of pride or passion; is so opposite to the spirit of
Christianity, that he who is guilty hereof, cannot find acceptance with God, v.
n. 16.

12. Joining in divisions are dangerou to wel^ disposed men.
But besides this, I have one thing more to add, which I think is very
considerable, and which possibly you have not observed. It seems plain enough
in the Apostolical Doctrine, that even such persons who unwarily join in
dividing and rending the Church, though they hold fast the fundamental
doctrines of Religion, and a care of many other duties of a holy life, yet for
this miscarriage, and their persisting therein, they diminish their future
happiness, and the degrees of glory, which they might otherwise attain unto, in
the other world. For the proof whereof, I shall give some account, of the third
Chapter of the first Epistle to the Corinthians.

13. When the Apostle reflected upon the Strife, and divisions of the Church of
Corinth, he thence pronounces them to be carnal, and Babes in Christ, 1 Cor.
3.1, 3, 4. or that they were of the lowest sort, 1 Cor. Chapter 3. Considered.
Dividers are not of the highest rank of Christians.
and meanest rank and degree of Christians, if they were Christians at all;
however they might value and esteem themselves. And whereas they were one of
Paul, and another of Apollos, he shows them, that Paul and Apollos, and all
other Ministers of Christ were laborers under God, and neither could, nor did,
lay any other foundation than Jesus Christ, v. 5.11. which is an Argument
against dividing, Chapter 1.11, 12.

14. And the Apostle, Sincerity in Christian Doctrine, Piety and Unity is
greatly rewarded.
still continuing his Discourse, with a particular respect to this Subject
concerning Divisions; tells them, concerning what is built upon this
Foundation, that every man's work shall be made manifest: for the day shall
declare it, v. 14. and that the Apostle speaks this of the day of judgment, or
the day of the Lord (as being opposed to man's day, Chapter 4.3.) is manifest, from
Chapter 3.8. and especially from Chapter 4.4, 5. He acquaints them, that he who shall
build upon this foundation, Gold and Silver, and precious Stones, and whose
work shall abide; that is, who shall keep close to the integrity of the
Christian Faith and Doctrine, and to the purity of the Christian Life, and
therein to Christian Unity, which is one great duty thereof, and a means of
growth therein: (v. 1.3, 4.) he shall receive a reward v. 12.14. or obtain
great and perfect happiness.

15. And he lets them know, that they who build Hay and Stubble, upon this
foundation, and whose work shall be burnt, they shall suffer loss, ver. 15.
Which shows, that they who shall join hurtful Opinions and Errors, though not
in things Fundamental, with the Christian Religion; and irregular Practices,
tho they be not wholly opposite to a Christian Life: Well disposed persons, by
closing with Divisions, lessen their future reward.
And particularly (which is the special occasion of this discourse of the
Apostle) they who upon this Foundation build Strife, Factions, or Divisions,
shall suffer loss. Or these, though they act from mistaken Zeal, or from some
other Principle, which is not inconsistent with all integrity of heart; they
shall with respect to another World, have abatements of reward: Though they
shall be saved as by Fire, or with appearance of difficulty and danger. And
besides the evidence that this Truth has, from the scope, series, and
connection of this Apostolical Discourse; it is manifest of it self, that such
Divisions, as these at Corinth were, which are so much decried and condemned,
in the Doctrine of Christianity, must be reckoned amongst those works, which
shall not abide, but be burnt, to the loss of them who are engaged in them. And
they who are Babes and carnal, (ver. 1, 3.) may well be thought inferior in
reward, to them who are Spiritual and grown men, when every man shall receive
his own reward according to his own labor, ver. 8.

16. And this Apostle still eying their Divisions in the Church, Dividing the
Church, is a practice in many destructive of their salvation, v. n. 11.
goes on to declare their danger, Ver. 16. Know ye not that ye are the Temple
of God? And Ver. 17. If any man desile the Temple of God, him will God destroy.
That is, that they who deprave the genuine Purity of the Church of God, in
Doctrine or Practice, or who defile themselves by any Vice; and particulaly who
so engage in Divisions, as thereby to turn aside from the Christian Life, their
end will be misery. And to this purpose, (...), Divisions, or Seditions, are
reckoned among those fruits of the Flesh, which exclude from the Kingdom of
God, Gal. 5.20, 21. And yet further, with respect to the same thing, the
Apostle, Ver. 18, 19, 20. shows, That what men may sometimes account to be
their Wisdom, if it lead them amiss (as particularly by bringing them into the
paths of strife and discord) is no true wisdom, but folly. And the same thing
is asserted by St. James, Jam. 3.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.

17. And to make it manifest, that in this discourse of the Apostle thus far,
and also in his proceeding yet further, what he wrote was particularly directed
to the case and miscarriage of their Divisions: From what he had hitherto said,
The sense above mentioned further cleared.
he deduceth this Inference, Ver. 21. Therefore let no man glory in Men, i.e.
to make Factions and Divisions, out of pretense of the esteem they have, even
of Paul, Apollos, Cephas, or any other. And he directs, Chap. 4.1. Let a man so
account of us, as of the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the Mysteries of
God. And Chap. 4. v. 6. he tells them, These things I have in a Figure,
transferred to my Self and to Apollos, for your sakes, that you might learn in
us, not to think of men, above that which is written, that no one of your be
puffed up for one against another.

18. And that no man may slight and despise this consideration, and still
conclude, that as he can please himself in such undertakings, so God surely
cannot be so displeased, with these Divisions, I shall take a little notice of
the evil temper, that generally attends them. Besides, The evil attendants of
Schism.
the hurt that is done to the Church of God, to Religion, and to other men; the
engaging in Separation, is also usually accompanied with many disorders of Mind
and Practice. Here are Prejudices toward them, from whom they divide, with
disordered heats and censoriousness; a neglect of due reverence to Superiors;
and a proneness to embrace some particular Opinions, concerning some things in
Religion, whereby they may distinguish their Party, and by opposing others
herein, keep themselves at a greater distance from them. And withal, the
offending Persons are here ordinarily so far pleased with, and ready to
justify, and approve their miscarriages, that they are not willing to examine
their own Errors and Mistakes; are far from being pleased with him, who shall
reprove their faults, and sometimes with him also, who shall in the mildest and
kindest manner persuade them, to consider of their Duty, and return unto it.
And this temper of mind, besides the various woeful fruits, and manifest
consequents of Divisions themselves, may well provoke the Divine displeasure.

19. Wherefore as every Person valueth and esteems the pleasing God, and
minding the duties of the Christian Religion, which are things of mighty
concernment and absolute necessity; they must not think, Care of Unity is
greatly necessary.
they may safely omit the duty of Unity, or any other great command of the
Gospel, and practice only such Rules and Precepts, as themselves please. When
St. Paul did beseech his Ephesians, Ephesians. 4.1. to walk worthy of the Vocation
wherewith they were called; he to this end, among other duties, insists most
particularly, and most largely, upon keeping the Unity of the spirit in the
bond of peace; and inforceth this by very many Arguments, and Obligations to
Christian Unity, v. 3.4, 5, 6. And I hope I need add no more, but the Apostles
conclusive words, in his latter Epistle to the Corinthians, before he gives his
Apostolical Blessing, to them, who had been drawn into Divisions, 2 Cor. 13.11.
Finally, Brethren farewell, be perfect, (or v. Dr. Hammonds Annot. in Loc.
be compact and knit together) be of good comfort (or as others render it not
amiss, receive exhortation) be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of love
and peace shall be with you.

FINIS.

