Imprimatur,

C. Smith, R. P. D. Episc. Land. a Sacris Domesticis.
Ex Aed. Land. Jan. 29. 1673/4.
FIFTY SERMONS Preached at the Parish Church OF St. MARY MAGDALENE Milk-street,
LONDON, AND ELSEWHERE.

Whereof Twenty on the Lords Prayer.

By the late Eminent and Learned Divine ANTHONY FARINDON, B. D.

Divinity Reader of His MAJESTY'S Chappel-Royal of Windsor.

The Third and Last Volume: Not till now Printed.

To which is adjoined Two SERMONS Preached by a Friend of the AUTHORS, upon his
being Silenced.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft for Richard Marriott.

MDCLXXIV.

TO THE READER.
THE good welcome and esteem the Two former Volumes of Mr. Farindon's Sermons
have met with amongst learned and judicious persons, has encouraged this also
to venture abroad, hoping to speed as well as its Fellows. They who have been
conversant in the other, need not be told that these are the genuine Works of
the same Author: for they will soon perceive that the very same spirit
breaths in all, and that they are all of one strain and style. The Work is
sufficient to commend it self: and truly both it and the Author are well worthy
of large Encomiums: But the Wine is so high and rich that it needs not a Bush.

The Sermons on the Lords Prayer our Author did many years since finish; but
had the great misfortune in the time of the late troubles to loose his Notes,
they being by a hand then in power forcibly taken from him. These thou now
have, as near as may be guessed, are more then two parts of three of what he
did Write and Preach on that subject. However, I finding upon each Petition
several Sermons not inferior to any our Author has written, I could not think
it reasonable, because I had not the entire Sermons, to deprive thee of the
better part of them: Which I hope thou will accept, the rather for being in the
affair freely dealt with. And so he bids thee heartily FAREWELL, who is

Thine to serve thee, R. M.

A TABLE directing to the Texts of Scripture handled in the following SERMONS.
Two Sermons by a Friend of the Authors upon his being Silenced. SErmon 1.
Jerem. XII. 1. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me
talk (or reason the case with thee) of thy judgments: wherefore does the way of
the wicked prosper, wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously.
Sermon. 2. Phil. IV. 17. Not because I desire a Gift, but I desire Fruit, that
may abound unto your account.
A Sermon preached by the Author upon his being restored to the exercise of his
Ministry. Gal. IV. 12. Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am, for I am as ye are,
ye have not injured me at all.
A Sermon preached on Christmass-day. Psalm. LXXII. 6, 7. He shall come down
like rain upon the mowen grass (or, into a fleece of wool) as showers that
water the earth. In his days shall the righteous flourish, and abundance of
peace, so long as the Moon endures.
Twenty eight Sermons more. Sermon. 1. Matthew. V. 5. Blessed are the meek: for
they shall inherit the earth. Sermon. 2. Matthew. V. 5. Blessed are the meek, etc.
Sermon. 3. Matthew. V. 5. Blessed are the meek, etc. Sermon. 4. Matthew. V. 5. Blessed
are the meek, etc. Sermon. 5. Ephesians. V. 1. Be ye therefore followers of God, as
dear children. Sermon. 6. Ephesians. V. 1. Be ye therefore followers of God, etc.
Sermon. 7. Matthew. XVIII. 1. At the same time came the Disciples unto Jesus,
saying, who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven. Sermon. 8. 1 Cor. XIII. 7.
-- hops all things. Sermon. 9. Psalm. LI. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy
salvation. Sermon. 10. 1 Cor. VI. 1. We then as workers together with him (or as
helpers) beseech you also, that you receive not the grace of God in vain. Sermon.
11. Luke XXI. 28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up,
and lift up your heads, for your redemption draws nigh. Sermon. 12. Romans XIII.
4. He bears not the sword in vain. Sermon. 13. 1 Pet. II. 13, 14, 15, 16.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme. Or unto Governors, as unto them who are sent by him
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. For
so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance
of foolish men. As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of
maliciousness, but as the servants of God.
Sermon. 14. Psalm. LXVIII. 1, 2. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let
them also that hate him, flee before him. As smoke is driven away, so drive
them away; as wax melts before the fire, so let the wicked perish at the
presence of God.
Sermon. 15. Genesis III. 12. And the man said, the woman whom thou gave to be
with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. Sermon. 16. Luke X. 5, 6. And
into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, peace be to this house. And if the
Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to
you again. Sermon. 17. Luke X. 5, 6. And into whatsoever house ye enter, etc.
Sermon. 18. Romans XI. 20. Well: because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou
stand by faith, be not high minded: but fear. Sermon. 19. Acts XII. 5. Peter
therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church
unto God for him. Sermon. 20. Psalm. XXXVII. 11, 12. For yet a little while, and
the wicked shall not be: yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and it
shall not be. But the meek shall inherit the earth. Sermon. 21. Matthew. XV. 28. O
woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou will. Sermon. 22. Prove.
XII. 14. A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth, and the
recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him. Sermon. 23. Matthew. IV. 1.
Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the
Devil. Sermon. 24. Matthew. IV. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit into the
Wilderness, etc. Sermon. 25. Matthew. IV. 1. Then was Jesus led up of the Spirit
into the Wilderness, to be tempted of the Devil. Sermon. 26. Matthew. IV. 1. -- to
be tempted of the Devil. Sermon. 27. Matthew. XXII. 11, 12. And when the King came
in to see the guests, he saw there a man which had not on a wedding garment.
And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding
garment, and he was speechless.
Sermon. 28. Matthew. XXII. 11, 12. And when the King came in to see the guests.
Twenty Sermons more on the Lords Prayer. Sermon. 29. Matthew. VI. 9. After this
manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art in heaven, etc. Sermon. 30. Matthew.
VI. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye, Our Father which art in heaven,
etc. Sermon. 31. Matthew. VI. 9. Our Father which art in heaven. Sermon. 32. Matthew.
VI. 9. Hallowed be thy Name. Sermon. 33. Matthew. VI. 10. Thy Kingdom come. Sermon.
34. Matthew. VI. 10. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Sermon. 35.
Matthew. VI. 10. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven. Sermon. 36. Matthew.
VI. 11. Give us this day our daily bread. Sermon. 37. Matthew. VI. 11. Give us this
day our daily bread. Sermon. 38. Matthew. VI. 11. Give us this day our daily bread.
Sermon. 39. Matthew. VI. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors.
Or as Luke XI. 4. And forgive us our sins: for we also forgive every one that
is indebted to us. Sermon. 40. Matthew. VI. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we
forgive our debtors. Or as Luke XI. 4. And forgive us our sins: for we also
forgive every one that is indebted to us. Sermon. 41. Matthew. VI. 13. And lead us
not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Sermon. 42. Matthew. VI. 13. And
lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Sermon. 43. Matthew. VI. 13.
And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Sermon. 44. Matthew. VI.
13. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Sermon. 45. Matthew.
VI. 13. And lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil. Sermon. 46.
Matthew. VI. 13. -- But deliver us from evil. Sermon. 47. Matthew. VI. 13. -- But
deliver us from evil. Sermon. 48. Matthew. VI. 13. For thine is the kingdom, and
the power, and the glory for ever. Amen.



TWO SERMONS Preached at the Parish Church OF St. MARY MAGDALENE Milk-street,
LONDON.

By a Friend of the AUTHORS, Upon his being in the late Troubles Silenced.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft for Richard Marriott.

MDCLXXIV.

The First SERMON.
JEREM. XII. 1. Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee: yet let me
talk (or reason the case with thee) of thy Judgments: Wherefore does the way of
the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?
THE most general Question which has troubled the world, almost ever since it
began, is that great Dispute, concerning the just and equal distribution of
temporal blessings; how to reconcile the prosperity of the wicked, and the
miseries of the righteous, with those common Attributes which we assign unto
God: how it can consist with the Divine Wisdom and Justice to promote the
designs of the ungodly, whom he abhors at the very Soul; and to crush and bear
down those whom he calls by his own Name, styles his peculiar people, and whom
he esteems as the Apple of his Eye: For this objection has gone through all
degrees and qualities of men, high and low, rich and poor, miserable and happy,
good and bad: the glorious flourishing and lofty sinner, whom God smiles upon,
as Job speaks, he proves there is no Providence from his own success, because
he goes smoothly on in his wickedness, without the least check or interruption;
Therefore pride compasses him, therefore he sets his mouth against heaven, and
Psalm. 73. 9.
his tongue walks through the earth, scorning both God and Man. And not only
they, but the very people of God too, seeing this unequal dispensation, even
they say, How does God know, and is there knowledge in the most v. 11.
high, v. 11. Nay, David himself professes, the thought of this came so cross
him, as it had almost beat him down: My feet were almost gone, my v. 2.
steps had well-nigh slipped, v. 2. of the same Psalm, and he very hardly
recovered himself, but breaks out into this amazement, Behold these are the
ungodly Psalm. 73. 12.
who prosper, they increase in riches; as if he had said, I looked to see the
righteous upon thrones, and the virtuous gay and flourishing; but contrary to
all expectation, Behold these are the ungodly who prosper, they increase in
riches, which makes him cry out in the next verse, Verily I have cleansed my
heart in vain; in vain have I washed my hands in innocence; a most desperate
speech! and means thus; Let who will stand upon forms and niceties hereafter;
let who will betray his being and livelihood to a timorous conscience: I will
be scrupulous no longer, no longer shall the formality of Laws and Religion tie
me to be undone; if wickedness only thrives, I can be wicked too: Thus David,
thus Habakkuk, and thus the Prophet Jeremy in this Chapter complains, who
seeing the falsness and treachery both of his friends and enemies, still
prevail against him; and seeing the conspiracies of those Priests of Anathoth
(where he was born too) never fail; though God had told him in the first
Chapter, He had made him a defenced City, an iron Pillar, a brazen Wall, and
that he would enable him, by his Divine assistance, to oppose the whole Nation;
whilst he, alas, found himself but a Reed shaken with the wind, blown into a
prison with every breath of a base Informer: Seeing and considering this
cross-dealing, and debating within himself, what this should mean, falls out
into this Exclamation; Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee, etc.

Where you have a Proposition or Doctrine laid down, as certain; and then an
Objection raised against this Doctrine. The Proposition, Righteous art thou, O
Lord, when I plead with thee. The Objection, which seems to oppose it, in these
words, Yet let me talk with thee of thy Judgments: Wherefore does the way of
the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they happy that deal very treacherously?

I begin with the Proposition it self; Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I
Proposition.
plead with thee.

Where you may observe the most singular piety and resolution of the Prophet,
though Gods design looked never so strange unto him, and seemed, as it were a
mere contradiction, yet still he held fast to his Principle, That God was just,
whatsoever became of him or his Cause; That whenever he did plead and argue
with God concerning his Dispensations, He assured himself thus much before
hand, that God would overcome when he was judged; and that his Righteousness,
like a glorious Sun, would break through all the clouds of opposition cast
about it: Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee.

The Prophet did not preposterously conclude God just from the justice of his
action; but, arguing backwards, inferred his proceeding to be just, because he
himself is righteous: He does not first examine Gods ways, and then pronounce
him just, because he finds him so, but first takes this as granted, that God is
true, be the action what it will: and then afterward inquires into the Reason
of it. And whosoever, in reasoning about Gods actions, shall argue otherwise,
or use any other method, will run himself upon many rocks and perplexities, and
at last find blasphemy in the conclusion.

For we read of many actions commended in Scripture, so horrid in themselves,
as no Orator can invent a color to excuse them, but because God enjoined them.

Look upon Abraham's offering of his Son Isaac simply by it self, and that will
seem a Sacrifice fitter for Moloch then a merciful God, who requires not so
much as a Lamb from our fould; but the Lord commanded it, and then the
Patriarchs obedience styled him, for ever after, Gods friend.

Consider the action alone, without other Circumstances, and what a barbarous
thing it was for the Israelites to dispossess the Canaanites of their lives and
fortunes, who had done them no wrong; when the very Heathen called Alexander,
but a more glorious Thief, for doing less? But God, when their sins were full,
had devoted them to slaughter, and then they were called the Lords battles.

David's most bitter curses and execrations would damn a Christian, if he should
vomit them out of spleen; but when the Holy Ghost did dictate them, then they
became the raptures of a zealous Prophet.

Think of Rahabs preserving the Spies by a downright lie; Sampson's killing of
himself, with diverse actions of this nature; and then let me see him who can
name any one thing, which God cannot make lawful, either by doing it himself,
or commanding it in others.

And yet it is a common saying amongst the Civilians and Schoolmen, That some
things are in themselves immutable, which God himself cannot alter; placed, as
it were, out of Gods reach: as that some things are not evil, because God has
forbidden them, but are bad in their own nature, before God has laid any
command concerning them at all; robbing God, as it were, of part of his
Legislative power, which is to stamp every action, good, or bad, as it seems
best to his Divine will and pleasure: Whereas, if you examine it rightly what
they say, God, by his Almighty power cannot make such and such actions lawful,
proceeds not from any Null-obliquity in the actions themselves, but because we
have wrapped them up in irreconcilable terms.

As for instance, God cannot make it lawful for me to commit murder: for it is
a plain contradiction, that ever it should be lawful to kill a man unlawfully;
but then God can make it lawful for me to kill any one living, though I have
never so near a relation to him: So again, God cannot make it lawful for me to
steal, because to steal is to take away another man's right or property, whilst
it is his right; but God can make it lawful for me to possess my self of any
thing which another has, by changing the property, and by giving me a right
unto it; so that we may as infallibly conclude the action just, whatsoever it
be, as we can assure our selves that God does it, or authorizes it to be done,
though it seems to us never so irregular, and even to contradict the Law of
Nature.

Well then does the Prophet Jeremy here lay down this as a Maxim, which he
cannot deny, that God is just, though at first sight, the prosperity of the
wicked seems to overthrow it; being if God does it, it must needs be just,
because without any more ado God makes every action just by doing it, though we
at present cannot find the reason of it.

Why? what would we have? would we be Gods our selves, and call the Lord to
give us an account of all his Actions? would we appoint him a day to bring in
all his Reasons before us, why he deals thus, and thus, with us? Is this that
we desire, with the Prophet here, to dispute the Question with the Almighty, to
circumscribe and bound him in, within our limits, to make a circle round about
him, which he should not pass, but upon such causes, as our wisdoms shall think
fit? But what a ridiculous thing is it in us, to cry up Gods Councels, as
unsearchable; and fling him off, because we cannot comprehend him? First to
confess his paths past finding out, and then renounce God, because we cannot
track him? How childish does it show in us, to acknowledge a Lord God, whose
ways are not our ways, nor his thoughts as our thoughts, and yet bring him to
our bar; set him before our Courts of Justice; and measure his actions by our
line and plummet* which are things of another kind, quite of another nature
from Gods, which bear no proportion to them at all: For he who pronounces of
Gods actions, according to those rules of Justice we have, is guilty of the
same vanity, as if he should measure length by breadth, and judge of colors by
sound, which are toto genere diversa, and carry not the least Analogy to one
another.

Seneca, in one of his heats, says, He would rather believe Drunkenness a
virtue, then Cato vicious for being intemperate; A speech vain enough, in
regard of him to whom he directed it; but most excellently true, if applied
unto God: For we should rather believe Injustice to be Justice; that to kill,
is to make alive; to fail our hopes, is to satisfy our longings; (as we think
of Physicians Medicines, that to poison, is to restore) rather then by
conceiving otherwise, lay the least imputation upon Gods Truth, because we
cannot reconcile his proceedings with our Reason. We do indeed heap up all the
glorious titles upon God imaginable, call him the Almighty wise God, the
Everlasting Councellor: but in our dealings with him, we do by retail, take
them all back again to our selves, and when he comes to exact any duty or
obedience from us, which is troublesome; then we cavil and murmur, as if He had
no power at all, but were indeed a mere Idol. How could it happen else, that
We, who will trust a Lawyer with our whole Estate, and, without any scruple,
give him up all our Deeds and Writings, to manage, as he thinks fit; yet will
not trust our God one moment? but as soon as ever we apprehend, that things do
cross our Interests, presently we fall upon God, accuse his Judgments for the
miscarriage, and as much as in us lies, would take the business quite out of
his Hand, in seeking, by unlawful means, to preserve our selves? How (I say)
can it be else, that we who dare commit our Lives into a Physicians hands, and
never question his Method, though he put us to a new pain every hour, as if he
studied only how to torment us most; will yet leave nothing to the Wisdom and
disposing of God, without Articles, Conditions, at every turn, exacting an
account of his Proceedings?

When the Jews admired how God could possibly lay aside his ancient people, and
turn to the Gentiles, whom he never knew, St. Paul, Romans 9. answers this
Question, with another, saying, Who art thou O man, that replyest against God?
As if he had said, suppose I could not assign any Reason for this Action of
Gods, would it therefore follow, He were unjust? it is God whom thou replyest
against; and thou, who do reply, art but a man; God whose way is in the
Whirlwind, and the Clouds are the dust of his feet, Nahum 1. 3. God
unsearchable in his Councils, and Man so ignorant, that he knows not whether
the ground he treads upon, stands still or moves; God, whose Thoughts do as far
exceed our Thoughts, as the Heavens do the Earth; nay more, for the distance
between us and the highest Star is known, and calculated; but the distance
between us and God passes all Arithmetic; It is infinite.

Why then should we sawcily pry into the hidden Councels of God? If he has let
down a Veil before his Holy of Holies, how should we dare to tear it asunder,
and profanely break into his Mysteries? What? must we know before we will
believe? have a Demonstration for all God does, to give us satisfaction? Why,
perhaps we shall never answer Zeno's argument against Motion: and shall we
therefore sit still all the days of our life, and say, we cannot stir? perhaps
it is impossible to solve Pyrrho's objections against Reality, shall we
therefore fondly conceit, that every thing we see, is but an appearance only?
that it is but your fancy, that I seem now to speak, and nothing but your
imagination, that you think you hear me; a^ ^f our whole life were but one
continued Dream? And is it not as much madness to mistrust the truth and
faithfulness of God, confirmed by so many Clouds of Witnesses, evinced by so
many Ages of Instances, because we cannot answer this one objection against It;
because we cannot see through this one single particular of Providence?

Why then should we think it any indiscretion, with Abraham, to believe against
Hope? or to be sure (though we have least reason to expect it) That the only
way for a man to become a great Nation, is to kill his only Child; and the
means to overcome Canaan, was to go alone, and a stranger into it? Pray, why
should we not believe our Savior, that to save, is to loose; and to preserve,
is to destroy? Why should we imagine our selves any wiser then St. Paul, who
committed his body to God, until the last day, and persuaded himself that God
was able to keep it until that day? 2 Timothy 1. 12. though it past through so
many transmutations and changes, into beasts, fowl, and fish; nay, though it
became part of another Man, which is to rise together with him in the same
Body? Yet this seeming contradiction did not startle the Apostle; He was sure
of the thing, though he knew not how it could come to pass; I know whom I have
believed, says the Apostle in the same place. Yet though Almighty God might
challenge our Obedience, without giving us account of his matters; though we
ought to conclude the Lord righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his
works, when to our eye of flesh he appears neither holy, nor righteous, but
rather the contrary; though our understandings be shallow, and Gods Judgments
profound; though the Well be deep, and we have nothing to draw; yet God like a
most gracious Prince, when he might absolutely command, vouchsafes a reason why
we should obey: submitting himself to our slender capacities, he appears at our
Bars, and to settle our wandering thoughts, to leave us quite without excuse;
exposes himself to be impleaded by us, to be judged by us, to be examined by
us. Which leads me to the Objection, which seems to overthrow the Righteousness
of God; Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? Wherefore are all they
happy that deal very treacherously?

The occasion of this Question, I told you, was, because the Prophets
adversaries did continually prosper, and had power to do him hurt; not simply
because the wicked prosper'd; but that by this their prosperity, they had means
and opportunity to mischief him; to smite him with their tongue, by secret
whisperings; and smite him with their fists, to hurry him from one prison to
another; and at last clap him up in the Dungeon, sealing him up there unto
unevitable destruction.

Now the Prophet demands of God, in this Question; why he did not disappoint
the plots and contrivances of all those, who had designed his ruin; being God
had sent him as an especial Ambassador to his people? So as we may resolve the
Question into this; Why does God suffer the wicked to have any Power to oppress
the righteous?

A Question, if we consider the time, in which the Prophet lived, not
altogether idle or impertinent; for he lived under the Law, a Covenant of
Works; unto which God had annexed Blessings and Cursings, in outward
appearance, altogether temporal, Deuteronomy. 28. But, on the contrary, this Prophet
found by sad experience, that he fled from his Enemies, and not they from him;
that not they, but he groped at noon days, being cast into a Dungeon, which was
only a larger Sepulcher; and that the Iron yoke was put upon his, not their
necks: all which was contrary to the express words of the promise, as you may
read at large in that Chapter: Which made him think God had forgotten to be
gracious; and to ask, wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore
are all they happy that deal very treacherously?

Nevertheless, had the Prophet considered with himself rightly, he would not
have thought this so strange a thing, even under the Law, where God seems to
set bounds and terms, even to his Almighty power, and to confine his absolute
Dominion and Royalty over the Creature, by making Promises, Oaths and Contracts
with his People: Yet he never passed away the Land of Canaan, or any thing in
it, so absolutely, but that still he reserved the title and propriety of it to
himself: All souls are mine, says the Lord, And the Land shall not be sold for
ever, for the Land is mine, and ye are sojourners and strangers with me, Levit.
25. 23. God granted the use of it to them, yet kept still the Right and full
disposal of it to himself: for the Lord calls them (for all this Grant) but
sojourners and strangers, who held what they possessed, under God, and continued
in it no longer then he gave them leave, from whom he might take it away, and
bestow it on whom he pleased: And truly, if we allow God the power but of a
temporal Prince, and grant him to be King of Israel only; we must allow him the
liberty of changing, altering, and dispensing with his own Laws: For we read
how Nebuchadnezzar might slay whom he would, and whom he would he might keep
alive within his own Realms, set up whom he would, and whom he would he might
put down, Dan. 5. 3. And least you might imagine such an unlimited power, over
the Subject, unlawful, God is said to give him this power, in the same verse:
and can we think, for all his promises, the Lord of the whole Earth may not
challenge as much Sovereignty, as a Prince but of a single Shire enjoyes? As
then he, in whom the Supreme power of a State resides, when he grants out
property of life, liberty, and estate to his Subjects, does not by this Charter
debar himself the liberty of taking them away again, if the use of the Public
so require; in like manner God in that (...), as Philo calls the Commonwealth
of the Jews, Gods own peculiar Kingdom, where he reigned temporally, as the
very Civil Magistrate of that Nation, never tied himself up so strictly, by his
promises, as that he might not lawfully, for his own glory, and the good of his
people, upon some extraordinary cases (as to purge, to correct, to punish, or
for trial of them) recall those good things he promised to the Righteous, and
confer them upon the wicked: A most clear instance of this absolute Dominion in
God, we see, in that under the Law, he punishes frequently one man for another;
nay, a whole Commonwealth for the sin of one man; and, stranger yet, whole
Ages of posterity, for the offense only of one single person: Which proves most
evidently, God might, even under the Law (where the Holy One seemed most to be
limited) afflict, without any consideration of guilt or demerit, or else the
punishment could not have justly past the offenders person. And this
consideration, merely, might have stilled the Prophet from asking this question.

But then that there should be some (perhaps in this very Congregation) who
when they suffer (as they think) unworthily; some, who call themselves
Christians, who demand of God, why he gives them up into the hands of a Tyrant,
to suffer what they deserve not? That such ask it, is a wonder to me far
greater then the Question it self: Have you so learned Christ? Pienty, Peace,
and Victory over Enemies, these, indeed, were the blessings under the Law, when
God did not think fit (as yet) to discover fully the Joys of a better life, he
tempted Israel with the bliss of this; and instead of Heaven, showed them
Canaan: But when it pleased him, by Christ, to reveal unto us a new Heaven, and
a New Earth; a Resurrection and an eternal weight of glory, ready to crown all
such as do believe and practice; then he proposes loss of estate, and loss of
friends, poverty, scorn, shame, nakedness, imprisonment, and death it self, to
his Disciples: for these, I, these are the blessings of the Gospel; and by his
example he proved them to be so: For what Crown had he, but of Thorns? what
Scepter but of Reeds? or where was he ever lifted up, but upon the Cross?
Prosperity? Why, were I to study for an Argument to render a Church suspected
for a false One, I would object the outward splendour of it: not that God does
not bestow sometimes temporal blessings upon his chosen people, even under the
Gospel, to refresh and recover their wearied Spirits after a difficult trial:
But this, I say, is quite besides the promise of the Gospel; a thing
extraordinary in respect of it: Prosperity? If this proves the goodness of a
Cause, how many Arguments can the Turk allege to assert his Mahomet? Every
battle he wins is a new Objection against us, and every Town he takes in
Christendom, he gets ground of us in our Religion also: What would become of
the glorious Martyrs, if it should be a blemish to suffer? Why did St. Paul
call his scars, the marks of the Lord Jesus? which, were this true, they were
the stigmata, and brands of guilt: and when the Apostle gloried in his
infirmities and troubles, then he did but cry up his own sins: Nay, upon this
account, we cannot possibly quit the eternal Son of God, whose whole life was
but one continued Passion; We, we Christians should wonder that wicked men do
not always prosper; We should admire how it comes to pass that they do ever
miss of their designs; that a Traitor does not ever escape Justice, and the
Oppressor does not always hold his prey? Which made some pious Christians to
reverence and esteem Affliction so much, to think it so proper and peculiar to
a Christian, as many times they have doubted of their Calling and Election,
upon no other ground but this, because they did not find themselves miserable
enough: therefore for want of others to do it for them, they persecuted their
own selves, and gave away their Estates, when no body else would take them from
them: Like noble Soldiers, they grew weary of peace and ease; and like the
Fencer in Rome, who was sick when he could venture his life but once a day.

And this is so certain and evident, that, if you examine this Question
strictly, it will appear an Objection raised, not out of any desire to clear
Gods Justice, or that true Holiness might be promoted upon the Earth, or out of
any consideration that concerns the glory of God, but merely out of Calamity,
and a By-respect of our own, which I shall show you plainly, and then the
Objection will fall to the ground of it self.

As first, Men ask this Question, Why do the wicked prosper, because we What
praise is it, what glory is it, if, when you be buffeted for your faults, you
endure it patiently, says the Apostle, 1 Pet. 2. 20. No: this only is true
Patience, Patience indeed, when we suffer for doing well: And, pray tell me,
How can men bear injuries, if there be no wicked men to do them? or how could a
man loose his own, were there no violence to wrest it out of his hands? If you
suppose a robbery, you must suppose a Thief too; where there is a Rebellion,
there must be a Rebel, and a Traitor, where there is a Treason, for he that is
born of God cannot sin, 1 John 3. 9. He, such an one, cannot be the Instrument
of any wrong; for when he does unrighteously, he ceases to be righteous: Abel
would never have killed Cain, nor would the Israelites have oppressed Pharaoh:
Paul would never have imprisoned the Romans, nor the Martyrs have killed their
Persecutors; and so we should have lost all these glorious examples of
Constancy and Zeal, if God had not given leave to such wicked acts: lost the
very privilege of a Christian, which he injoyes above the Saints in Heaven,
which is to suffer: Nay, had there been no Priests and Elders to take away his
life, Christ had not dyed; and then, as St. Paul argues, You had been yet in
your Sins: When we suffer for sin, we do (as the Latin's, best of all tongues
express it) dare poenas, give in exchange for some unlawful gain, or pleasure,
either our body to the Executioner, or our estates to the Exchequer: this is a
due debt, which we stand obliged to see satisfied: But when we suffer for doing
well, and yet take it patiently, God will in a manner take this as a courtesy
from us, as St. Peter implies, 1 Pet. 2. 20. You need not wonder then, why our
Savior bids his Disciples be exceeding glad at their afflictions; why Peter
and John went away rejoicing when they suffered for the Name of Jesus? Why St.
Paul was so far from fearing it, that he longed for his dissolution? Why the
Primitive Christians did so much court and admire danger, ruin, and
destruction, for thus we glorify God, and thus he glorifies us again, in
accounting us worthy, and admitting us to suffer for his sake, that as the
Apostle says, At last we may receive the peaceable fruits of Righteousness.

Besides, if good men were not oppressed, we could not have so fair an
opportunity to exercise our Charity: I confess we should pity those, whom their
own folly has brought into Calamity, whom Lust and Riot have cast upon the Bed
of Sickness, or whom Pride and Vanity have impoverished and thrown into Prison:
But whom the Zeal of Gods house has eaten up, and consumed, whom strictness of
Conscience has brought low and diminished, who is poor only, because he durst
not be rich for fear of doing ill, this is such an Object of Charity, as a man
would travel the world to find out, were there not too many nearer home. Our
formerly religious Ancestors have run to Jerusalem to view the pretended
Relics of our Savior, whether true or no: and thought it worth a pilgrimage
to fetch a piece of the wood he suffered on, though perhaps it were a chip of
the next Block: whereas in sheltring the afflicted, we bring Christ himself
into our Houses, for he acknowledges whatsoever is done to his poor suffering
Members, is done to himself. It was one of the promises Christ made to his
Disciples, that they should always have the poor amongst them, Matthew. 26. to
assure us, we should never want an opportunity to exercise that most powerful
virtue of Charity which can lay so many obligations upon God to hear us, to
pardon us, and to reward us both with the blessings of this, and a better life;
so that if you will but consider how much your own Interest does engage you to
help and assist the oppressed, you will scarce find in your hearts to call that
Liberality, which benefits the Giver more than the Receiver, but rather
confess, by dispersing thus, you show greater Charity to your selves, then to
others. For where can you place your money more securely, then when you make
God your Debtor? or how can you lay out what you have to greater advantage,
then by purchasing Heaven with it? one would think to build Churches to the
honor of God, is a most high piece of Devotion: Melius est hoc facere, says
St. Jerome, quam repositis opibus incubare; it is better indeed to bestow our
wealth thus, then keep it by only to look upon. The Holy Father speaks slightly
of this kind of Charity, in respect of that which relieves the poor, and values
one single Alms well placed, as a greater Munificence far, then the erecting
of the most stately Cathedral: For as St. Chrysostom argues upon the same
subject, to build Christ a magnificent Palace, and at the same time suffer him
himself in his poor Members to wander up and down for want of a lodging; to
offer to his Church a Golden Chalice, and deny him a Cup of cold water; to
cover his Altars with the richest furniture, whilst he himself goes about
naked, is just as if you should see a man almost starved with cold and hunger,
and then instead of feeding, and clothing him, you should set up a Golden
Statue to his honor, and let him pine with hunger: though the other be
commendable, yet certainly this expresses our Piety most, when we supply the
wants of the Necessitous, and give the poor and needy a good occasion to bless
God, and trust to his Providence hereafter; because thus we build up a Living
Temple, which in the Apostles phrase is Every true, and sincere Christian. How
much more then should you feed your Minister, who so often has fed you? who for
your sakes, has, with St. Paul, dyed daily, by venturing himself every hour,
and by standing continually with his breast quite open to receive every clap of
Thunder, that came against him: So that though he be not a Martyr, yet he is a
Confessor (who is next to a Martyr) because he was ready to dye in this good
Cause, though he be yet alive, and God preserve him so: therefore in common
Gratitude you ought to assist him now in his distress, seeing his Zeal to keep
you stead fast in the true Faith, has brought him into it. Methinks, I say, you
should a little consider him now at parting: for the Question is not now,
whether Tithes be due Jure Divino, or, whether the Law of the Gospel, as well
as the Law of Moses, require you to give such a measure and proportion to your
Minister; but I ask you now whether you will give a man a cup of cold water in
the name of a Prophet? Whether you think your selves bound in conscience, not
to let him starve at your doors as useless, whom you have praised and admired
so much? this will be Charity indeed: then you will give, whereas before you
did but pay. But on the other side, to say, there goes a good Preacher, it is
pity he has nothing to live on, to give him the wall, or your hat in the
street, and then be glad in your hearts, you are past by him, to drink his
health at your full Tables, whilst he is ready to perish for hunger, to bring
him to your very door in a complement, and then turn him out, is the same piece
of Charity, as the Apostle mentions, as if one should say to the hungry, get a
good meal, or to the naked, put on your clothes, when he has none left to
cover him: and be sure what you give, give to God, rather then to the man: And
be not like the Ravens who fed Elijah, that knew not what glorious thing it was
to feed a Prophet.

Secondly, No man asks this Question, Why does the way of the wicked prosper?
but upon a false presumption of his own Righteousness, because, as he
conceives, he does not deserve what persecution is laid upon him: and whosoever
he be complains thus, if God should lay his sins in order before him proceeding
from his evil thoughts, to his evil actions, from his sins of ignorance, to his
sins of malice and despite against God, would rather think it reasonable to
charge Gods Mercy as too remiss, then his Justice, as too severe. Why does God
suffer the wicked to distress the Righteous? The Supposition is notoriously
false; there has not happened such a Case since the world began; If, for any
ends of his own, God would afflict a righteous man, he could not possibly find
one to exercise this power upon: Perhaps you did never commit Adultery, but did
you never cast a lascivious glance? Perhaps you did never stab a man with your
dagger, but did you never run one through with your tongue? and though you did
not kill your Brother, yet have you not been so much as angry with him, without
a cause? Now he that commits the least sin, deserves the Curse, as well as he
that commits the greatest, for as St. James excellently gives the reason, for
the same God did forbid one, as the other; and he who stands at the door here,
is as well out of the Church, as he who is 1000 miles off, though not so far.
He that says he has no sin lies, says the Apostle; at the very heart, he
lies; St. Paul knew nothing by himself, yet for all that he would not quit
himself, but refers that wholly to God, He that judges me is the Lord, 1 Cor.
4. 4. who knew his heart better then he himself did: And David cries out,
Cleanse me from my secret sins, O Lord; Sins which fly our sight, that steal
from us in crowds, or borrowed shapes, so slighly, as man (who is the most
absurd flatterer of himself) cannot discern them: As pride in decency, malice
in zeal, hypocrisy in devotion, boasting in charity, covetousness and
extortion under the name of providing for our families: wherefore when we meet
with those terms of Holy, Just, and Righteous given unto men in Scripture, we
must not conceive them so, as if they were absolutely Just, Holy, and
Righteous, no more than we can say, there is pure earth, or pure water, without
the commixture of any other Element: But when we are said to be innocent, it is
either meant, in foro humano, because the Law of man can take no hold of us,
though God, the searcher of all hearts, may; as St. Paul says, He was
blameless, but not perfect, Phil. 3. Or as righteous Lot in wicked Sodom was,
because he loathed to do such horrid things as they did; though he committed
Incest, so soon as ever he came forth; or else because God seeing our Hearts
and Intentions toward him, is pleased to cover our slips and failings with his
mercy, as David is said to have done all things well, excepting the matter of
Uriah; not that he could, indeed, clear himself from all guilt (for whosoever
marks his story, will find many foul actions besides this of Uriah) but because
he did not lie dead in any sin but this; for he had a Child before ever he
thought he had committed Adultery.

The Prophet Habakkuk puts the Question into more reasonable terms; who
inquires not Why the wicked should devour the Righteous? but, Why the wicked
should devour the man, who is more righteous then he? A man may be more
righteous, yet not righteous neither: Perhaps he did not deserve it from this,
or that man, but from God he did: As David deserved not the disloyalty from
Saul, Absalom, and his familiar Friend, yet he deserved so much from God, as it
was counted an escape when his Child only lost his Life: The Lord also has put
away thy sin, thou shall not dye, says Nathan to him.

But with what face can we complain against God? We of this sottish and sinful
Nation, whose sins are risen so high, as we may very well conclude, we were
marked out to fulfill all the wickedness which is to forerun the day of
Judgment. Do we murmur because our fears have compassed us, when our Sins have
beset us round about? A Nation wholly divided between Debauchery and
Hypocrisy; between open profaneness, the Sin of Sodom, and Lying unto God, the
Sin of those Priests and Elders which crucified our Savior: What if our
Churches be thrown down, when we have profaned them by our empty formality? by
bringing our Bodies thither, but leaving our minds and hearts fast with some
lust at home. This, this was the Idolatry they so often twitted us withal,
these were the Images and Pictures we set up in Churches, our empty Bodies that
stood here without Souls and Hearts, to attends Gods Service: What? would we
call God to protect Stones and Mortar? when nothing besides zeal, holiness, and
fervency of Devotion, these are the Encania, which do sanctify, consecrate,
and make a Temple.

The last thing which moves us to ask this Question, Why the wicked prosper?
Envy not the ungodly, says the Psalmist, as if the main ground of our
Impatience were our Envy, because we so earnestly dote on these earthly
vanities, as we grow mad with such as injoyes them from us, and charge the most
righteous God for bestowing them on others, as this very Prophet does in the
seventh Chapter, whereas we quite mistake their Condition: The Objection
supposes a false thing: For wicked men did never prosper in the world, unless
you will call it Happiness for a man to assure Gods wrath upon himself, and to
have a liberty to improve his sins, and increase his damnation: and this he
does, if you will believe Scripture to be the word of God; for this, which you
call prosperity, engages us most certainly to punishment: The threats of Jonah
saved Niniveh, though God had set down the very day, in which he would destroy
it: But when we go finely on, in a wicked course of life, when we raise an
Estate, by false-dealing, this flatters us to go still further, to put off the
evil day far from us, and cause the Seat of violence to draw near us, Amos 6.
3. to pull our Lusts still closer and closer to us, but remove the thought of
Gods Judgments farther and farther off, till at last we will not believe that
he does see, that he does understand, and, which is worse, till we imagine God
approves and blesses our sins, because we thrive by it: like Ephraim, who
concluded, God should find no iniquity in all his labors, because he was rich:
when, at that very time, he held the balance of deceit in his hands, Hos. 12.
8. It is the last of Gods Judgments when he throws away the Rod, when he will
smite us no more; when he lays down his pruning knife, and will dress his
Vineyard no more; when he will not pour us out, and wrack us any longer, bus
lets us settle upon the Lees, to putrify and corrupt; when God gives us over
to our vile affections, and delivers us over to Satan already; when he has
bound up our sins in a bundle, as the Prophet says, Hos. 13. 12. and laid them
by himself, till the day of his Feast, his Sacrifice, his Banquet; for these
are the terms by the which the Scripture expresses Gods laughter, mirth, and
jollity, when he means to glut himself with the blood of his Adversaries.

Again, we do not only assure our Damnation, but increase it, by our seeming
Prosperity, by having power to commit more and more sins, to treasure up wrath,
to proceed from evil to evil, to add iniquity to iniquity, and so raise
mischief to the height, till God cannot in Honor and Justice spare us, nor
Mercy it self save us. How long, O Lord! O Lord holy and true, do thou not
judge and revenge our blood upon them that dwell on the earth, it is the loud
cry of the martyred Saints, Rev 6. 11. who receive this answer in the next
verse, That they should rest yet for a little season, until their fellow
servants also, and their brethren, that should be killed, as they were, should
be fulfilled: as long as there remained one Saint to destroy, they should live
and govern. That (as our Savior tells the Pharisees) upon them might come all
the righteous blood shed upon the earth, even since the beginning of the world:
Did men consider this, would they believe wicked men happy, because they laugh
and sing? because they have as many Clyents pressing upon them here, as they
shall have worms crowding to them in the Grave? Alas! we should rather pity and
pray for them, as much, as if we saw them, like the Lunaticks in the Gospel,
cutting and tearing their own flesh: For the Lord is not slack, he is but
fitting up, and preparing all this while, whetting his Sword, bending his Bow,
making ready his Arrows, putting on his Armor, and then the Lord will go out
with a shout, as the Psalmist says, and all the world shall say, Verily there
is a reward for the Righteous, verily there is a God that judges the earth.

Why then art thou troubled, O my soul, or why art thou disquieted within me?
trust in the Lord, who will yet deliver thee: For the Devil himself cannot so
much as stir without Gods leave, as appears by many Examples in Job and the
Gospel too, and wicked men are but Gods Instruments, his Hammer, and his
Hatchet, as the Prophet Isaiah calls them, with which he cuts, carves,
polishes, and works our hearts; which otherwise would remain rude stone for
ever.

Think of this, and it will still the murmuring Spirit when it is within thee,
and when ever this Tempter does assault thee to ask this Question, Wherefore
does the way of the wicked prosper? do as the Prophet does in this Text,
Enquire of God, talk and discourse with God; for it is not the wit of Seneca,
the gravity of Plutarch, nor the distinctions of Epictetus, which can solve
this Objection, but the Gospel only; which tells us of a Judgment to come, and
a Resurrection, without which, we of all men would be most miserable, as the
Apostle himself acknowledges, to let others run away with the profit and
pleasure of this world, whilst we brutishly look on, and pine for hunger: Nor,
which is worse, let us in our desperate humors go into the house of mirth, to
drown the cry of our wants, with the noise of a riotous jollity: What would you
forget your miseries? I thought you had with St. Paul, gloried in your
Tribulations, if ye know ye are innocent: then are you miserable indeed, when
by your murmuring and repining, you go from one Hell to another; from poverty
here, to eternal torments hereafter.

Oh, rather let me entreat you all to wait, wait, I say, upon God; do not
through your impatience, loose your affliction, and the benefit of that hour,
wherein every one of you shall say, It is good for me that I was afflicted;
tarry the Lords leisure; stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord: For
all this will have a good issue, at least, in the other world, if not in this:
Where God shall wipe every tear from our eyes, turn our howling into singing,
Phil. 1. 12. 13.
when he shall bring forth the eternal weight of Glory, which is laid up for
all that shall endure unto the end: and so Lord Jesus come quickly.

The Second SERMON.
PHIL. IV. 17. Not because I desire a Gift; but I desire Fruit, that may abound
unto your account.
AS that great Philosopher wrote over his School-door, That, none should
presume to enter there, unless he had learned some Mathematics: So our Lord
and Master, Jesus Christ, requires one Principle of his Disciples likewise, as
a necessary qualification, before their admittance into his Church, namely, To
resolve before hand thus much, never to regard any thing hereafter besides him,
to strip our selves of all earthly considerations whatsoever; to go continually
with our lives and fortunes in our hands, ready in an instant to lay them down,
as soon as ever the Lord has need of them: So as none must dare to follow
Christ, without his Cross. Few amongst us but grant all this; we are ready
enough to acknowledge all this, till God comes to prove us. For how pleasant
does it seem to discourse of a storm at Sea, under a warmer roof? of
banishment, at home in our own houses? of imprisonment, as we ride abroad? to
magnify, extol, and, as it were, paint the Cross of Christ, with our fine
speeches, in our success: but when tribulation begins to appear, we withdraw
our shoulders quite from under it: then we stand upon our guard with our poor,
slender distinctions, putting by danger, and most dishonourably, shift our
selves out of the way, till, at last, we grow to the height of impudence, as to
make it a Case of Conscience to renounce the command of God, that we may
preserve our selves, though it be by forswearing Christ: a piece of the same
valor, as if a man should describe a battle well with his finger in wine upon
a Table; or read some valiant Story with life and vigor, but in the field
start at the report of a Gun. Wherefore St. Paul in this Epistle did very
providentially, being now a prisoner of Jesus Christ in Rome, exposed to the
fury of merciless Nero, who did riot it in nothing more, then in the blood and
ruin of innocent people; I say, St. Paul did very wisely encourage the
Philippians here, to stand fast, to fear no opposition, but to go on boldly
forwards in every work of a Christian, notwithstanding the terrible persecution
was now begun. For do you not conceive this advice seasonable to his absent
friends, when all his present acquaintance had forsaken him? as he complains to
the Corinthians: For affliction did make the Prophets themselves question
Providence, and almost turned them Atheists; affliction has had power enough
to remove rocks, as we find by St. Peter, and to stir that very foundation upon
which Christ built his Church: it is so great a temptation, as Almighty God
tried Abraham, with it ten times, before he would say, he was Faithful. Now
that his sufferings might not more prevail upon them, then they did upon
himself, by putting them into a fright, least they might suffer the like; to
fix their constancy, he uses these Arguments.

First, As for himself, they should not bemoan him, because, though he was laid
in Irons, yet the Word of God was not bound; the Gospel, that had freer passage
by this his confinement: for though his person could never have been admitted
into Nero's Palace, yet his afflictions had converted some, even of Caesar's
household, in the first and last Chapters. So that considering the things which
happened to him, fell out thus to the furtherance Phil. 1. 12. 13.
of the Gospel, they ought to joy with him, because he was in prison, it being
only a more convenient place to preach in, where he might be heard the better;
for the voice of his sufferings reached further then his tongue could possibly
do.

Then again, in respect of themselves; why should they complain, if Christ
would vouchsafe them the honor to put his own Crown of Thorns upon their Head?
If he would please to exalt them, and lift them up to his own Cross? they
should rather boast and be exceeding glad, for thus they tread his steps whom
they profess to follow, in the other Chapters: and afterward concludes the
whole Epistle with a most pathetical acknowledgment of their great Liberality
in supplying his present wants.

So that however Origin pleases to tax St. Paul's writings, as broken, rugged,
and unequal; yet here both his matter and style glides so smooth and eaven,
that we easily see to the very bottom of it. But least these Philippians might
mistake the joy he conceived at this their charitable expression toward him,
either as proceeding from a covetous desire to fill his pockets, or out of too
much carefulness to secure himself against want for the future, he tells them
plainly, that indeed, they solely, had contributed to his necessities, of all
the Churches besides; that they had not relieved him, once only, but once and
again, v. 13. that is, very often, according to the Greek Phrase: And, in this,
the Apostle applauds them, You have well done, v. 14. of this Chapter. But why?
wherein does the blessedness of this action consist? in relieving him? in
feeding him? merely in feeding his belly? No: No such matter: But because in
parting thus freely with their goods to supply him, they raised a bank in
Heaven for themselves; and in giving to him, became far more liberal to
themselves, as it follows in my Text: Not because I desire a gift, but I desire
fruit that may abound unto your account.

Where you see the Philippians liberality, at the same instant, refused, and
accepted by St. Paul: Refused under the Notion of a Gift, and as it merely
served his turn; Not because I desire a Gift: but most gratefully Accepted, as
it did respect and benefit those who did give, expressed in these words, but I
desire fruit, that may abound to your account.

I begin first to consider the Philippians liberality toward the Apostle,
under the Notion as he refuses it, namely, as a Gift; Not that I desire a Gift.

A Gift? A Gift does he say? Why? suppose he had indeed received their
liberality, as a maintenance for himself to feed and cloth him only? Suppose
he had sent to them particularly for a subsistence from them? without any
regard to the benefit which they should reap by giving: Imagine, I say, the
Apostle had expected a most speedy return from them, merely that he himself
might live: Yet could they look upon their Bounty, as a mere Gratuity, or a
thing given away? Or, indeed, could they boast of any more done, then they
stood bound to do? Will you persuade me St. Paul even in this had desired a
Gift? You acknowledge your selves obliged to discharge the Bills of Fare;
though they cost you as much again in Physic to cure the surfeits you got by
them? it is a just and a due debt, which your wantonness in apparel has
contracted, and this you must quit, though you sell half your land for it: and
you think you wrong and neglect your selves extremely, if you don't prove your
Hearts with the madness of Mirth, and the folly of Pleasure, whatsoever it
costs you: it is just and noble to pay to your Lusts; nothing but right to feed
them: But to feed the hungry; to cloth the naked; to House him who knows not
where to lay his head; to perform all those Acts of Charity which style us
Christians, more then Faith it self, as St. Paul acknowledges; This, of all
things, we 1 Cor. 13. 13.
esteem indifferent, accompting what we lay down here, as given, or rather,
thrown away. It Is true, St. Paul could not have su'd them, had they sent him
nothing: for in those times of persecution, what Court of Justice stood open
for poor Christians, but to condemn them? Or how can you imagine this Apostle
should be suffered to accuse another, who was not permitted to defend Himself?
especially recover maintenance by the Judgment of those men who did not think
him worthy to live? yet still notwithstanding all this, in those very days,
where it was death to relieve a Christian, where, whosoever put forth his hand
to succor them, did in a manner, stab himself; yet then in relieving, they did
but pay St. Paul what they owed Him; nor so much gave an Alms, as they stroke
out a Debt, to which they stood engaged. For take the Apostle in his private
capacity, only as a common Christian; thus they were bound to relieve him,
bound by the Law of Charity; Mark you the Law of Charity: they are Lawyers, and
Philosophers only, who tell you, the Acts of bounty and liberality fall not
under the strict rules of Debt, and Obligation: for the Scripture mentions a
Law of Charity, and calls Charity the fulfilling of the Law; as if truly, there
were no Law but it: and as all Laws have some punishment, either tacitly
implied, or openly annexed, to make them obligatory and binding: so has also
this Law of Charity. For if it be a punishment to be thrown into a lower Hell
then Gomorrah, and to suffer more then Sodom; if it be a punishment at the last
day, to be cast by upon Christ's left Hand; to live eternally in utter darkness,
without any Light; besides that of a sinful Conscience; if it be a punishment
for Christ not to own us, when he comes to Judge the world; if any part of
this, singly; or all put together, deserve the name of punishment; then, I Am
sure, who receives not a Disciple, feeds not the hungry, clothes not the naked,
will certainly be punished. If I should ask a Lawyer, why I may not commit
Murder, or why I must needs satisfy my Creditors; He Will presently answer,
because I should loose my life for one, and my liberty for my offending in the
other: yet I may possibly corrupt the witnesses, bribe the Judge, or by a
quirk, fool and out-wit the Statute; or, it is possible, by using violence
successfully, turn the point of the sword upon him who should punish with it:
and, pray, where will our Lawyer then fix the obligation? If I am bound only,
because I shall receive a punishment here, when it is ods, but by my Secrecy,
Art or Power, I may escape the penalty of Humane Laws: Why then do we put such
stress upon these Laws, which none of us would keep, beyond his convenience and
interest, were there not a power above them, who commands our obedience? Or why
should we say an Alms is not due to a poor man, because he cannot recover it in
the Court? and heedlesly pass by one distressed, and drop no Comfort, because
he cannot take out a Writ against us, or because the Jury will not find it?
when God will punish us for our hard heartedness; God from whose power no wings
can carry us; nor, as the Prophet speaks, Hell it self hide us. They then who
admire the Law of the Land so much, and direct their Actions merely according
unto it; I think, had they lived in Sparta, would have killed both father and
mother, because there the Law did not punish parricide.

But may some object: If I am bound to express my Charity to him who Love and
Gratitude: Love, in taking away the sweetness which alone gives it the Relish,
by making every charitable Action involuntary; and not leaving it to our
choice, whether we will do good, or no: and then it cuts off all civil
acknowledgments between us whatsoever. If I am tied to seed the Hungry, why may
not they sit down at my Table without Invitation? and if I must cloth the
Naked, why may not he come and demand a Garment of me? this appears to gain him
a Right: for in all civil Commerce between man and man where one is bound to
give, another may certainly challenge it as his own.

I answer, This doctrine does neither the one nor the other, neither destroys
Gratitude, nor takes away Love, which must be free and unconstreined. For
though God enjoins me to relieve the oppressed, yet he gives them no power to
constrein me: so as a beneficial Act, is an act of mere Indulgence, as to him
who cannot enforce it from me; but a due debt, as toward God, who gave me what
I have, for no other end, then to deal it about as he has commanded; it is an
Act of Charity and Choice, in regard of him whom we relieve: an Act of Justice
and Necessity, in respect of God, who has enjoined It: and you may easily
apprehend somewhat due to a man, when he himself can lay no claim to it. This
is no Paradox: I Will give you an instance; Suppose you send a present by some
Messenger (as here the Philippians did by Epaphroditus) and he turns it to
another use, and mispends it, so as the present never comes to him for whom you
meant it: you see plainly, the money was due to him unto whom you sent it; yet
he shall never recover it by Law, because he never possessed it: but the Owner,
he who sent it, shall have a good Action against the Messenger for breach of
Trust. In like manner (for we all are but Stewards to lay out what God gives
us, as He shall dispose it) if I take no notice of the Cry of the poor, when
God has put money in my hand to give him; though the beggar here can have no
relief from any Court of Justice, yet God (whose Talent I have either hid
through Covetousness, or consumed in Prodigality) will, at the last, exact a
most severe account of me: For I owe it to God, though I do not to the man: and
God challenges the Acts of Charity as such a peculiar debt to himself, as he
will not have man so much as know when we pay it, least they may seem to share
in it; but commands us to bestow our benevolence in all secrecy imaginable; He
will scarce allow us our selves to be privy to our own gifts, nor our right
hand know, what our left hand gives away.

You see then, without taking in the particular obligation of the Philippians
to St. Paul, as their Apostle (which we shall consider by and by) that put the
case, he had requested some benevolence from them; yet had he not then begged
downright, or desired a bare Gift: nor could they justly have imputed it to him
as a Gratuity only, because in some sense, they were bound to do it, as much as
if he had had their bond for it: for God commands us to be charitable; who is
said many times, to leave Heaven, and come down from thence only to judge the
poor and needy. No (my Brethren) then you give when you grant out a Revenew to
one for his close drawing the curtain to an unclean bed; then you give when you
maintain your flatterer high and kicking; then you give, when, like Judah, you
come to pay for your unlawful Lusts, with the pure God, who cannot behold
iniquity has forbidden you to contract for: This, this is to give; but for your
Minister, who leads you by the hand to the very gates of Heaven; who begets you
again, not unto a life, which beasts and trees enjoy as well as you, but to a
spiritual and eternal Being; would you indeed lay down all that you have at his
feet, were you then out of his debt, to whom you owe even your own selves, as
St. Paul tells Philemon?

But then, secondly, St. Paul did not desire a Gift, only to benefit himself,
because he wanted nothing: they quite mistook his condition, if they looked
upon him as a necessitous person: He might perchance seem dying, when, behold,
he lived: appear outwardly sorrowful, yet rejoiced always: seem then poor
himself, when he had made many rich: and look as if he had nothing, when he
possessed all things, 2 Cor. 6. Not that I want, says the Apostle, a little
before my Text; he would not have them think so meanly of him, as if he needed
their Benevolence, though he had nothing, not so much as a roof to shelter him
from the weather, were it not for a Prison: And he gives this reason in the
same verse, for I have learnt (says he) in whate state soever I am, therewith
to be content: I, this is the knowledge which makes us wise, rich, free, happy,
every thing, supplies all our wants, and sets us above danger; to have learnt
quietly to submit our selves to God, in all the variety of his dispensations,
to be content, (...), it is a word which our English will not well express, to
be self-sufficient, to have provision within our selves against all accidents;
when a Christian arrives to such a pass, as, like God, he stands in need of
nothing in this world, though he can use it, if he has it, yet does he not
want it, if he has it not; neither meat in Famine, nor clothes in his
Nakedness, nor liberty in Prison, but is (...), wholly able to preserve himself
without those outward helps: This is not to live in the world, Col. 2. 20. to
have our Conversation in heaven already, and there discourse with none but God
and Angels: Thus we may shame a Tyrant, and puff at his Terrors. For what, I
beseech you, can the most subtle in curses invent against such, who call
Banishment, a going to travel, Imprisonment, a getting out of a throng; who
say, to dye, is to lie down to sleep? It is as impossible to torment these, as
to confine a Spirit; or to lay shackles upon that thing which has no Body to
bear them: For you must not esteem these kind of expressions, the heat only of
a luxuriant wit, because whatever happens in this life is (...) (as one most
excellently calls it) whose whole being consists merely in Relation, seems good
to such as like it, and evil to such as think the contrary; just like meat,
which though it nourish one, may kill another. His Brethren thought they had
sold Joseph into a strange Country to destroy him; but, he says, God sent him
before to provide for their whole Family. So this Apostle collects with
himself, that, if he died, he should go to his Savior, and, if he lived, he
should serve his Brethren. If he were at liberty, his tongue should preach,
but, being in prison, his sufferings did further the Gospel much more: If he
met with all friends, they would receive the Truth cheerfully, and if he found
enemies, they would preach Christ for him, though out of strife and envy: With
him to dye was gain, and to live was gain: He took every thing by the right
ear, and found some benefit in every condition whatsoever: whether by good
report, or by disgrace, whether by the left hand, or by the right, whether by
hatred 2 Cor. 6.
or out of good will, whether by life or death, if Christ were preached, he
looked no farther, he had his end, that unum necessarium, the advancement of the
Gospel, and whatsoever happened besides this, he esteemed as an additional
complement which he might very well spare, and yet remain an Apostle still: But
now on the other side, what a continued torment is a man's life, without this
spiritual carelessness, this holy neglect of our earthly Being? Then are we born
to misery indeed, if a moth, rust, or canker can make us wretched; If the
trouble, which (as our Savior says) belongs to every single day, can sully our
mirth, and cast us down; If every wind and breath of an insulting Tyrant can
twirl us about to all points of the Compass; If we make our selves the shadow
of the times, and take both form and figure only as men do Rise, and Set; like
some flowers, if we shut and open just as they shine, or not upon us; 'twere
better a Millstone were tied about our neck, and we were cast into the midst
of the Sea (for that would keep us steady.) Thus to halt, to be divided, as the
word imports, between Heaven and Earth, Light and Darkness, God and Mammon; It
breeds the same deformity in the Soul, as would appear in the Body. If you
fancied a man looked with one ey directly up to the sky, and at the same time
pitched the other ey straight down upon the ground; how ugly would such a one
seem unto you? This, this is the carefulness; or rather, this denying of Gods
Providence, which makes so many desire a gift; desire it? Nay, most impudently,
make it their whole design and business of their lives, to get it: mounting the
Pulpit as they would do a Bank, and there sell of their Drugs for Medicines,
when, in truth, they poison the very Soul: Whence is it else, that they preach
their dreams, calling that the word of God, which hits in their heads, when
they cannot sleep? Who bite with their teeth (as Micha says) eat on, and talk
as the company will have it; and (as it follows in the same verse) who puts not
into their mouths, and gives not what they expect, they even prepare a war
against him, Micha 3. 5. nay blot him out of their book of life: Dogs ('it is
St. Paul's word to them, or else I durst not use it) Phil. 3. 2.
that divine for money, who will be rich, whose greatest triumph is to lead
captive silly women: Men that will help up a sin into your bosom, which
otherwise, perhaps, a tender Conscience, would keep down, and set a whole City
a fire, and then, like Nero, stand by and play to it: Men, without whom no
mischief ever had a beginning, nor by whom shall ever any have an end. Give me
leave, I beseech you, to bend this crooked bough as much the other way, and
call such to St. Paul's example, who when he was to preach a new Law, preached
(...), the Gospel without charge, 1 Cor. 9. who put his hands to work night and
day, that they might not receive any thing but from himself; And I heartily
wish, what the Apostle did here of choice, the Civil Magistrate would whip them
to: for they are a scandal to their beautiful Profession, to preach Providence,
and at the same time scrape together; as if God, who provides for all things,
would have more care of a crow, or the grass of the field, then of man whom he
created after his own Image; as if he who sent forth his Disciples without
scrip or penny, did it only to destroy them; and how shall the people credit
those who preach the contempt of the world to their Congregations, when they
see these Foxes would only have their Auditors leave the world that they may
enjoy it wholly to themselves; calling that the Kingdom of Christ, when they
themselves reign, or rather, when Lust raigns in them; Whereas St. Paul often
urged this, as an Argument to confirm his Doctrine, that he took nothing for it.

Thirdly, St. Paul did not desire a Gift, because their Benevolence kept him
still alive, heartned his body up and prolonged his days: which, considering
St. Paul's condition was cruel mercy, the greatest injury they could possibly do
him, to hold him thus from his Savior, with whom he longed to be: For the
Apostle had fully weighed the poizes both of life and death, and concluded, the
most beneficial thing to him, if he looked only after his own advantage, was
Death, having a desire to depart, and be with Christ, which is the better,
Phil. 1. 23. For, pray resolve me, what kindness is it to fetch a wretch
devoted and given up to affliction, necessity, and distresses, to stripes,
imprisonment, tumults, to fasting, watching, and all kind of labors, 2 Cor. 6.
to make much of a man only, that he may last out to torment? to set his joints,
that he may go on upon the rack again? to strengthen and enable him, that he
may suffer yet more? to bind up his wounds, as they did the Slaves in Rome,
merely that he might fight with more beasts? This is the same pity, simply so
considered; as if you should give strong Cordials to one irrecoverably sick, to
lengthen and draw out his pain, least he should not feel what he endured? to
wake a condemned man, and tell him he must dye? Evasit, says the Tyrant, of one
who had prevented his fury by a timely death; Evasit, in dying quickly, he has
made an escape, he got away, and has outrun me now: for there, in the Grave,
the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest, Job 3. 13.
The prisoner and the oppressor there lie quiet both together, and there, every
one is free, in the next verse; and therefore, if we consider Death, only as a
Rest from labor, the Apostle had no reason to be solicitous with what to
preserve his life any longer: For we mistake exceedingly, if we think life, as
life, is desirable; for there are some that dig to find a Grave, as much as
they would do to discover a Mine, as Job speaks: and God, when he would reward
some memorable act of piety Job 3. 21.
in a man, takes him out of the way before his Judgments come; which made the
Prophet, when he could not turn away Gods wrath utterly, prayed the women might
have miscarrying wombs; and the Apostles seeing the persecution begin to rage,
advises the Christians not to marry, lest they should 1 Cor. 3.
only bring forth to the Sword and Faggot: Now not to be born and death, are,
in effect, all one; they are both equally alike, not to be here.

Again, Imagine the world had treated and dealt kindly with the Apostle, yet
then he needed not much care for means, to keep up his life any longer, for he
calls himself now, Paul the aged: a time when we might choose death Philem. 9.
merely out of satietie; because it is tedious to do the same things over and
over again so often; to eat and be a hungry, and then eat again, to sleep and
then wake, and then sleep again, to see things still go about in the same
circle; to behold peace breeding luxury, luxury war, and war smooth into peace
again; for is there any thing whereof it might be said, this is new? Solomon
Eccl. 1. 10.
asks the Question, who had proved all things, and at last concludes by a
particular Induction (the surest Demonstration of any whatsoever) That, as the
Sun goes round, as the rivers hasten to the Sea from whence they came; as the
wind goes round the points of heaven, and whirls about continually; so the
actions of men have their circuits too: and whatever you wonder at in this or
that Age, you may find the same in another, for there is no new thing under the
Sun. The Apostles years therefore, he being now grown old, might induce him,
not to be much concerned how he should live, being now full of days, as the
Scripture most elegantly expresses it; having taken a perfect view now of
whatever this world can afford (which requires no long time to look over, for
Christ saw it all in a moment, Luke 4. 14.) and then I know not what a man has
to do, but to despise it, and leave it with no more regret, then he would walk
out of garden, where he found nothing that liked him: But there is a far higher
Contemplation, not only to render living inconsiderable to a Christian, but
likewise to ravish our thoughts up from hence, and that is the the promises of
the Gospel, where we behold Heaven open, and those eternal Joys revealed
there, which have lain hid ever since the foundations of the Earth. If there
were one that killed himself at reading Plato's immortality of the Soul; If it
be true, that there are yet some Heathens, who usually make away themselves
upon no other account, but because they would be in heaven; If natural Reason
can cast mere Gentiles into such admiration of that Bliss; What will you say to
St. Paul, who was wrapped up alive into the Third Heavens, and saw what the
Saints enjoyed above, though he could not express it when he came back? with
what scorn, do you think, he trod upon the ground afterward, when the Angel
set him down again here? Who was fain to have a thorn run into 2 Cor. 3.
his flesh, before he could find himself to be a Man: can you imagine he would
petition for liberty, whose very body seemed a prison to him, till he returned
to Christ again? Or would he sue for a supply, to detain him from that which
became his wish, his dissolution? how would you fret at him who should lengthen
the race, when you had almost won it? or stake the prize yet farther off, when
you had almost caught it? Just such a courtesy is it to relieve him who would
dye any way, that he might quickly enjoy his Savior: it is but deferring and
putting off his happiness the longer, as if an unexpected supply should renew
the fight then, when we thought we had now gotten the day; Take no thought for
your life, what you shall eat, or what you shall drink (says Christ) surely
this precept is needless to the Matthew. 6. 25.
Disciples of Christ: Methinks he should rather allay our desire, then fear of
death, who do expect such great things after it: Methinks he should rather
advise us that we should not out of hasty longing to be in Heaven, neglect the
means of continuing our being in this life: But, O you of little faith! to talk
of the blessedness the Saints of God enjoy above, and yet use the most base,
abject, and sordid means to live here, and to keep your selves from it: If then
we cannot apprehend the Apostles here as a necessitous person, nor any way
concerned to prolong his days by shifting about for maintenance, but rather
obliged to leave this world as soon as he could, that he might enjoy a better:
We must think of some other Reason why St. Paul entertained their Benevolence
with such joy: Which leads me to the Consideration under which he accepted
their Liberality; viz. for their sakes, not his own; But I desire fruit that
may abound to your account, etc.

Fruit! as fruit of their Patience, that they durst own one whom the world had
not only laid by, as useless, but tied up as dangerous; and fruit of their
Love, that they would acknowledge him; and fruit of their Constancy, that they
persevered still to admire the glory of the Gospel, though clouded with so much
opposition, as the whole world had now set it up as a mark to shoot at: and as
the fruit of their Zeal; for in sending part of their substance to supply him,
they gave testimony that they would part with the whole, and lives, and all, to
advance the Kingdom of Christ: and lastly, as fruit of his Ministry, wherein
he saw he had not run in vain, suffered in vain, or scattered his seed amongst
stones or thorns: for in this he perceived that neither the fears nor love of
the world had choked it; because, as he tells the Galatians, they neither
despised, nor spued him up again Gal. 4. 14.
(as the word imports) when he was in misery, but in the midst of his distress
looked upon him as an Angel of God; nay, received him even as Jesus Christ (as
it is in the same verse) at this he triumphs, at this he rejoices in the Lord
exceedingly, in this Chapter, v. 12. This makes him cry out here, I am full, I
abound, not so much for his receiving, as for Gods accepting; nor because what
was sent, came to him, but because it went up into Heaven, like a sweet smell,
and of an Alms, because a Sacrifice, in the sixth verse: For indeed, the
intention only of the Giver commends the gift; because a man may give his body
to be burned, yet never be a Martyr; distribute all whatsoever he has to the
poor, yet not be charitable: for he-may send his presents upon a hook to catch
some greater thing, like those in the Gospel, who made one feast, that others
might invite them to many, and therein he gives to his Covetousness: Or he may
give, as he in the Gospel, only to rid himself of an importunate beggar, and
then he gives to his ease and quiet: Or again, he may give like the Pharisees,
with trumpets, and then he gives to his ambition: Or lastly, he may give, as
some preached the Gospel in St. Paul's time, out of strife and contention, not
to keep up the Man, but the Faction: as Kings send relief to those whom they
hate, only to poize the scales, not that they may overcome, but that they may
be in a condition to fight on: But as St. Peter says, their money perish with
them, who give to a Disciple, and not in the name of a Disciple, and receive a
Prophet, yet not in the name of a Prophet. Plato being asked what God does in
Heaven, how he busies and imployes himself there, how he passes away eternity,
made this answer, (...), He works Geometrically: and in judging of our works of
Charity, God most apparently does so: For the proportion of Faith, as St. Paul
calls it, in this particular, is merely Geometrical; where we must not compare
sum with sum, as they do in a market, or value the gift more or less by telling
it; but argue thus, as what he bestows is in proportion to his Estate, so is
what I bestow unto mine: And in this sense, you know, the widows two mites were
recorded as a more bountiful and a larger present, then if Solomon had thrown
the wealth of his Kingdoms into the Treasury. 'Twas the Faith therefore from
which their Liberality proceeded, which cheared the Apostle in all his
distresses; not the gift it self: Now, says he, we live, if you stand fast in
the Lord: This 1 These. 3. 8.
he called a life, not to eat and drink; for what good would all their presents
have done him, if they, for whose sake he professes he would fast all his life
time, should have fallen off from him? If it is not eating and drinking which
feeds the Minister, as our Savior says, He has meat which the 1 Cor. 9.
world knows not of, to hold fast those that stand, lest they fall down, to see
the Gospel spread wider and wider; this is to enrich a true Minister; to gain
whole Territories unto Christ, and to leave them the Land, and to win whole
Kingdoms over, not unto himself, but God: Wherefore in the fourth Chapter, v.
1. St. Paul calls these Philippians, whom he had instructed with such success,
His Joy, and his Crown: for if there be degrees of Bliss hereafter, as our
Savior, as well as the Prophets, seem to employ; if there be certain Lofts and
Stories in Heaven; higher and higher Mansions in that Kingdom, we may not doubt
but he who converts a Soul to God, as he is said to increase the joys of
Heaven by doing it, so certainly he shall partake more of them, and shine as a
Star for ever and ever, Dan. 12. 3. But yet the Apostle seems to decline even
this consideration likewise of himself, to disclaim any interest of his own in
promoting their good, nor to intend in it so much as his own Salvation,
Therefore I endure all things for the Elects sake, that they also may obtain
Salvation which is in Christ Jesus (says the 2 Timothy 2. 10.
same Apostle:) Therefore it might reasonably be presumed, that he ran those
many hazards to avoid that terrible woe which he denounces against himself if
he preached not the Gospel: But, behold here the last and utmost 1 Cor. 9.
expression of Integrity; he waves this, and as if he could not enjoy that
Heaven without them, proposes this as the sole end and design of all his
Labors, not to save himself, but them, That they also may obtain the salvation
of God; as if he meant literally, when he said for his Brethren he Romans 9. 3.
could wish himself accursed even from Christ; and in the manner, here in my
Text, He desires their Bounty, not so much as a fruit of their affection
toward Him, or as an Act of Christian Charity any otherwise then as it did
benefit them to give; But I desire fruit which may abound to your Account.

Which their Charity to St. Paul produced many ways: As first by striking off a
Debt from their Account, to which they stood engaged: for Charity (as I have
showed you) is a due Debt, though we cannot sue for it in a Court of Justice,
because God alone, not man, has a Right rigorously to force this Duty from us:
But if you look upon St. Paul, as an Apostle, and above an ordinary Christian,
what did they owe him then? For, how did St. Paul grow into want? was it not
for their sakes? did he not dye, even every day that they might live once for
all? Had he kept his Religion close to himself, and warily shifted faces with
every company he met, as Peter does in the second of the Galatians: had he sat
quietly at home, and not run from one Country to another, from City to City,
from Town to Town, from Village to Village, as if he had been to draw a Map; or
(which is the sly Providence of this our Age) had he in his preaching, not only
let alone the sore, but smoothed it over; as praising thrift to a covetous man,
and liberality to a prodigal, and commended courage and magnanimity before a
stout and sturdy Rebel; like a politic physician, applying a remedy to the
Leg, when the distemper lies in the Head: nay, had St. Paul but used himself
that common circumspection and caution, which he allows to others, perhaps he
might have been able to relieve some of them: But when he was brought from
Judge to Judge, from Prison to Prison, from Court to Court; suffering that long
Catalogue of Torments which he gives us in the Epistle to the Corinthians, till
he wearied his persecutors, and till they entreat him to go out of prison, Act.
20. and all, because he taught them the truth sincerely. If we could invent an
obligation more binding then a debt, surely you would think that due from them
to him; who had begotten them, nay, who was sacrificed for them, and saved
them; (for these glorious terms the Apostle gives himself) saved them (I say)
not their Bodies from the Grave, but their Souls from Death. O my Brethren,
there was a time when men sold all they had, and laid it down at the Apostles
feet; there was a time, even in our memory, when Sacriledg was thought a sin,
and men conceived the maintenance of a lawful Clergy, as sacred as their own
Revenues: in the time when axes and hammers were lifted up to build, not to
break down the carved works of the Sanctuary; yet something is due still, at
least to give a cup of cold water in the name of a Prophet, to hold up their
weak hands, and to support their feeble knees with your staff of Bread. For
though St. Paul would have worked with his hands now, had they not been locked
up with manicles, rather then prove burdensome to them (for then was not a time
to receive Gifts in the infancy of the Church) yet he always says, he might
claim it as a recompense, that he had power to challenge it; and proves it by
all kind of Arguments: 1 Cor. 9. from Custom, Reason, and Scripture: and least
you should pretend the abrogation of this Law by Christ; the Apostle adds, v.
14. That the Lord has ordained, that they who preach the Gospel, should live
of the Gospel: he has ordained it, enacted it, and made it a Law for ever; he
has tied and bound you up to it for ever; it is not left to your choice and
discretion. And our Savior, when he sends out his Apostles, calls their
maintenance their Hire, Mat. 10. 10. as if there did pass a tacit contract and
bargain between the Preacher and the Audience, that if he feeds their souls,
they should feed his body; if he gives them the water of life, he may claim a
draught from out of their well, as due: and that he who deals the bread of life
about, should have, in return, the bread that perishes; a fair exchange, you will
say, on your parts; Carnal for Spiritual things, and a Birthright that gives
you title to become the heirs of God, for a small mess of porridge.

The second advantage we have by Charity is, the Exercise of our Patience
before the day of Trial come upon us. Who (pray) among you would leave, at this
very instant, his whole Estate to preserve his Conscience, if violence should
offer to take it from him? or who would go immediately from this very place to
the stake, if God should call him thither? but Charity leads us to this
perfection; for whosoever gives away of his own willingly, may come in time, to
endure quietly, if it be forced from him: and who can cheerfully part with some
to relieve his Brethren, will at last arrive so far, as contentedly to loose
all, so he may preserve his Conscience. My Brethren, it is all the business of
our Time, Diligence, and Experience to be a Christian: for though God did
sometimes extraordinarily pour forth as much of his Spirit into some Vessels of
Mercy as enabled them, at once, to become Christians and Martyrs both together,
ready to lay down their lives for the Faith as soon as ever they did believe:
Yet it is said of Christ, that notwithstanding he was a Son, yet learnt he
obedience by the things which he suffered, Heb. 5. 8. He learnt it: Let others
learn to measure the Earth, do you learn to despise it: and let Philosophers
dispute the causes of lightnings, storms and thunder, but do you Christians
learn the way to Mount Sion, where you may stand above them all.

The last and highest benefit we receive by our Charity, is, that as God will
most severely punish the neglect of this duty, so if we do perform it, he will
account himself in debt to us: for (...), God will 1 Pet. 3.
thank you for this: for this God will, in a manner, acknowledge himself
beholding to you. You lend to the Lord, lend to him who possesses all already;
as if God would willingly part with his whole right and title to this world, so
we, in compassion to our poor Brethren, would give him the least return of it
again: God owes you a blessing which you shall be sure to have, not only
hereafter but here also, if we can believe God, for whom it is impossible to
lie. For as God did certainly punish some with temporal punishments for
offending against the Gospel, as he did the Corinthians with diseases and
sudden death, for their profaning the Lords Supper: So 1 Cor: 11. 30.
likewise may not we doubt, but God, under the Gospel also, rewards those who
obey, even with temporal blessings; and, if you observe it, nothing prospers
here better, then this virtue of Charity. For the very Politian himself advises
us to help our very enemies, if we mistrust they can get out of themselves,
because thus we shall make them our friends. Beasts have so much reason and
civility to return a courtesy: Nature is still calling upon us for this duty,
so earnestly, as some have wished their very friends (to whom they stand most
obliged) in misery, for no other reason, but that they might relieve them, and
be quit of this debt: On the contrary, it is remarkable what great advantages
some have missed, merely because they knew not how to give in season: For there
is he (says Solomon) that withholds what is meet, but it tends to poverty,
Prove. 11. 24. But suppose men do turn inhumane and ungrateful, yet still he
that gives to the poor shall not lack, Prove. 28. 27. For God in your
extremities will either afford you an (...), a place to slip out of, or else
give you strength to suffer; which in effect, is all one. No great matter
whether the three Children be in the Furnace or out of it, so the flame does
not so much as singe them: and then you will, without all question, receive an
ample reward in the world to come: For if Heaven do stand open to such as have
their sins forgiven, then you, for your Charity shall be sure to enter in, for
Charity shall cover the multitude of sins. If your luxury did make your Savior
fast, the feeding of his afflicted members, that will feed him again: and if
your wantonness in apparel stripped him, in covering their nakedness, you shall
cloth him again: in short, if your sins crucified him, in relieving them you
revive him, and make him alive again upon the earth. This Sacrifice will
expiate all, Give to the poor what thou have, and all shall be clean unto you,
says our Savior, Luke 11. 41. Again, do you think such as do all the whole
will of God shall inherit eternal life? then your Charity must of necessity let
you in: for Charity is the fulfilling both of the Law and the Prophets, and
Gospel too: What do you talk of Sermons, and of hanging Religion at the Ear?
when we are bound to break the Sabbath to save but an Ox or Ass? what Ordinance
may not we then trample under foot to relieve a Man? or do you think lying down
and believing will serve the turn? When the Harlot Rahab, for her Charity unto
the Spies, you find recorded Hebr. 11. among Abel, Enoch, Noah, and Abraham the
father of the faithful? When Cornelius his alms came up to Heaven, and lay
continually before God as a memorial, before ever he heard of a Savior? No, my
Brethren, Christ will not ask you at the last day, whom you have followed, what
Church you frequented, but whom you have fed, whom you have clothed, whom you
have relieved: this will be your Question, upon which you will be examined at
the last Day of Judgment, as you may read in St. Matthew: not how often you
have heard your Minister, but how often you have fed him. Do you think a
Prophet will go to Heaven? Why he that relieves a Prophet, becomes thus a
Prophet himself, and shall receive a Prophets reward, Mat. 10. 41. Or an
Apostle? why St. Paul calls Epaphroditus here an Apostle, because he had
administered to his wants; nay, only because he did collect the contribution for
the poor, Phil. 2. 25. Or don't you doubt but Martyrs wear their Crowns? then
be ye secure of yours: Charity cannot fail: For by relieving the Apostle, the
Philippians became his fellow sufferers, Martyrs too, though at a cheaper rate.
You do but lay up, secure, and traffic with that you bestow on your Brethrens
wants. A Thief may break into your house, or a Robber spoil you of your money;
but what you give away is safe, and your own for ever, as being locked up in the
Treasury of Heaven, where no wicked person ever shall appear.

And now having done with my Text, sure I need not make any Application, or
tell you how by St. Paul I meant your Minister all this while; and you your
selves by these liberal Philippians. I know to whom I preach, and besides spoke
it plainly, that so necessary a subject might sink into the meanest capacity:
And because it has pleased God to make me the happy Instrument first to strike
this Rock at which your Charity gush't out in streams, I am obliged to tell
you, what I have heard him say that is concerned in it: How that now he glories
more then ever in his sufferings and afflictions, because they have yielded you
so fair an opportunity to express your faith: how he rejoices not so much in
your Gift, as in your Christianity; and more in your love to God, then in your
affection to himself: For now (says he) I see I have not spent my self in vain:
I dare trust them now amidst a perverse and crooked Generation: and if in this
dispersion I shall hear they stand fast and steady in the Doctrine of Christ, I
shall live; for what else befalls me is impertinent, and drops quite besides
me: But for this (says he) I will pray night and day, make Supplications
without ceasing to him who is the author and finisher of every good work, that
he will strengthen them against all Temptations, that they may run on till they
have won the prize, fight on till they have gotten the day, and then receive
the reward of those who shall endure unto the end: Thus much are his own words.
But it is fit that I should conclude with something of mine own.

Seeing then this golden Candlestick is to be removed from you; seeing that
Light which has made such a blaze about this City, is now to return again into
its corner; methinks I could acquaint you whom you loose, that you may be more
satisfied, if possible, how well you have placed your Charity; but I spare
him: for I could ask, when he desired a Gift, who received this, not without
some violence? I could ask you, whose houses has he crept into, like those
that come with a tale colored over with Scripture mis-applyed, and grow, at
last, to be Masters of your Family? I could say that if I would have a School
Question unridled, I would name him, or a Text soberly interpreted, I would
choose him: and if I desired to see a sin rivited, as it were with thunder,
into Hell, you your selves would then direct me unto him: I could speak more,
and thus, and thus, and thus, and so begin another Sermon. And if St. Paul did
boast himself, sure I might commend another: or if he lay here before you in a
Coffin, then you would never think I had said enough: at parting give me leave
to praise you at least, to commend the Congregation, if I may not the Preacher:
Then I tell you I have seen such persons, when they were in Town, frequent this
place, as were able to create a Temple wheresoever they went; men, each of
whom, single Dr. H. H. Dr. R. S.
and alone made up a full Congregation, nay, a Synod: So as some have not
unfitly named this Church the Scholars Church. But I shall wave this, and pass
to what shall more profit you: Which is to desire you in the bowels of Jesus
Christ, to consider and lay it to heart, that the last Judgment which God spent
on the obstinate Jews was the destruction of the Temple, and the turning out of
his Priests. I say, be think your selves what it should be, which makes Gods
vengeance so implacable against you, that he threatens you not with cleanness
of teeth, but the famine of the Word: examine your Consciences, and if you find
your crying sins have put these Ministers to silence, you ought in conscience
to maintain them; to give them, as the Philippians here did, once and again; to
seek them out, and relieve them, as Onesimus did St. Paul: Owe no man any
thing, says the Apostle, but to love one another: Romans 13. 8.
A most excellent speech, and means thus; as if he said, you may pay your Bills
at a Shop, and be out of the Trades-mans debt, you may lay down your money, and
take up your Bonds; you may really satisfy all other engagements, but this
debt of Charity, never: This you must always be paying, yet never think it
satisfied. Break then off your sins by Prayer and Alms-deeds; for who knows
whether God will yet have mercy upon you, and set these Candlesticks again in
their right places again: But you especially are bound to do thus, who resolve
to partake of this blessed Communion: For here we celebrate the death of
Christ, who left Heaven, to suffer for us, and shall not we part with one crum
of earth to enjoy him? For in feeding the poor we feed him; in receiving a
Disciple, we take Christ home to our houses, set Christ down at our Tables, and
make him Incarnate again, make every day a Christmass-day, and every meal a
Sacrament: and at last he will receive us into his eternal Mansions, where we
shall never want more, where we shall spend all our Charity no longer in
relieving one another, but in enjoying one another bliss and happiness,
always singing Praises unto the Lamb that sits upon the Throne.

Reader,
THese two Sermons, especially the later, if I could have obtained them when
the Authors second Volume was printing, should have been placed immediately
before the last Sermon of that Volume; now thou art desired to let thy fancy
place them there, and it is as well, as if they really were so.

Thine R. M.

A SERMON Preached by the AUTHOR Upon his being restored to the Exercise of his
MINISTRY.
GAL. IV. 12. Brethren, I beseech you, be as I am; for I am as ye are: ye have
not injured me at all.
AFTER so long a pause, after such an interruption as the unhappiness of the
times have made (for I will not put it upon any other score) I am returned to
the execution of my Ministerial Function, by the Providence of God, by the
favor of some of the highest, and, as I hope, beloved Brethren, by your loving
consent, and (for I will presume it so, because I wish it so) your unanimous
approbation. Otherwise (give me leave, I beseech you, to enlarge my self and
open my heart to you) far better were it for me to return to my dust and to my
former condition, there to sit down and pray for my enemies, to possess my soul
in patience and silence, to struggle with all those temptations which Poverty,
Scorn, and contempt commonly bring along with them, then to embroyle my self in
an odious and loathsome contention with those whom I am bound to count my
brethren, though they think themselves bound to be my enemies; whom if I do not
love, I shall hate my own soul; and whose salvation if I do not seriously
tender; I shall forfeit my own. Brethren, my hearts desire and prayer to God
is, that all misconceit, prejudice, jealousy, suspicion, which are the winds
that blow the coals of contention, may be bound up for ever; that they may be
buried in the sea, and in everlasting oblivion; that they may be drowned in the
Ocean of Gods mercies, never to rise up again in any breast, there to create
and set up that world of iniquity, that bitterness, that debate and hatred,
which, as St. James speaks, defile the whole man, and sets on fire the whole
course of our nature, our youth, our age, and are themselves kindled at no
other fire then that of hell. And therefore, that I may walk circumspectly, and
not cast the least shadow of offense in the course I am to run, I so far drive
it out of my thoughts to accuse any, that I would not give them leave to frame
any apology or defense for my self; which peradventure may be thought
expedient, and some may expect. But in this I must take leave to deceive their
expectation, and to follow the rules of Descretion and spiritual Prudence,
which will teach us that thriving lesson, To loose something, that we may gain
the more; To yield, that we may overcome; Not to be over-just to our selves,
that others may be won at last to do us the more right; Not to stand upon
credit and reputation when we plead for peace. And of this most Christian art I
may say what Gorgias once spoke of a Tragedy, That it was a kind of fraud by
which he that did deceive was juster than he that did not deceive, and he that
was beguild was much wiser than he that was not. Oh that by this art, by this,
by any continuance, by all the endeavors of my whole life, I might thus
deceive you into such charitable conceits as might make you of the same mind
one toward another, as St. Paul exhorts, and, not to have, as St. James Romans
12. 16. James 2. 1.
interprets St. Paul, the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of persons,
(...), the faith, for (...), the believers, as appears by v. 2. not to look
upon or consider one another as rich or poor, as learned or ignorant, as
honorable or dishonorable, as pleasing or displeasing, but as Christians, as
members of the same body, as called to the same hope of an everlasting
inheritance. And to this end I have culled out these words of the blessed
Apostle St. Paul, Brethren, I beseech you, etc.

Which words are as the droppings of the honycomb; as that new wine and Cant.
4. 11.
milk which were to drop and flow from the hills and mountains. And so many
Joel 3. 18.
of the Fathers interpret that place of the Apostles, who, as Hills, were
eminent for Love and Piety. These words are the very breathings of Love, as
those sweet spices of which the Apostle makes a perfume and increase of Love,
a composition artificially tempered together, pure and holy. What does Exodus
30. 34.
he not do, what does he not say, to recover the Galatians from their dangerous
deviations. What does not this master builder attempt to perfect his work? How
sincere is his heart? He is still the same man, and yet how various are his
expressions? Sometimes he is in a maze, and wondreth, as chapter 1. 6 I marvail
that you are so soon removed from me unto another Gospel. Sometime he is in
trouble, and chides, as chapter 3. 1, 3. Are you so foolish? Have you begun in the
Spirit, and are ye now made perfect by the Flesh? Will you fall back from the
Spirit, which teaches true and solid piety, to a carnal and outward worship of
God, to the ceremonies of the Law? Throughout the whole Epistle he disputes,
and convinces them, That Christ and Moses, the Gospel and the Law, could not
consist together; That to seek for justification by the Law was quite to shut
out Christ, whose peculiar office it was to justify and save them. At last,
after wondering, chiding and disputing, he turns his vehemence another way, and
is as earnest and zealous in entreating, like a good Captain, who will attempt
that fort by treaty which he cannot win by seige; or like a wise Physician, who
will condescend to flatter a froward Patient into health. From the height of
Amazement, from Rebukes, which carry with them a mark of Superiority, from
Arguing and Disputing, from Fighting, and Levelling all opposition in his way,
he sinks by degrees, and falls low, even to Beseeching: Which whosoever does,
by the very doing of it he makes himself an inferior. See how his doctrine
drops as the rain, and his speech distills as the dew! The Spirit of Love blows
upon him; see how the spices flow abroad! Brethren, I beseech you, etc.

You have the occasion of these words. Will you have these sweet Spices beaten
yet smaller? Then conceive our blessed Apostle speaking thus; my little
children, of whom I travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you, till
the true figure and image of Christ be stamped on you, which is now much
defaced and almost wasted out by the artifice and deceitfulness of false
Apostles; if you felt my pain and sorrows, you would not thus look upon me as
an enemy, but lend as open an ear to the truth as now you do unto fables; You
would recollect your selves at my wandering, and think sure there was something
of moment that amazed me; You would kiss my lips for my rebukes; You would
weigh the force of my reasons, and submit. You are not straightened in me, but
you are straightened in your own bowels. For if I wondered, it was to make you
consider: If I imputed folly to you, it was to make you wise: If I pressed you
with reason, it was to make way for the truth: If I said you were bewitched, it
was to uncharm and dis-deceive you. Habet and virga charitatem: Even my Rod was
shook over you by a loving hand; and the roughest wind, the harshest
expression, came from the same treasury of a well affected heart, out of which
the gentlest gate of persuasion uses to be breathed forth: and that Love which
was as loud as thunder, can speak yet in a lower voice. For though you are in a
dangerous error, which undermines the very foundation of the Gospel, yet I can
call and do count you Brethren; A name able to slumber any storm, to becalm any
tempests, to make the roughest Esau as smooth as Jacob. And if there be not
Rhetoric enough in that name of Brother to move you, then see, I bow lower
yet, and beseech you. And though a request may be of that nature that no
humility, no submission, no oratory can commend and prefer it, yet mine is not
so; My request is most equitable, grounded upon a principle of nature. I
request but love for love; Be ye as I am; for I am as ye are: Which in all
equity you are bound to believe as true, till some act of enmity prove it to be
false. Lastly, do not make your displeasure an argument of mine, and finding
nothing in me, lay hold on something in your selves, to prove me an enemy. Do
not shape me out in your thoughts what no injury can make me. Do not draw a
Lion when the copy is a Lamb. Why should you be conscious of doing that wrong
which I never suffered? If you struck me, I felt it not: if you wronged me, I
was not moved, because I was not sensible. Whatsoever you have done, or
whatsoever you can do, I can shadow it with Love: And be the character never so
visible, the impression never so deep, I can blot it out by Forgiveness. Why
should you fear? why should you suspect? Behold, you have not injured me at
all. What motives, what insinuations, what reasons, what wise prae-occupations
and preventions, what art, what humility, what love is here? I may be bold to
say, The tongue of Men and Angels cannot be more expressive, more pathetical:
No eloquence can outspeak this Love; Brethren, I beseech you, etc.

This I conceive to be the sum of these words. Now they consist of these four
parts: Here is 1. a loving Compellation, Brethren; 2. a submissive Address by
way of comprecation, I beseech you; 3. a Request most reasonable, Be you as I
am; for I am as ye are; 4. a wise and prudent Prae-occupation or Prevention,
which removes all obstructions, and forestalls those jealousies, those surmises
and groundless suspicions which are the bane of Charity, and the greatest
enemies to peace, Ye have not injured me at all; Of these the Request is the
main. We shall at this time speak only of the first part, that adducing,
persuading, powerful name of Brethren.

This word in Scripture is of a large and capacious signification and extent.
Sometimes it is confined to a Blood, to those who come from the same loins. We
be twelve brethren, sons of our Father. Sometimes it taketh-in a whole Genesis 42.
32.
Kindred. So Abram, who was Lots uncle, calls him Brother. And Christ is Genesis
13. 8.
said to have Brethren, though Mary had no other son. Sometimes it is enlarged
1 Cor. 9. 5.
to comprehend a whole Nation. Thus Paul calls the Jews his Brethren Romans 9.
3.
according to the flesh: and Moses thus bespeaks the two Hebrews that were at
strife, Sirs, you are Brethren; why do ye wrong one to another? Sometimes Acts
7. 26.
it is of as large a compass as the whole World, and he that is a Man, by right
of his humanity, is Brother to all the men that are. So Lot lovingly entreats
those wicked Sodomites, I pray you, Brethren, do not so Genesis 19. 7.
wickedly, respecting only the common Brotherhood of Nature. And again, it is
contracted into that narrow circuit of a little flock, the Church, those who
are gathered together in one, the Children of God, that were scattered abroad.
John 11. 52.
We will not look upon the word Brethren in all these representations, but
confine our selves to the two last, which are most apposite to our present
purpose, and in all probability most suitable to the mind and meaning of our
Apostle. And we will consider the Galatians and all Christians as Brethren by
Nature, and as Brethren by Grace; as partakers of the same flesh and blood, and
as partakers of the same heavenly calling; Brethren as Men, and Brethren as
Christians, professing the same Faith.

In the first place, Nature her self has made all men Brethren. Have we not
all one Father? has not one God created us? There is great difference Mal. 2.
10.
indeed in other respects. Some are high, others low; some fair, others foul;
some learned, others unlearned; some rich, others poor. But in respect of
Original and Extraction there is no difference at all: we are all branches of
the same Root, all hewn out of one rock, all dug out of one pit. We are all
homines ab humo. And as we all have our rise from the ground, so to the ground
again we must all fall. Out of it we were all taken, and unto Genesis 3. 19.
it we must all return. The highest as well as the meanest may claim kindred
with the Worm and Corruption. This point I have often touched: This doctrine
Job 17. 14.
is most evident both by Scripture and Experience, That all nations Acts 17. 26.
of men are made of one blood; and that by nature we are all Brethren. We need
rather to have it pressed then proved, and to be taught to practice what we
cannot but know.

And therefore to make some use of that which we have learnt concerning our
Brotherhood by Nature; this may serve in the first place to condemn all those
who look upon Men under other consideration then as Men, or view them in any
other shape then that of Brethren. And the very name of Man and of Brother
should be an amulet for all Mankind against the venom of Iniquity and
Injustice. For all the title any one has to these subluminary things, he has
it not jure adoptionis, by any right of Adoption or Filiation: Riches and the
things of this world are not to be found in that Charter; but an incorruptible
Crown and eternal Life. These later indeed are demised unto us by our new
birth: but the things of this world we hold by another tenure, jure Creationis,
by the right of Creation, as we are Men, from him who has made the earth, and
given it in possession to the children of men.

Therefore, in the second place, by this light of Nature we may condemn our
selves when any bitterness toward our brother rises in our hearts, and allay,
or rather root it out, with this consideration, That it is inhumane and most
unnatural; That we cannot nourish it in our breasts, and not fall from our
creation, and leave off to be Men. How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer,
says the Prophet, and cut down to the Isa. 14. 12.
ground? How art thou fallen from being a minister of light to be a Prince of
darkness? from being so filled with the Grace of the Divinity, to be a foul
receptacle of malice? from waiting on God in all his Majesty, to be thrust down
into the foulest pit, there to be his executioner? And how art thou fallen, O
Man, whosoever thou be that hate thy brother, from heaven (for in earth there
is no other heaven then what Love makes) to hell it self, to be a place for
those foul spirits, Malice and Envy, to reign and riot in? How art thou fallen
from thy conversing with Angels, to wallow in blood? from the glory of thy
creation, to burning fire, and to blackness and darkness and tempest? from
being a Man, to be worse then the beasts that perish? Oh what a shame is it to
our royal and high descent! Oh what a shame is it that Man, who was formed and
fashioned by the hand of Love, by the God of Love, by Love it self (for it is
Divine Love that laid the foundation of the World, that breathed a soul into
Man, and stamped that image of God upon him) that Man, I say; so elemented, so
composed, so compassed about with Love, should delight in war, in variance, and
contentions! that this creature of Love should be as a hot fiery furnace,
sending forth nothing but sulphur and stench, but malice and the gall of
bitterness! that he who is candidatus Angelorum, made to be a competitor with
the Angels, and in time to be equal to them, made to be conformed with Christ,
and to be transformed into his image, as the Apostle speaks, should make
himself a companion with Devils! and for a malicious man, though he be not
possessed, yet may be sure he carries a Devil about with him whithersoever he
goes, that this (...), this honorable creature, as Synesius calls Man, should
turn Savage, should be a Beast, nay a Devil, to accuse, deceive, and destroy!
We use indeed to stand much upon our honor and repute: But none can dishonor
us more then our selves do, even then when we are in our altitudes; when we
glory in our shame; when one man has trodden down another as the clay in the
streets; when we think our selves great men by making our brethren little; when
we contemn and despise, hate and persecute them; then in this height, in this
glory, in this triumph, we are the most despicable creatures on the earth in
his sight who being the God of Love, and having made us Men, and linkt us
together as Brethren, cannot but look upon us as the basest and vilest
creatures in the world, when being grown savage we hate one another. And
further we carry not this consideration, but pass now to view the Galatians as
Brethren in that other capacity, as they were Christians, professing the same
Faith: Which our Apostle in this place might more particularly and especially
mean.

For as they were Brethren by Nature, so were they also by Grace and their
celestial Calling, having one spirit, one hope, one faith, one baptism; one
calling; being all brought out of the same womb of common Ignorance, heirs of
the same common salvation, partakers of a like precious faith, sealed with the
same Sacraments, fed with the same Manna, ransomed with the same price,
comforted with the same glorious promises. Et major fraternitas Christi quam
sanguinis, says the Father; The Brotherhood we have by Christ is a greater and
nearer tie then that we have by blood or nature. Hereupon Justine Martyr and
Optatus have been so far charitable as to call Judaizing Christians and
Donatists by the name of Brethren. And we may observe that our Apostle, who in
all other his Epistles calls them he writes to Saints; To the Saints at
Corinth; To the Saints at Ephesus; To the Saints at Coloss; To the Saints at
Philippi, Grace be with you, etc. yet in this whole Epistle he never calls the
Galatians Saints; because from being Christ's Disciples they had well-neer
degenerated to be Moses 's Scholars, and had joined the Law with the Gospel.
Yet nevertheless, though he will not honor them with the name of Saints, yet
he is very willing to call them Brethren, as professing the same Christ, though
with an unsavory mixture and dangerous addition. This may soon be gathered by
any who will but take so much pains as to read this short Epistle. And upon so
plain an Observation, as upon a foundation, we shall build this Doctrine, That
there is such a relation, such a Brotherhood, betwixt all those who profess the
same Faith, that neither Error, nor Sense, nor Injury can break and dissolve
it. For if any, or all of these had been of force enough to do it, then
certainly our Apostle would never have been so free as to have called the
Galatians Brethren.

And first to Error, though it have a foul aspect, and bear a distastful and
loathed name, yet it carries no such monstrosity, no such terror with it, as
to fright Brethren so far asunder as not to behold one another in that
relation, not to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. For if
there were any such power about it, the name of Brethren must needs be quite
wiped out from amongst the children of men; there being almost as many several
opinions in the world as men; and most of them erroneous. For Man, being
subject to passion, cannot improve his wisdom so far as to preserve it safe and
untoucht of all error. So that no reason can be given, but such as
Uncharitableness, or Ambition, or Pride, or Self-conceit use to frame, and
throw as fireballs about the world to consume and devour all Brotherhood (and
these are no reasons, but carnal pretenses) why men may not be divided in
opinion, and yet united in charity; why they may not draw opposite conclusions,
and yet conclude in peace; why they may not have different conceptions, and yet
be of the same mind one toward another; why they may not err, and yet be
brethren.

For first, Error may be the object of my Dislike, but not of my Anger. For as
it is error, and no more, it has no moral, culpable deformity in it; as being
no way free nor voluntary. And the Civil Law has laid it down as a rule,
Voluntas errantis nulla est; He that errs has no will at all. For he does not
err who knows he is ignorant, but he who thinks he knows what indeed he does
not know. And Error is no sooner discovered but by its very being discovered is
avoided. Therefore the greatest punishment an erring person can receive, is, as
Plato speaks, to be brought to School, and be taught. Now to keep our Charity
alive even toward erring persons; First, we must consider the great difficulty
of finding out truth in all things, and of avoiding error. This consideration
made St. Augustine so compassionate and mild even toward the worst of
Heretics, the Manichees, and to think that none could be enraged against them
but those who thought it an easy matter to serene the mind against carnal
pleasures, and who knew not how hard a thing it is for the eye of the inward
man through so many mists of objections to look upon the Sun. He who
considers that himself also may be tempted will use the spirit of meekness
toward an erring brother. Gal. 6. 1.


Secondly, we should conceive it more probable that our brother does err
rather for want of light than out of malice, and wilfully, to his own damnation
and others.

Thirdly, we ought to look upon the erring person as one who may possibly be of
the number of the elect, whom God in his wisdom may permit to err and fall,
that he may raise him up again to the knowledge and profession of the truth
with greater glory to himself. And against those who are destined to a crown of
glory, against our Brethren and the members of Christ, how dare we pass a
severe sentence?

Lastly, let us but a while put upon our selves the persons of our adversaries,
and put ours upon them; and let us conceive it possible that our selves may
err as foully as they. And then let us think within our selves that this
deceived brother, whose error we count so pernicious, may be sent to us from
God to be an occasion of finding out some truth the face whereof we have never
yet seen, as having been never represented to us. And then to these charitable
thoughts, let us join also a prudent consideration of those truths wherein we
both agree, which peradventure may be more and more weighty then those in which
we vary; that so by the luster and brightness of these the offense taken by
the other may vanish as the mist before the Sun. In all our disputes and
debates with our Brethren whom we suppose to err, let us walk by that rule
which the learned have drawn out before us for our direction, That no Text of
Scripture in its exposition can retain the sense and meaning of the blessed
Spirit which does not edify in charity. For that Doctrine cannot be of any use
in the Church, says Bernard, which exasperates one man against another. And
this Moderation, this Discretion, is that Salt which Mark 9. 50.
Christ requires to be in us, that wise seasoning of our words, that purging of
our affections, amongst which Ambition and Envy are the most violent: Have this
salt in your selves; and then, as it follows, you shall have Peace one with
another.

Now for application of this; I might here strike through the loins of those
who are enemies to peace, and are so intent against them who are not of the
same opinion, that in the prosecution they forget they are Brethren; who like
Hannibal, cannot live without an enemy; or, like those ancient Spaniards in
Trogus, are so out of love with Concord that they dispute and quarrel upon no
other reason than this, because they hate it; who call every Opinion that is
not theirs Heresy, and Heresy a crime, accounting nothing sin but Heresy;
not so hot against a foul pollution in the heart as against an error in the
understanding; not so angry with a crying sin as with a petty mistake. But I
had rather exhort you to bear the burdens of these contentious men, as St. Paul
exhorts in this Epistle; Not to assault one another with lies in defense of the
Truth; Not to nourish hatred in honor to Charity; Not to fly asunder in
defense of the Cornerstone; Not to be shaken a pieces to secure the Rock. If
others separate themselves, do not you withdraw your affection from them. Si
velint, fratres; and, si nolint, fratres: If they will, let them be your
Brethren; and if they will not, yet let them be your Brethren. And in these
times of hurry and noise, in these so many divisions and sects, look upon every
sect with an eye of Charity, or as Erasmus calls it, with an Evangelical eye:
and leaving all bitterness and rancor behind you, walk on in a constant course
of piety, and a holy contention with your selves; not answering reviling with
reviling, but beating down every imagination which is contrary to Love; doing
that upon Sin in your selves which you cannot do upon Error in your Brethren;
not shaking off Brotherhood, though the error be as great as this of the
Galatians, then which there scarce could be a greater; that so you may be like
the people of Nazianzium, who by their peaceable behavior in times of great
dissension gained a name and title, and were called the Ark of Noah, because by
this part of spiritual wisdom they escaped that inundation, that deluge, which
had well-neer over-flowed and swallowed up all the Christian world.

But, in the next place, if Error cannot break and dissolve this relation of
Brotherhood which is amongst Christians, being of it self venial and easy to
be pardoned, especially of those who are subject to error themselves; yet Sin
has a foul aspect, and is of the most ugly and deformed appearance of any
thing in the world; being compared by one to dung, by another to that which I
will not now name; being a monstrous deviation from that infinite Justice and
Purity, that eternal Law of God: so that if we could watch one eye with
another, our carnal eye with our spiritual; if we could see Sin in its impure
and horrid shape; if God would present it to us now in that likeness in which
it shall appear in the day of judgment, we should straight be shaken in our
minds, our joints would be loosed, and our very soul, says St. Chrysostom,
would fly out of our bodies. And do we not well then to be angry with this
monster, though we meet it in a Brother, or in the person perhaps of our
dearest friend? Should we not hate the garment, much more the person, of him
who is bespotted with sins? This question may be asked: And yet we should never
ask this question, if we would distinguish (which is easy to be done) between
the Nature of our Brother and his Fault; between that which he received from
God, and that evil affection he has from himself; between that which is from
heaven, heavenly, and that which is from the earth, nay from the lowest pit of
hell. If we would consider him in his rational nature, the image of God; and in
that other capacity, as he is one for whom Christ dyed, and so capable of
eternal life; and that though he seem dead, yet his life may nevertheless Col.
3. 3.
be hidden with Christ in God. For why judge thou thy brother? Judgment is
the Lords, who sees things that are not as if they were. What though he be
fallen upon the stone, and be bruised? Yet he may be built upon that foundation
which is sure, and which has this Seal, THE LORD KNOWS WHO ARE HIS. This
open profaner may become a true professor, this false witness may be a true
martyr, this persecutor of the Church may at length prove the most glorious
member and bold defender of it, and he that led the Saints bound to Jerusalem
may himself afterward rejoice in his bonds for the same cause: Paul of the
tribe of Benjamin may, as it is said of Benjamin, in the morning raven as a
wolf, and at night divide the spoil, and after bow his head to such a Sheep as
Ananias. And therefore the Apostle, where he erects a kind of discipline
amongst the Thessalonians, thus draws it forth; If any man obey not our word,
that is, be refractory to the Gospel 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
of Christ, have no company with that man, that he may be ashamed; that seeing
others avoid him, he may be forced to have recourse unto himself, to hold
colloquy with his own soul, to find out that plague of his heart which makes
him thus like a Pelican in the wilderness, or an Owl in the desert; like the
leper under the Law, which no man must come near. Have no company with him,
that is, By thy company give him no encouragement in his sin: And yet, for all
this, have company with him; for count him not as an enemy, but admonish him as
a brother; which we cannot do if we avoid his company. And in this sense also
we must take that of the Apostle, where he forbids us to eat with public and 1
Cor. 5. 10.
notorious offenders: For the Apostles mind was not that such men were to be
given over for gone; or, that we should acquaint our selves only with the good,
and not with the bad, as Physicians do in time of Pestilence, look only to the
found, and shun the diseased. For our Savior Christ familiarly conversed, ate
and drank with publicans and sinners, and gives the reason of it, Because he
came to call, not the righteous, but sinners to repentance. And we cannot think
that St. Paul is contrary to Christ.

Beloved, the rule of Charity commands us to think every man an heir with
Christ; or at least, if he be not, that he may be so. What though believers be
very few, and there be many so like them that we cannot distinguish them? This
is, I confess, an error of our Charity, but it is a very necessary error. And
he that errs not thus, he that thinks not and hopes not the best he can of all
he sees, wants something of being a good Christian. And this error of our
Charity is not without reason. For we see not where nor how the Grace of God
may work. How sinful soever a man be, yet if he be baptized, if he make
profession of the name of Christ, if he do but come behind and touch the hemm
of Christ's Garment, the Grace of God may cure him. Nay, were he dead in sin,
who knows what the Grace of God may do? Peradventure God may call unto him
lying and stinking in his sins as in a Grave, Lazarus, come forth. Charity
therefore, because she may err, nay, because she must err, looks upon every
Christian as a Brother. If he err, she is a guide to him; if he sin, she is
Physician; if he wander, she recalls him; if he fall, she strives to lift him
up, being a light to the blind, and a staff to the weak; if he fall into sin,
she is ready to restore him in the spirit of meekness; (...), that is the
phrase, to be Gal. 6. 1.
his Surgeon, to handle him with a gentle (or, as we use to say with a
Ladies) hand, not roughly, but with all tenderness and compassion; to set every
broken joint, but so as if she touched it not; to settle all that is dislocated,
that all his parts and joints may be entire, and aptly knit together, that
nothing may be wanting to him of those things which are required to the
completing and constituting of a brother and a Christian. Look upon these
Galatians unto whom Paul writes, and then cast your eye upon chap. 5. 19, 20,
21. where he draws out that black catalogue of the works of the flesh,
Adultery, Fornication, Uncleanness, and the like, and you will think it more
then probable, that these sins even reigned amongst them; that they had abused
their Christian liberty as an occasion to the flesh, v. 13. that besides the
contagion of a foul Error, they were also polluted with Sins; yet St. Paul does
rather intimate then impute them. He shows them in their full horror, and
deformity, that the Galatians may run from them, and leaves them to accuse and
condemn themselves; and though he strike at their Error and Sin both, yet he
makes a fair close with themselves, and calls them Brethren.

And now briefly to make some use of this, it may seem to correct an angry and
malignant humor which lurks in the hearts of many men undiscerned,
undiscovered, and often breaths and exhaleth it self forth, not to the saving
of the souls, but to the blasting of the good name of their brethren; not as
physic, but as poison, fatal and deleterial. It is one mark of Antichrist,
That he sits as God in the temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 4.
showing himself that he is God: thundering out his excommunications,
canonizing, damning, absolving, condemning whom he pleases. Beloved, thus
(...), to overlook, our brother thus to look down upon our Brethren, and dart
a heavy censure on them for that for which we should shed a tear, is so far to
follow Antichrist, as to take the seat and place of God; nay, to put him out of
his seat, and do his office; nay, to do that which he will not do, to sentence
him to death when he, for ought we know, has chosen unto life: Nay, though it
does not make any man Antichrist, yet it makes him so much Antichrist, as to
place him in a flat opposition to Christ himself: For we have not such a high
Priest as cannot be touched with the feeling of our sins, but being tempted
himself is able and willing to compassionate those who are tempted. Did we feel
the burden of our Brothers sins, as he did, did we apprehend the wrath of God,
as he did, we should rather, as he did, offer up prayers and supplications,
with strong crying and tears, unto him, for our Brethren, then smite them with
our tongues, then tell of the misery of these wounded ones, (that is, speak
vauntingly, and Psalm. 69. 26.
preach thereof, as the word signifies) then thus rain down upon them their own
snares, halestones and coals of fire. I confess, prudent and discreet
reprehension is as a gracious and seasonable rain, as precious balm; but rash
and inconsiderate censure is as a Tempest or Hurrican, to waste a soul, to
carry all before it, and to digg up a good name by the roots. And as it is
truly said that most men speak against Riches not out of hatred but love unto
them; so do many declaim against Sin, not out of hatred to sin, but out of love
to themselves; which may be as great a crime as that they speak against. Signum
putant bonae conscientiae aliis male dicere; They think it a sign of a good
conscience in themselves to speak evil of others, and conceit themselves good
if they can say others are evil; For as true Righteousness speaks always in
compassion, but that which is false and counterfeit breaths forth nothing but
wrath and reviling and indignation. Remember those that are in bonds, as if you
were bound with them, and as being your selves in the Hebr. 13. 3.
body: as being in the body, obnoxious to the same evils, in a mortal body,
Romans 8. 11.
an earthly body, and a corruptible body. And remember those who are 1 Cor. 15.
40. 53.
in their sins, which are the bonds, I am sure, and fetters of the soul, as
being also in that body of death, as being under that burden that presses Romans
7. 24.
down, and under sin that hangs so fast on that we shall never fling it Hebr.
12. 1.
off till we cast off our bodies, being in the same polluted garments which
will stick close to us till we be uncloathed, and clothed upon, 2 Cor. 5. 4.
and mortality be swallowed up of life. Look not upon thy Brethren as
Grasshoppers, and upon thy felf as a strong and perfect man in Christ; as if
thou were spiritual, heavenly, impeccable, and as far removed from Sin as God
himself. But rather as St. Paul was made a Jew to the Jew, so be thou as a sick
man ministering to the sick, handling another 1 Cor. 9. 20.
with the same compassion thou would have extended to thy self, if thou thy
self should be in his case. If thou despise and reproach him, I am sure thou
art in a far worse. For be he what the frailty of the Flesh, the subtilty of
Satan, and the flattery of a vain World can make him, yet he is thy Brother: be
he sick well-near unto death, yet he is thy Brother; be he the lost sheep, yet
he is thy Brother; and Christ may fetch him back again, even upon thy
shoulders, that is, by thy compassion and thy care: be he amongst the swine
with the Prodigal, yet he is thy Brother; for within a while he may come back
again to his Father and thy Fathers house: If he be to thee as an heathen or
publican, yet he must also be Brother. And further we press not this Use.

So then neither Error nor Sin can unty this knot, can dissolve and break this
relation of Brethren; I named a third, but I am well-near ashamed to name it
again, or bring it in competition with Error or Sin; because an offense against
God should more provoke us then any injury done to our selves; Which our
Apostle here sets so light by, that although the Galatians had even questioned
his Apostleship, and preferred Peter and James and John before him, yet he
passes it by as not worth the taking notice of; Like Socrates, who being
overcome in judgment professed he had no reason to be angry with his enemies,
unless it were for this, that they conceived and believed they had hurt him.
And here St. Paul says, Ye have not hurt me at all. And indeed no injury can
be done by a brother to a brother. For the injury is properly done to God, who
made them Brethren and fellow servants, and who reserves all power of revenge
unto himself, who is their common Master and the God of revenge. If a brother
strike us, we should, says Chrysostom, kiss his hand; if he would destroy us,
our revenge should be to save him. Ignoscat tibi Christus, says Nazianzene, to
a young man that was suborned to kill him; Christ forgive thee, who has also
forgiven me, and dyed to save me. Ille idoneus patientiae sequester; He is the
best Advocate for our patience, the best Decider of all our controversies and
debates. If you gage and lay down your injury with him, he is the Revenger; if
your loss, he is the Restorer; if your grief, he is the Physician; if your
death, he will raise you up again. But we shall no further prosecute this,
because it will fall in with our last part. We will rather, having as ye have
read, secured and fortified the Brethren, walk about yet a while longer, and
tell the towers and bulwarks which the God of Love has raised and set up to
uphold them. And they are 1. Pleasure, excessive Pleasure; 2. Profit, great
Profit; 3. Necessity, extreme Necessity. All these serve to maintain and uphold
this Brotherhood. For Brotherly Love is 1. pleasant and delightful; 2.
profitable and advantageous; 3. so necessary that it had been better for us
never to have been then not to love the Brethren.

For the first, hear what the Psalmist says, Behold how good and joyful Psalm
133. 1.
a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together in unity! Not only it is so, but
it is worth our observing, and we are called to behold and consider it: Which
if we did with a serious eye, we should not so slight and undervalue it as we
do. For Pleasure is winning and attractive: It is a motive above all eloquence,
more persuasive then the words of the wise. Oh that we could be once brought to
be well persuaded of this Pleasure, and did not so dote on that which has no
true pleasure at all in it! The Hills, says the Prophet David, are girded with
gladness. Psalm 65. 12.
Things are figuratively said to be glad when they attain unto and abide in
their natural perfection. So the Light is said to rejoice when it shines clear
and continually, because then it is in its highest and fullest splendour. Now
there can be no higher perfection for a Christian then to love the Brethren: He
that dwells in love, dwells in God, and God 1 John 4. 16.
in him: and, By this men shall know you are my Disciples, if ye have John 13.
35.
love one to another; says Christ by the same John in his Gospel. What
perfection greater then for a man to dwell in God, and to have God dwell in
him? This is to be like unto God, and to be partaker of his spirit. And to be
Christ's Disciple is to be one with him, and to be ingrafted into him. Here is
the Christians highest pitch, his Ascension, his Zenith, his Third heaven. And
therefore it is said to be a speech of Christ which the Nazarene Gospel has
recorded, though our Bibles have not, Nunquam loeti sitis nisi cum fratres in
charitate videritis. No spectacle of delight, nothing that a Christian can take
pleasure in, nothing of virtue and power has enough to raise a Disciples joy,
but to see his fellow-disciples, his Brethren, embracing one another in love.
For if the ground of all Pleasure be agreement and proportionableness to the
temper and constitution of any thing, then certainly nothing so agreeing, so
harmonical, so consonant to our reasonable nature and to the ingenuity of our
kind, and consequently so universally delightful to all who have not put off
the bowels and the nature of Man, and are by the love of the world swayed and
bended to a brutish condition, as that which may as well go for a Reward as for
a Duty, the Loving of the Brethren; that language of Love, which we must
practice here, that we may chant it in heaven with the congregation of the
firstborn, and the spirits of men made perfect by love, eternally. And indeed
Charity is the prime ingredient of the glorified Saints. Of whose state we
understand no more but that they are in bliss, and love one another, and that
they are for ever blessed because they for ever love one another. Their Charity
never fails, says St. Paul, and then their bliss is everlasting. What is
Paradise, says the Father, but to love God, and serve him? And the best love
we can show him, the best service we can do him, is to love and serve the
Brethren: The end of the Gospel is love; 1 Timothy 1. 5.
that is, other doctrine tends to strife and contention; but the whole
doctrine of the Gospel tends to love and unity: So that no doctrine that
naturally and of it self works wrath and uncharitableness can be Evangelical.
For the wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, easy
to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without judging, James 3. 17.
and without Hypocrisy. Beloved, Envy, malice, debate, contention, strife, are
the delight and joy of them who have tasted of the powers of no other world
then of this which shall be consumed; or rather they are the delight of the
infernal spirits, as it is a torment to them to be restrained from doing
mischief. Art thou come to destroy us, to torment us before our time? says the
unclean Spirit. Art thou come to curb and hinder us from vexing and destroying
those we hate? for this is torturing, this is sending them again into the deep,
confining them to their Luke 8. 31.
Hell. As the lower pit is said to be opened in the Revelation, when they have
liberty to vex and torment mankind; so it is as much Hell to them not to punish
others, as it is to be punished. And none but evil spirits, and Men of their
constitution and temper, can make a Heaven in Hell it self, by doing mischief.
And indeed Delight it is not properly; but it is called so because it is
proportionable and satisfactory to their malice and pernicious nature and
disposition. No; if we hear, LAETENTUR COELI; Let the Heavens rejoice, it is
because Peace is here on earth. If we hear, LAETENTUR ANGELI, Let the Angels
rejoice; it is for the tears and repentance of some sinner here below. If we
hear, LAETENTUR SANCTI, Let the Saints rejoice, it is in their union and
communion, in those mutual offices of bearing and supporting one another; and,
as so many Angels, by prayers and exhortations, and by the reciprocal activity
of their love, lifting and conveighing one another into Abraham's bosom. Thus
we see that that love which makes and keeps us Brethren is the pleasantest
thing in the world, and that all other joy is no better joy then the Damned
have in hell: A Joy I must not call it: A Complacency we may call it: But that
is too good a name. It is the feeding, the filling, the satisfying the Malice
of an ugly and malicious Fiend.

But, in the next place, we shall the sooner fall in love with this Love, if
Profit also be brought-in to commend and enhance the price and value of this
Pleasure. And here if we ask with the Apostle, (...), What profit is there? we
may answer, Much every manner of way. For from this we have all those helps,
those huge advantages, which are as so many heaves and promotions and
thrustings forward into Happiness. By my brother I may see that which before I
could not discover. He may clear up my Affections from storm and tempest, and
my Understanding from darkness and confusion of thoughts. He may cast out
infinitatem rei, as the Civilians speak, that variety, that kind of infinity,
of appearances in which every thing uses to show and present it self. He may
be, as Moses said to Hobab, to me instead of eyes, to guide and direct Numb.
10. 31.
me by his counsel and providence. By him I may hear, as Samuel did for Ely,
what the Lord God will say. By him I may feel and taste how gracious the Lord
God is. He may do those offices for me which the Angels of God, those
ministering Spirits, cannot do, because they have no body. He may be my Servant,
and I may wait upon him: He may be my Supporter, and I may uphold him: He may
be my Priest, and I may teach him: He may be my Guard, and I may protect him:
He may be my Angel, and I may go with him and be his conduct: He may be made
all things to me, and I may be made all things to him. Thus we may grow up
together in Grace (for in this Nursery, in this Eden, in this Fraternity, the
nearer and closer we grow together, the more we spread and flourish)
COMPLANTATI, grafted together in the similitude of Christ's Death; and Romans 6. 5.
CONSEPULTI, Buried together with him in Baptism; and CONRESUSCITATI, v. 4.
risen together with Christ. No Grafting, no Burying, Col. 3. 1.
no Rising, but together; No profit, no advantage, no increase, but in love.
Speaking the truth in love we grow up into him in all things, Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.
which is the Head, even Christ: By which the whole body fitly joined together
and compacted, as a House, by that which every joint supplies, by that spirit
and juice which every part conveighs, according to the effectual working in the
measure of every part, according as it wants sustentation and increase, (...),
that the body, which is the Brotherhood, may be edified, that is, more and more
instructed and improved by mutual love and the duty and offices of Charity,
which is that increase of the body unto the edifying of it self in love. Oh
what a shole of Christians did this Love send forth, when the Heathen could
make the observation, and proclaim it, See how these Christians love one
another! Then did they fill their villages, their temples, their armies: And,
if we look upon their number, they might, as Tertullian observes, have easily
swallowed up their enemies in victory. When St. Peter, that Fisher of men,
caught so many together, even three thousand souls, it was Love that gathered
them in, and Acts 2. 41.
it was Love that kept them in. For (...), they continued daily with v. 46.
one accord in the temple: They were of one heart and of one soul: And what
Acts 4. 32.
is it that has made such a dearth and scarcity of sincere and truly pious
Christians, but our Debate and bitter Malice, the greatest enemy Christianity
has. For by biting and devouring one another we have well-near consumed one
another, nay, well-near consumed Religion it self. And if a Heathen should
stand by, he could not but wonder, and make no other observation then this, See
how the Christians hale one another! The Heathen of old could find out nothing
in the Christians but their name to accuse them; but we of this aged and
corrupted world have scarce any thing but the name of Christians to commend us.
Hoc Ithacus velit; This is that which our enemies have long expected, and to
effect which they have spent their nights, their days; have laid out their
leisure, their business, their watchings, their very sleep; and now have seen
that fire which they did help to kindle, by the light of which they may stretch
forth their curtains and enlarge their territories and dominions every day in
Christendom. For as the Devil is tormented, as Optatus speaks, with the peace
of the Brethren, when they are joined together vinculo fidei and glutine
charitatis, by the bond and cement of Faith and Love, so is he enlivened, and
put into hopes of success in his attempts, by the mutual ruptures and
jealousies which the Brethren, the members of the Church foment and cherish
amongst themselves. When by the defection of Jeroboam, Judah and Israel were
rent asunder, then came Shishak and troubled Jerusalem. And 2 Chronicles. 12. 2.
therefore let us love the Brotherhood, as the Apostle exhorts. For an enemy is
never more dangerous to an army then when it is disordered by mutiny and
division. If it be at peace with it self, it has half conquered the enemy.
When the Church begins to be torn by Schisms, and Contentions, then every blast
is ready to shake and shatter it; but when it is in unity within it self, then
it is built up strong and fair, as the tower of David. No Heresy, no Enemy, no
Jesuit, no Devil, no, not the Gates of Hell, can prevail against us, whilst we
are fast joined together, rooted and built-up and established in love. No
principalities nor powers, no height nor depth, no creature, can come near to
touch us, whilst we keep within the circle and compass which Love makes,
whilst we continue Brethren.

Thus then we find both Pleasure and Profit in being Brethren. But now, in the
third and last place, there is a kind of Necessity to force us: And the Love
that keeps us so is necessary not only as a virtue or quality without which we
ought not to be, but as a virtue without which we cannot be what we profess.
For loose but this bond once, unjoynt this goodly frame, shake but the
Brotherhood, and we are fallen from heaven, spoiled of all the riches of the
Gospel, deprived of all the privileges and prerogatives of Christians,
defeated of all those glorious promises, shook from the hope of immortality and
eternal life, without love, and then without God in this world; left naked and
destitute, stripped of our inheritance, having title to no place but that where
the revolting Angels and malicious Spirits are shut up. For as that is true
which we find in the Gloss on the Canon Law, Habe Charitatem, and fac quod vis;
Do it in love, and do what thou will: Thy Zeal shall be as the fire in the
bush, burning, but not consuming: thy Reproofs shall be balm; thy Justice,
physic; thy Wounds, kisses; thy Tears, as the dew of heaven; thy Joy, the joy
of Angels; all thy Works, fit to be put in the register of God. But if once
thou forsake the Brotherhood, if once thou shake hands with Love, then
whatsoever thou do must needs be ill done because thou do it. If thou
speak with the tongue of Men and Angels, it is but noise: if thou give all thy
goods to the poor, it is but loss: and that which with Love is martyrdom,
without it may be murder: Thy Zeal will be rage; thy Reproofs, swords; thy
Justice, gall and wormwood; thy Wounds, fatal; thy Tears, the dropping of a
crocodile; thy Joy, madness; and thy Works, sit for nothing but the fire. The
Gospel to thee will be as killing as the Law, and the Blood of Christ cry as
loud for vengeance as that of Abel, or of any Brother whom thou have persecuted
and wounded with injuries and reproach. Let us not deceive our selves with vain
pretenses and ridiculous excuses, with empty and airy phansies, which can
conceive and shape out Love, when it is dead in the heart; which can revile,
and love; strike, and love; kill, and love. For a truth it is, and a sad truth,
a truth which may bore the ears of many of us Christians, and strike us to the
ground, as Peter's voice did Ananias. And St. John has set his seal to it, He
that loves not his Brother, (and not to 1 John 3. 14.
love him with St. John, is to hate him) abides in death. And again, He He
that hates his brother is a murderer; alluding to our Saviors reformation of
the Law, which even made Anger murder. What degree of Murder soever he means,
such a Murderer he is that has not eternal life abiding in him; The want of
this Love being a sure mark of a child of wrath, and of one carrying his hell
about with him whithersoever he goes, being himself a Tophet burning with fire
and brimstone, with Hatred and Malice and Fury; having nothing between him and
that everlasting Hell but a ruinous wall, his body of flesh, which will moulder
away and fall down within a span of time. Oh how should this still sound in our
ears, as that, Rise, and come unto judgment, did in St. Hieroms, who could not
sleep for it! Oh that the sound of this would make us, not to leave our sleep,
but to leave our gall, our venom, our Malice, which may peradventure bite our
Brothers heel, wound him in his person, in his estate, or good name, but will
most certainly sting us unto death. Let then this sad, nay this behoofful, this
glorious, this Necessity prevail with us: and let us not so trifle with God and
our own souls, so flatter and smile our selves to death, as to think there is
no such Necessity at all, but that we may love God and yet hate and persecute
our Brother, nay, love God the more, the more we hate our Brother. For I ask,
Is it necessary to love God? is it necessary to love our selves? is it
necessary to be the children of God? is it necessary to love Gods image in
others, and to repair it in our selves? is it necessary to be ingrafted into
Christ? is it necessary to believe? in a word, is it necessary to be saved?
Then is it also necessary to love the Brethren sincerely, cordially, with a
single heart. To love our selves, or, as we are commanded, to love our common
Father which is in Heaven, and who is the God of Love. Profit and Pleasure may
draw and allure us; But Necessity forces, and chains and links us to the
Brethren. Now the God of Love work true Brotherly Love in us all.

A SERMON Preached on Christmass-Day.
PSALM LXXII. 6, 7. He shall come down like rain upon the mowen Grass; [or,
into a fleece of wool;] as showers that water the Earth.

In his days shall the righteous flourish; and abundance of peace, so long as
the Moon endures.


THis Psalm conteins a Prayer and a Prophecy: A Prayer for King Solomon, who
laid down his Scepter with his Life, and slept with his Fathers; and a
Prophecy of Christ, whose Throne is for ever and ever; and of whose Kingdom
there is no end. Take it as a Prayer, and it was heard. For God gave Solomon
Wisdom and Understanding 1 Kings 4. 29.
and largeness of heart, to judge his people with Righteousness, and the poor
with judgment. Take it as a Prophecy, and it was fulfilled: For God sent his
Son, who is Wisdom it self, to be the Shepherd and great Bishop of our Souls,
and to be our King to lead us in the ways of Righteousness. Apply it to the
Type, and the expressions are hyperbolical. Righteousness in the Text is not
complete, nor abundance full; Peace not as lasting as the Moon, but as the Moon
waxing and waning, and at last eclipsed and turned into blood. That Dominion
from the River unto the ends of the Earth takes in no larger compass 1 Kings 4.
24.
than Judaea, or at most the Region from Tiphsah unto Azzah, so narrow a
compass of ground that St. Hierom was ashamed to bewray its dimensions. In a
word; interpret it by the inscription, as a Psalm for King Solomon, and all
generations make but forty years; all Kings are but Pharaoh, and Hiram, and
some few other that were on this side the River Euphrates. All Nations are not
many Nations: and Solomon's For ever, we know well, had an end. And as we find
it in hyperbolical Speeches, ad verum mendacio pervenitur; That we come not too
short of the truth, the phrase is made to look beyond it. That we may conceive
aright of the glory of Solomon's Kingdom, David extends it from the River unto
the ends of the Earth. That we may conceive some Peace, he tells us of
abundance. He multiplies and dilates the bounds of his Empire, makes Judaea as
large as the whole world; an Age, eternity; and that Scepter which did depart,
everlasting. Literally this cannot be true of King Solomon. Hic Psalmus
Solomoni canere dicitur quae tamen soli competant Christo; says Cyril: This
Psalm is sung to King Solomon, but the ditty is of Christ, and of him alone.
Behold, a greater then Solomon is here; He shall have Dominion from sea to sea.
This Verse. 8.
belongs to Christ alone; All Kings shall worship him Before whom do all Verse.
11.
Kings fall down, but Christ? And all Nations shall serve him. Whom shall all
Nations serve but Christ? His name shall endure for ever: Whose name but
Christ's? All Nations shall be blessed in Christ; in Solomon, none at all. And
here in my Text, He shall descend like the rain, cannot be true of Solomon: For
he descended indeed, but not like rain, because he came not down from Heaven.
Many things are spoken of the Type which more properly belong to the Antitype.
Many things in this Psalm are spoken of Solomon which stretch beyond the line
of truth, and for no other reason but this, because they belong to Christ,
whose Type he bore, and in whom they were truly to be made good, and without
any Hyperbole at all. Solomon did judge the people with righteousness; but
Christ shall judge the whole world, and Solomon himself. Solomon was a King;
but Christ is the King of Kings. Solomon passed all the Kings of the Earth in
Wisdom; but Christ is Wisdom it self. Solomon did break in pieces the
Oppressor; but Christ broke the jaws of the Destroyer of mankind, and took the
prey out of his mouth. To him give all the Prophets witness; To him do all the
Fathers apply the words of my Text: The holy Church throughout all the world
does acknowledge him in her Hymns and Service for this great Feast of Christ's
Nativity, singing praises to the Lord our Strength, who came down like the rain
into a fleece of wool, (or, the mowen grass) as showers that water the earth.
And we have seen it with our eyes, and fell it in our hearts, and it is the joy
and glory of this high Feast, that in his days the righteous flourish, and
abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures.

And now I may say of this Prophecy as our Savior himself did of another,
This day was this Scripture fulfilled in Christ who is signaculum omnium Luke
4. 21.
Prophetarum, who was the great Prophet who was to come, and the seal of all
the rest; in whom all Prophesies were at an end. And therefore we will but
change the Tense, and not read it DESCENDET, he shall come down, (for the Jew
himself will yield us thus much) but DESCENDIT: The fullness of time is come,
and he is come down already. In quo quicquid retro fuit, demutatum est, says
Yertullian; In whom whatsoever was in times past is either changed, as
Circumcision; or supplied, as the Law; or fulfilled, as the Prophesies; or made
perfect, as Faith it self. The Subject of the Song is the same. Eaedem voces
sonant, eaedem literae notant, idem Spiritus pulsat; The words that sound, the
same; the letters that character him out, the same; the same Spirit, which
inspires the Prophets, and now speaks to us. Only for the Feasts sake we will
but change the time, the Future for the Present, and so express our thanks and
joy: Which should as far exceed the joy of the Prophets as Fruition does Hope,
and the present enjoying of the benefit a sad and earnest expectation of it.
And then there will naturally arise the handling of these points. 1. We shall
consider the Incarnation of the Son of God as a Descent or Coming down; 2. The
Manner of this Descent. It was placidus and insensibilis, says the Father,
sweet and peaceable, without trouble, without noise, scarcely to be perceived;
not in the strong wind, to rend us to pieces; not in the Earthquake, to shake
us; not in the fire, to consume us; but in a still and small voice: not as
Thunder, to make a noise; not as Hayl, to rattle on the house-tops; not as the
Blast and Mildew, to wither us; but as the Rain falling sweetly on the grass,
or on a fleece of wool, and as the showers which water the earth, and make it
fruitful. 3. We shall observe the Effect which this Descent produces, or the
Fruit which springs up upon the fall of this gracious Rain; First,
Righteousness springs up, and spreads her self, Justus florebit; So some render
it; The righteous shall flourish. Secondly, After Righteousness Peace shows it
self, even abundance of peace. And Thirdly, both these are not herbae
solstitiales, herbs which spring up and wither in one day, but which will be
green and flourish so long as the Moon endures, which is everlastingly. And
therefore we must Fourthly, in the last place observe 1. the Relation which is
between these two, Righteousness and Peace; They are (...). Where there is
Righteousness, there is Peace; and where there is Peace, there is
Righteousness. 2. The Order; Righteousness first, and then abundance of Peace.
Take them all three, and you shall find a kind of subordination betwixt them,
for no Peace without Righteousness, no Righteousness without this Rain: But if
the Son of God come down like rain, straight Righteousness appears on the
earth; and upon the same watering, and from the same root, shoots forth
abundance of Peace, and both so long as the Moon endures. Of these then in
their Order briefly and plainly; and first of the Descent.

He that ascended is he also that descended first, says the Apostle. And he
Ephesians. 4.
came down very low: He brought himself sub lege, under the Law; sub cultro,
under the Knife, at his Circumeision; sub maledicto, under the curse; sub
potestate tenebrarum, under the power of darkness; down into the cratch, down
into the world, and down when he was lifted up upon the Cross, (for that
ascension was a great descent,) and from thence down into the grave, and lower
yet, (...), into the lowermost parts of the earth: Thus low did he come down.
But if we terminate his Descension in his Incarnation, if we interpret his
Descent by NATUS EST, that he was born, and say no more, we have brought him
very low, even so low that the Angels themselves must (...), stoop to look
after him; that not the clearest Understanding, not the quickest Apprehension,
nothing but Faith, can follow after to behold him; which yet must stand aloof
off, and tremble, and wonder at this great sight. Hic me solus complectitur
stupor, says the Father: In other things my Reason may guide me, Meditation
and Study may help me; and if not give me full resolution, yet some
satisfaction at least. But here, O prodigia! O miracula! O prodigy, O miracle
of mercy! (...), O the paradox of this strange Descent! This is a depth which I
connot foard, a gulf wherein I am swallowed up, and have no light left me but
my Faith and Admiration. Certe mirabilis descensus, says Leo, a wonderful
descent, a coelo ad uterum, from his Throne to the Womb; from his Palace, to a
Dungeon; from his dwelling place on high, to dwell in our flesh; from riding on
the Cherubin, to hanging on the Teat. A wonderful Descent! Where is the wise?
Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this World? That God should thus
come down; that he that contains all things should be compassed by a Woman;
that he should cry as a child, at whose voice the Angels and Archangels
tremble; that he whose hands meted out the Heavens, and measured the waters,
should lie in the cratch; Deus visibilis, and Deus contrectabilis, as Hilary
speaks, that God should be seen and touched and handled, no Orator, no
Eloquence, the tongues of Men and Angels cannot reach it. O anima, opus est
tibi imperitia mea; O my soul, learn to be ignorant, and not to know what is
unsearchable. Abundat sibi locuples fides; It is enough for me to believe that
the Son of God came down. And this coming down we may call his Humiliation, his
Exinanition, his Low estate. Not that his Divine nature could descend (...),
considered in it self; but God came down (...), in respect of that gracious
dispensation by which he vouchsafed to dwell amongst us. For he assumed into
the unity of his Person that which before he was not, and yet remained that
which he was. Ille quod est, semper est; and sicut est, ita est; For what he
is, he always is; and as he is, so he is, without any show or shadow of
change. But yet in the great work of our redemption he may seem to have laid
his Majesty aside, and not to have exercised that Power which was coeternal
with him, as infinite as Himself. And now it is no blasphemy, but salvation, to
say, That he who created man was made a Man; That he who was the God of Mary,
was the Son of Mary; That he that made the world had not a hole to hide his
head; That he who was the Lawgiver was made under the Law. And therefore in
every action almost, as he did manifest his Power, so he expressed his Humility.
A Star stands over him, when he lay in the Manger; He rebukes the Winds, who
was asleep in the Ship: He commands the Sea, and Fishes bring tribute in their
mouths; but at Caesar's commands he submits and pays it: He strikes a band of
men backward to the Ground, but yields as a man, and is bound, and led away as
a sheep to the slaughter. And thus that Love which reconciled the World unto
God, reconcileth these strange contradictions; a God, and a Man; a God that
sleeps, that thirsts; vectigalis Deus, a tributary God; Deus in vinculis, a God
in bonds; a God crucified, dead and buried. All which Descents he had not in
natura, not in his Divine Nature. Neque enim defecit in sese, qui se evacuavit
in sese, says Hilary; For He who emptied himself in himself did not so descend
as to leave or loose himself. But the Descent was in persona, in his Person, in
respect of his voluntary Dispensation, by which he willingly yielded to assume
and unite the Humane nature to Himself. And thus he was made of that Woman who
was made by himself; and was contained in her womb, whom the Heavens cannot
contein; and was cut out of the land of the living, who was in truth, what
Melchisedec was only in the conceit of men in his time, without father, and
without mother, having no beginning of days, nor end of life: He was less then
his Father, and yet his Fathers Equal; the Son of David, and yet David's Lord; A
case which plunged the great Rabbis among the Pharisees, who had not yet
learned this wisdom; nor known this knowledge of the Holy. But most true it is,
Non fallit in vocabulis Deus. God speaks of things as they are; nor is there
any ambiguity in his words. He tells us he is God, and he tells us he is man:
He tells us that his dewlling place is in Heaven, and he tells us that he came
down into the world: He tells us he is from everlasting, and he tells us he was
born in the fullness of time. Et quod a Deo discitur, totum est; And what he
tells us, is all that can be said. Nor must our Curiosity strive to enter in at
the Needles eye, where he has opened an effectual Door. Indeed it was the
Devils policy, when his Altars were overthrown, when his Oracles were
silenced, when he was driven from his Temples, when his Godhead was laid in
the dust, and when Pagans and Idolaters his subjects and slaves came in
willingly in the days of Christ's power, to strive dimidiare Christum, to divide
Christ into halves; and when Christ became the language of the whole world, to
confound their language, that men might not understand one another speech. And
like a subtle enemy, when he was beat out of the field, he made it his
masterpiece to raise a civil dissension in the City of God. Proh! quanta
etiamnum patitur Verbum! says the Father; Good God! how much does Christ yet
suffer in his Church! He came into the world, and the world knew him not. He
came unto his own, and his own received him not: He comes down, but as a
Phantasin, as a mear Creature; so Anius: as an adopted Son, so Phocius: which
is in effect to say he came not down at all. For if he be a mere creature, the
Descent is not so low. And if he be adopted to this work, it is rather a rise
then a Descension. And if he be but the Son of Mary made the Son of God, and
not the Son of God made the Son of Mary, it is no Descent at all. I do not love
to rake these misshapen Monsters out of their dust; but that I see at this day
they walk too boldly upon the face of the earth, and knock, and that with some
violence, to have admittance into the Church. And therefore it will behove us
to take the whole armor of Faith, and to stand upon our defense; conservare
vocabula in luce proprietatum, to preserve the propriety of words entire, to
walk by that light which they cast, and not with those Heretics (...), to make
use of those Phrases which speak Christ Man, and (...), to pass by those which
magnify him as God; but to join together (...) and (...), his good pleasure
and his power; to say that he came into the world, and to say that he created
the world; to say he was the scorn of men, and to say he was the Image of his
Father; in a word, ipsi Deo de se credere, to believe God in that he speaks of
himself. And then we may turn aside, and behold this great sight, and make it
our glory and crown to say, Descendit Rex, not Solomon, but the King of Kings,
the King of Glory, is come down. And so I pass from the Descent, or Coming
down, to the Manner of it, Descendit sicut pluvia, etc.

The Manner of his Descent is as wonderful, as the Descent it self. It is as
full of wonder that he thus came down, as that he would come down; especially
if we consider the place to which he came, the World; a Babylon of confusion, a
Sodom, a Land of Philistines, of Giants, who made it as a Law to fight against
the God of Heaven. We might have expected rather that he should have come cown
as a Fire, to consume us; as a Tempest, to devour us; as Thunder, to amaze us;
then as Rain, to fall softly upon us, or as a Shower, to water and refresh us:
that he should have come down to blast and dig us up by the roots, rather then
to yield us juice and life to grow green and flourish. Indeed we could expect
no less: But his mercy is above all his works, and then far above our
expectation, far above all that we could conceive, far above our sins, which
were gone over our heads, and hung there ready to fall in vengeance upon us.
And rather then they should fall as hailstones and coals of fire, he himself
comes down like rain, and as showers that water the earth. Justice would have
stayed him, and for him sent down a Thunderbolt; but Mercy prevailed, and had
the better of Justice, and in this manner brings him down himself.

And here to show you the manner of his coming down, we shall observe a
threefold Descent; in uterum matris, into the Virgins womb; in mundum, into the
World; and in homines, into the Souls of men. For as the Virgins womb was
thalamus Christi, the Bride-chamber of Christ, wherein the Holy Ghost did knit
the indissoluble knot between his Humane nature, and his Deity, so the World
was the place where he pitched his Tent, and the John 1. 14.
Soul of man is the Temple of the Lord, where the same quickening Spirit by the
operation of Faith makes up that eternal union and conjunction between the
Members and the Head: And into all these he came down (...), says St.
Chrysostom: (and we find the very same words in the sixth Council of
Constantinople) quietly and without any noise at all; like Rain, which we may
know is fallen by the moistures of the Fleece or Grass, but not hear when it
falls.

And first, thus he came down into the Virgins womb as upon the Grass, and made
her fruitful to bring forth the Son of God; and as into a fleece of wool, out
of which he made up tegmen carnis, the vail and garment of his flesh; and so
without noise, so unconceivably, that as it is an Article of our Faith, and the
very language of a Christian, to say, He is come down, so it is a question
which poseth the whole world, and none but himself can resolve the Quomodo, How
he came down. For as he came down, and was made Man, not (...), or (...), not
by any alteration or mutation of his Divine Essence; sine periculo status sui,
says Tertullian, without any danger of the least change of his state; not by
converting the Godhead into Flesh, as Cerinthus; nor the Flesh into the
Godhead, as Valentius; no, nor by compounding and mingling the Natures, so that
after the union there should remain one entire Nature of them both; but by an
invisible, inconceivable, ineffable union: So also did the blessed Virgin
conceive and bring him forth without any pain of travel, without any breach of
nature, without any alteration, and retained gaudium matris cum honor
virginitatis, the joy of a Mother, and yet the integrity and honor of a
Virgin. We may say, Peperit, non parturivit, She brought Christ forth, but did
not travel. And Tertullian, where he conjures down that spectrum and Phantasm
of Marcion, borrows his very words, and urges this for a truth, Peperit, and
non peperit; virgo, and non virgo; She brought forth, and did not bring forth;
a Virgin, and not a Virgin. She brought forth, says he, because Christ did
take of her flesh; and she did not bring forth, because she took nothing from
man: A Virgin in respect of her Husband; and not a Virgin, in respect of her
Child. And so being busy in the confutation of one error, he seems to run
unadvisedly upon another. But his meaning is more then this; That she was both
a Mother, and yet a Virgin; and that Christ was born communi lege, as other men
are, and not utero clauso, the Womb being shut. Which, whether it be true or
false, I leave to those learned Chirurgions and masculine Midwifes, the
Schoolmen, to determine. I will say no more, but with the Father, Enormi and
otiosae curiositati tantum deerit discere quantum libuerit inquirere, Vain and
irregular Curiosity gains no ground in the search of those things which are too
hard for it, and of which we have no evidence of Scripture: and all the profit
she reaps is but this, to run forward apace, and to be struck blind in the way;
to make great speed, and be further off. It is enough for us to believe and
acknowledge that she was a pure and immaculate Virgin, that the Holy Ghost
overshadowed her, that she was that Fleece into which this gracious Rain fell
sine soni verbere, without any noise or sound: that, as a Fleece, she was made
both solid and soft; softened and made fine by the power of the Most High, to
receive this heavenly Shower, to conceive that; and solid, to conceive him
without the division of parts, to receive him into her womb as sheep do the
Rain into their Fleece, sine inquietudine, says Ambrose, without any motion or
stirring; parerc, nec compune, to bring him forth without any compunction or
conquassation of parts: to be soft, and prepared, and become a Mother; and yet
solid and entire still, and remain a Virgin. And further we need not carry the
resemblance. And therefore in the next place we will bring Christ from the Womb
into the World.

And here though I cannot say the World was all mowen grass, or as a fleece, or
as earth, but rather as brass, or as the barren rocks, yet Christ came down
into the World. And he came, not jaciens fulmina, says Chrysostom, in Thunder
and Lightning, with a Fire to devour before him, or a Tempest round about him;
but in great humility, in silence: and, as his Kingdom, so his coming was not
with observation. In a word, though he were the Lion of the tribe of Judah, yet
he enters the world as a Lamb. For first, nasci se patitur, he condescends and
suffers himself to be born, and is content to lie hid in the womb nine months,
who might have taken the shape of a man in a moment. He grows up by degrees;
and being grown up, he is not ambitious to be known. He is baptized by his
servant; and being tempted by the Devil, nihil ultra verba conatur, he uses no
other weapon then his Words. Was the Reed bruised? he broke it not. Did the
Flax smoke? he quenched it not. Were Men ungrateful? he cured them. His hand
that betrayed him was in the dish with him. So that as his Flesh was (...), the
vail of his Divinity, so what he did and what he suffered were as so many
curtains, or rather as a thick cloud, to obscure and darken his Majesty. You
will tell me of the new Star; But whether did it lead the Wise men? To see a
poor Infant in a Manger: And though the sign of the Star were glorious, yet the
sign of the Cratch did obscure it. Of the Angels Anthem: But they were but a
few Shepherds that heard it. Of the men of the East who came to worship him:
But at the same time Herod the King did seek the Child to destroy him. Of his
retinue: But they were Fishermen. Of the Angel that comforted him: But it was
in his agony. Of the Earth shaking, and the Vail of the Temple rent: But it was
at his Death. Certo latuit in infirmitate Majestas; his Majesty lay hid and was
obscured in his Infirmity. And thus he tempered and qualified his economy
amongst us; cast forth these radiations of Majesty, and yet appeared as but
under a cloud; had these tinctures and rays of Greatness, and yet dulled and
almost lost in Poverty and Ignominy and Scorn, and, in respect of the Many,
quenched in the blood which he shed. But now we need not wonder that he thus
came in silence and great humility. For the whole world was an Hospital of
diseased men, or rather a Prison of Slaves and Captives fettered in the chains
and bonds of Iniquity: And should Christ have bowed the Heavens and come down
in glory? should he have shone in his Majesty? Should he have come in thunder
and blackness of darkness? Certainly the sight would have been so terrible that
Moses himself, even the best men living, would have trembled and shaken. Had
all been glory, all with us had been misery. Had Christ come as God alone, we
had been worse then the Beasts that perish, even companions of Devils. Nisi
iram misericordia finivisset, says the Father, If his Mercy had not stepped in
between his Majesty and us, and quenched that fire which was ready to burn, the
Prisoners, nay the Prison it self, had long since been consumed and brought to
nothing. Therefore Christ came not as a Judge, but as a Physician. For sick men
are not cured with noise and ostentation. The Fleece was dry; and the gentle
drops of Rain will wash and cleanse it: but a cataract, a deluge will drown the
Sheep it self. The Earth was dry, and the Grass mowen, desecta and detonsa, cut
down; nay, carrosa a locustis, so the Chaldee, bitten and gnawn of Locusts. And
no Locusts comparable to Sins, which devour not leaves only, but the very root.
Now when Locusts swarm, commonly it is a drought. Therefore Rain and Showers
are most seasonable, to make the Grass grow afresh. But Fire would consume all.
It is impossible, says the Father, that our shackles should be knocked off,
and we set at liberty, nisi in nostris fieret humilis qui omnipotens permanebat
in suis, unless he were made humble in our nature who was Omnipotent in his
own; Impossible, that the mowen grass should grow up without Rain, or those who
are dead in sins be received with a consuming fire.

I may add one Reason more, and that taken from the nature of Faith: Which, if
the object be plain and manifest and open to the sight, is no more Faith: And
therefore that which she looks upon, is seen, but hidden; has light, but
clouded; is most probably, but not demonstratively true. For I do not believe
that a Man is a living creature, or that the Sun shines; because the one is
evident to my Understanding, the other open to my Sense. Fides non nisi
difficultate constat; Faith cannot subsist unless it finds some difficulty to
struggle with. And this is the merit, the dignity of our Faith: Though a cloud
come between it and the object, to look through it; as Abraham, though the body
be dead, and the womb dead, yet against hope to believe in hope that he shall
become the Father of many Nations; To believe the Promise of God when he uses
those means for the trial of our Faith, which are most like to extinguish it;
To behold a Savior through the thick cloud of Ignominy and Scorn; To see a God
in a Cratch, on the Cross, and in the Grave; To be persuaded that he may be the
Son of the Most High, though he come down as Dew, and not as a cataract; and
descend like Rain, and not in Thunder. It was the unhappiness of the Jew to
expect (...), a most glorious Messiah, and to think he should come into the
World as Agrippa and Bernice his wife, (...), with great Acts 25. 23.
pomp; that he should be a great Captain and Warrior, and should take the power
of Damascus, and carry away the spoils of Samaria. And this anticipated conceit
is that which has made them siccatum vellus, as Hierom speaks, like Gideons
fleece; dry, when there is dew in all the ground about Judge. 6. 40.
them. It is true, says Tertullian, he shall take the spoils of Samaria; but
it is then, says the Text, when he is a Child, before he know to refuse the
evil, and choose the good. And if the Jew would have considered his age, he
might soon have discerned of what nature the War was he was to wage, and what
Spoils they were he should bear away. For if he must take them by violence and
dint of Sword, how should he bid defiance? Should he do it with the cry and
tears of an Infant? Signum belli non tuba sed crepitacillo dabit? Shall he give
signal to Battle, not with a Trumpet but with a Rattle? Shall he leap from the
Teat to his Horse, and point out his Enemy not from the Wall but from his
Mothers Breasts? Observate modum aetatis, and quaerite sensum perdicationis,
says the Father; Let the Jew remember his age, and then he will not be to seek
what manner of War it was. We confess the child Christ was and is (...), a
great Captain, and has a Trumpet, and a Sword, and Arrows; and he sounds his
Trumpet, and girds his Sword upon his thigh, and makes his Arrows sharp; and he
strikes with his Sword, and sends forth his Arrows; but yet he never sheddeth
blood. He rides in Majesty, but it is because of his meekness and gentleness;
which are no Virtues, I think, at the Camp. His Trumpet is the Gospel; his
Sword, the Word, which divides asunder the soul and the spirit, and the joints
and the marrow; his Arrows, his Precepts, which fly very swiftly, pearcing
every heart, and wounding every conscience. With these he pulls down strong
holds, casts down imaginations, and fights against principalities and powers.
And the people fall under him: What? to be trod under feet? No; but to worship
him. He carries away the spoils of Samaria; and not only of Samaria, but of all
the Nations of the Earth: Certe alius est ensis, cujus alius est actus;
Certainly this is another manner of Sword then that which Joshua and David
fought with. This is the Sword of the Lord, not of Gideon, and drawn to another
end. For our Captain draws his Sword to make his Enemies Kings; wounds, that
he may heal; beats us to dust, that we may be exalted for ever; fights with us,
that we may prevail; and then rides in triumph, when we overcome and are
crowned. And to this end he came down, not in majesty, but weakness; not in
thunder, but in rain. He did in a manner divest himself of his honor which he
had everlastingly with God; and he who was a King before all time, became a
Preacher, an Instructor, a Schoolmaster to lead us to himself, and vouchsafed
to interpret his own Imperial command. No Servant so careful to execute the
will of his Master as he was to perform the will of his Father. Hoc habet
solicitudo ut omnia putet necessaria; His Care thought nothing too much. And
therefore, though for so great a Prince it had been a sufficient discharge to
direct or command, yet he will supererogate, and go many degrees above
sufficiency. For what he commands us, he himself is the first man that does
execute it. And though it be ad sanguinem, to suffer unto blood, primus in
agmine Caesar, still he is first. He is not only our Pilot to direct the stern,
but also he does manage the sail, and set his hand to the oar; yea, he himself
is unto us both Sea, and Sun, and Pole, and Wind, and all; and he wins us more
by his Example, then by his Precept. Thus Christ came; And thus to come down is
certainly to come down like rain upon mowen grass. Exasperat homines imperata
correctio: blandissime jubetur exemplis; There is something of Thunder and Hayl
in a command; and it may make some noise, because it falls not upon a fleece of
wool, but on a stone; upon Man, who by nature is a stubborn creature: But we
may be bold to say, Examples are showers, Guttae stillantes, stillicidia
coelestia, drops and dew; and they fall gently and sweetly and effectually. And
in this manner Christ came down into the World like rain upon the mowen grass,
(or, on a fleece of wool) as showers that water the earth.

And now we come to the third degree of Christ's Descent or Coming down; He
comes into the Souls of the Sons of men, to be shaped and formed in us, Gal.
4. 19.
that we may be Christiformes, made like unto Christ, and bear an uniformity
and conformity unto him. And he observes the same SICUT still, and comes down
in animam sicut in uterum, into our hearts as he did into the Virgins Womb,
gently and insensibly, as the Rain does into a fleece of wool; using indeed
his power, but not violence; working effectually upon our souls per
suaviductionem, say the Schools, leading us powerfully, but sweetly, to that
end his praedeterminate will has set down. St. Cyprian well calls it illapsum
gratiae maturantis, the fall of Gods ripening Grace, which falls like Dew or
Rain upon the grass. Nescio quomodo tangimur, and tangi nos sentimus; We are
watered with this rain, and we know not how; We feel the drops are fallen, but
how they fell we could not discern. And we are too ready to ask with the Virgin
Mary, How comes this to pass? But the Angel, nay, God himself, tells us, The
Holy Ghost does come upon us, and the power of the Most High overshadows us;
and that Holy thing which is born in us shall be called the Son of God. Non
deprehendes quemadmodum aut quando tibi prosit; profuisse deprehendes; That the
power of Gods Grace has wrought we shall find; but the retired passages by
which it has wrought are impossible to be reduced to demonstration. Res illic
geritur, nec videtur. The Rain is fallen, and we know not how. We saw not
Christ when he came down; but it is plain that he is come down. And he comes
down not into the Fancy alone: That commonly is too washy and fluid of it
self, and brings forth no better a Christ then Marcions, a Shadow or Phantasme.
Nor into the Understanding alone: For thither he descends rather like Light
then Water; and he may be there, and the grass not grow. He may be there only
as an absent Friend, in his picture. But he comes down in totum vellus, into
the whole fleece, into the Heart of man, into the whole man, that so he may at
once conceive Christ, and yet be presented a pure and undefiled Virgin unto
Christ, and be the purer by this new conception. And he comes down in totam
terram, upon all the ground, upon the whole Little World of Man, that so he may
be like a well-water'd Garden, even a Paradise of God. A strange Jer. 31. 12.
complaint the world has taken up, yea rather not a complaint, but a pretense,
a very cloak of maliciousness to hide our sins from our eyes; That Christ does
thus come down but at pleasure, only sometimes, and but upon some men; some,
who, like Mary, are highly favored by God, and called out of all the world,
nay, chosen before the world was made. And if the earth be barren, it is
because this Rain does not fall. As if the Grace of God were not like Rain, but
very Rainie indeed, and came down by seasons and fits; and as if the Souls of
men were not like the Grass, but were Grass indeed, not voluntary but natural
and necessary Agents. Thus we deceive our selves, but we cannot mock God. His
Grace comes not down as a Tempest of Hayl, or as a destroying Storm, or as a
Flood of many Waters overflowing, but as Rain or Drops. He pours it forth
every day, and renews it every morning. And he would never question our
barrenness and sterility if he did not come down, nor punish our unfruitfulness
if he did not send Rains. If before he came into the world this Rain might fall
as it were by coasts, in Judaea alone; yet now by the virtue of his coming
down it drops in all places of his Dominion. Omnibus aequalis, omnibus Rex,
omnibus Judex, omnibus Deus and Dominus; As he came to all, so he is equal and
indifferent to all, a King to all, a Judge to all, and a God and a Lord to all.
And his Grace manat jugiter, exuberat affluenter, flows continually, and falls
down abundantly. Nostrum tantum sitiat pectus and pateat; Let our hearts lie
always open, and the windows of Heaven are always open: let us continually
thirst after righteousness, and this Dew will fall continually. Let us prepare
our hearts, let us make them soft as the Fleece; let us be as Grass, not
Stubble; as Earth, not Brass; and the Son of God will come down into our hearts
like rain into the fleece of wool, (or, mowen grass) and like showers that
water the earth.

And now we have showed you this threefold Descent; We should in the next place
contemplate the effect which this great Humility wrought, the Fruit which
sprung upon the fall of this gracious Rain upon Gods Inheritance: the Spring of
Righteousness, and the Plenty of Peace, and the Aeternity of them both. But I
see the time will not permit. For conclusion therefore, and as the present
occasion bespeaks me, I will acquaint you with another Descent of Christ; into
the blessed Sacrament; I mean, into the outward Elements of Bread and Wine.
Into these also he comes down insensibly, spiritually, ineffably, yet really,
like Rain into a fleece of wool. Ask me not how he is there; but there he is.
Eia fratres, ubi voluit Dominus agnosci? In fractione panis, says St.
Augustine: O my brethren, where would our Savior discover himself, but in the
breaking of bread? In his Word he seems to keep a distance, and to speak to us,
says the Father, by way of Letter or Epistle, but in the Sacrament of his Body
and Blood he communicates himself, that we, who could not see him in his flesh,
may yet eat that flesh we cannot see, and be in some kind familiar with him. I
need not busy my self in making the resemblance. Theodoret in one of his
Dialogues has made up the parallel between the Incarnation of Christ and the
Holy Sacrament. In Christ there are two Natures, the Divine, and the Humane,
and in the Sacrament there are two Substances, the heavenly, and the earthly.
2. After the union the two Natures are but one Person; and after the
consecration the two Substances make but one Sacrament. 3. Lastly, as the two
Natures are united without confusion or coalition of either in Christ, so in
the Sacrament are the Substances, heavenly and earthly, knit so together that
each continues what it was. The Bread is bread still, and the Body of Christ
is the body of Christ; and yet Christ is the Bread of Life, and the Bread is
the body, and the Wine the blood of Christ. It is panis Domini, the Bread of
the Lord, and panis Dominus, the Lord himself, who is, that living Bread which
came down from Heaven. And to a believing John 6. 51.
Virgin soul Christ comes nearer in these outward Elements then Superstition
can bring him, beyond the fiction of Transubstantiation: For as he by assuming
our Nature was made one with us, made flesh of our flesh, and bone of our
bones, so we by worthily receiving his flesh and his blood in the Sacrament are
made one with him, even partakers of the Divine Nature. 2 Pet. 1. 4.
Per hunc panem ad Dei consortium preparamur, says Hilary; By this Bread we
are united to him here, and made fit to be with him for ever. And to drink this
Cup, the Blood of Christ, is (...), says Clemens, to be made partakers of the
incorruptibility of God.

And now to conclude; This quiet and peaceable committing of Christ to us,
should teach us the like behavior one to another. For shall he come down like
rain, and shall we fall like Thunder upon our Brethren? Shall he consider us as
a Fleece of woll, or as Grass, and shall we make one another a mark and an
anvil for injuries to beat on? Shall Butter and Honey be his meat, and shall we
feed on Gall and Wormwood? Shall he not break a bruised reed, and shall we make
it our glory to break in pieces the Cedars of Libanus? Shall he come to save,
and shall we destroy one another? Shall he come without noise, and shall we
make it our study to fill the world with tumult and confusion? Shall he give
eyes to the blind, and we put them out? Cloths to the naked, and we strip them?
Legs to the lame, and we cripple them? Shall he raise men from the dead, and
we kill them? And if we do it, can we be so bold as to say we are Christians,
or that Christ dwells in us of a truth? Will he abide in this region of
blackness and darkness? in this place of noise and thunder and distraction? No:
the humble and contrite, the meek and merciful is the place of his rest. He
that came down in humility will not stay with the proud heart; he that came
down in silence will not dwell in a Chaos, in confusion. Therefore put you on
the Lord Jesus Christ; put on his Meekness, his Humility. As children of
Christ, put on tender bowels and compassion: And let your bowels yearn over the
poor, to relieve him; over the weak, to strengthen him; over the injurious, to
forgive him. And let us be as Rain, to soften and quicken; not as Fire, to
consume one another. And then He who thus came down into the Womb, thus into
the World, thus into our Souls, thus into the Sacrament, in silence, without
noise or tumult, like Rain or Dew, having thus watered us, and distilled his
graces upon us by virtue of this his first Advent, at his second Advent, when
he shall descend with a shout and with the voice of the Archangel, though he
come with more terror, yet shall he let fall his dew as the dew of herbs, and
drop upon our rottenness and corruption: And they that dwell in the dust shall
awake and sing. And in those his days shall the righteous flourish, and
abundance of Peace, not only so long as the Moon endures, but in new Heavens
and new Earth shall dwell Righteousness and Peace for evermore.

The First SERMON. PART I.
MATTHEW. V. 5. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
BLessedness is that which all men desire, the Sun which every eye looks upon.
And in this Sermon of our Savior it streams down upon us in several beams and
strictures, in Poverty of Spirit, in Mourning, in Meekness; which seem to us as
dark and thick clouds, but are beams by which we have light to see the way to
the Kingdom of Heaven, to comfort, and the inheritance of the Earth. Now the
two first Virtues, or Beatitudes, (call them what you please: and if they be
Virtues, they are Beatitudes, though not formally, yet by communication: and if
Blessedness be the garland to crown them, they must be Virtues. The two first,
I say) Poverty of Spirit, and Mourning, are set in opposition to our
Concupiscible appetite: Which, if not checked and held back by these, stoops at
every prey, is ensnared with wealth, and crowned in pleasure, and, like those
(...), those artificial Engines or Clocks the Philosopher speaks of, are
turned about disorderly, parva motione facta, at the least touch and
representation of unlawful and forbidden objects, whether it be a wedge of
Gold, or the lips of the Harlot, whither wealth or pleasure. And therefore our
best Master has placed these two, as assistant Angels, to order the motion of
that power in the desire of earthly blessings, and continue her motion in the
search of those things which are above, even Poverty of Spirit, and a voluntary
Abdication of those pleasures which smile upon us as friends at their entrance,
but at their Exit, when they turn their backs upon us, are as terrible as Hell
it self. He that has his mind so spiritually steered, that it declines not to
the wealth and pomp of the world, nor to the delights which it affords,
howsoever his way be rugged and uneven, and his passage cloudy and tempestuous,
shall notwithstanding at the end thereof find a Kingdom and Consolation. And
now to these two in its due place (and by a kind of nearer method) is added
(...), Meekness and Sweetness of Disposition, to restrain the Irascible faculty
or appetite, as those did the Concupiscible. Thus they stand in the original
and Greek Copy, and the Latin Fathers read them so. Nor could the Jesuit find
any reason why they should not be so placed in the vulgar Translation, and he
thinks they were misplaced by the error of the Scribe, and put between Poverty
and Mourning. Sure I am, there is good reason why Meekness should stand in the
place it does. For from whence come wars and fightings amongst us? says St.
James; come they not from hence, even from our lusts, that war in our members.
And the Schools teach us that Anger proceeds from the concourse of many
passions. We lust, and have not: We hope for wealth, and are poor and
destitute; we would sport away our time in pleasure, but some intervening cross
accident casts us down: and for this we are angry. Jacob has Esau's
birthright; and Esau will kill him: Naboth denies his Vineyard; and Ahab is on
his bed: Jonathan loves David; and Saul is ready to nail him to the wall with
his Javelin: The Samaritanes deny entertainment; the Disciples would presently
call down fire from Heaven to consume them. Irascibilis, propugnatrix
concupiscibilis, says Gerson: These two seditious Tribunes of the Soul, the
Irascible and the Concupiscible faculty, mutually uphold each other. My Desire,
my Hope, my Grief are the fuel of my Anger. He that stands in my way to wealth
or pleasure is my enemy, and sets me on fire, which nothing can quench but
Poverty of Spirit and Contempt of pleasure. When we are weaned from the world
and the vanities thereof; when we are crucified to the world, and the world
unto us, we are then aptinati, fitted for this third Beatitude, and gain
strength against Anger, and against all Thirst and Desire of revenge. If I know
how to abound, and how to want; if I can sit down in the House of Mourning, and
judge those miserable whom the world calls happy, and pity them whom most men
bow to, I am then idoneus auditor, a fit man to hear our Savior preaching from
the Mount, and proclaiming to all the world, Blessed are the meek: for they
shall inherit the earth. And thus much of the dependence this third Beatitude
has on the former two.

Meekness then, you see, stands in its right place, after Poverty of Spirit and
Mourning, which make its way plain, and usher it in. I will not here compare
them: For they are all three Beatitudes; Circumincidunt mutuo, they are
involved one within another, and such a connection and kind of consanguinity
there is betwixt them, that one partakes of the denomination of the other;
Poverty is meek, and Meekness is poor; he that mourns is meek, and he that is
meek is ready to mourn: As the Philosopher said of the Will, that it was either
appetitus intellectivus, or intellectus appetitivus, either Appetite with
Understanding, or Understanding with Appetite. But yet without the least
detraction from the former, we may commend Meekness as the virtue which, when
our Savior teaches, he makes himself the example. He indeed is Schola
virtutum, a Scool and Academy of virtue; and every action of his was a Sermon.
That he was poor, it is plain: For he had not so much as the Foxes had, a hole
to hide his head. His Grief we may see run down his cheeks when he weepeth over
Jerusalem. But when he commends Meekness, he does it by the best example,
Himself. He stands up, and places himself before our eyes, and bids us look on
him. All the virtues which make a Christian we must learn from Christ; but
there is never an express Discite a me, for I am meek; and you shall find rest
to your souls. And indeed Meekness, as it is a most necessary virtue for a
Christian, so is most hard to learn. It is a hard matter to quench Anger, and
to restrain all Desire of Revenge. Plato tells us that Anger is (...), not
easily subdued, almost invincible; and Aristotle, that it is (...), a vehement
and violent passion; and that it is a far easier thing to be strong against the
allurements of pleasure then to prevail against the heat and force of Wrath. I
may make a covenant with my eyes, and shut out Lust; I may put a knife to my
Throat, and so keep off Intemperance; I may sell all that I have, and give to
the poor; I may mourn like a Dove, and chatter like a Crane: but to repress
Anger, to take off all Desire of revenge, not to hurt an enemy, to love an
enemy, to do good to an enemy, is that which our Savior here commends, and the
hardest Task of a Christian; Therefore St. Chrysostom is plain, that God does
not look so graciously upon Fasting and Mourning, no not upon Virginity and
contempt of the World, as upon this virtue of Meekness, which so sweetly
composeth the Mind, and makes one man a God unto another, by covering his sins,
bearing his burden, and condemning and burying his malice in patience and
forgiveness. We see here in my Text it stands in mere conjunction with
Blessedness, and has the promise both of this life, and also of that which is
to come. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.

Our method now shall be, First, to show you (...), very briefly, what this
virtue is which bears so goodly an inscription; and that in respect 1. Of the
Nature of it; 2. Of the Subject of it, in whom it is, and of whom it is
required; 3. Of the Object, on whom it is to be showed and exercised. And when
we have briefly laid before you this virtue, in its full extent, we shall, in
the next place, more easily persuade you, that it is a Virtue, most proper,
most necessary for a Christian, without which he cannot live nor move nor have
a being. And this will make way for that which sweetneth and gives a relish to
all these, the Reason which our Savior here gives why the Meek are blessed;
For they shall inherit the earth.

To show you what Meekness is, we must distinguish it from that behavior which
has nothing of it but a bare and naked representation, and does then most
deceive us when it is most like it. The Father will tell us that Virtues and
Vices are (...), mere borderers one upon another; and the Stoic, that
Philosophy is so sacred and venerable a thing, ut siquid illi simile est, ipso
mendacio placeat, that its very counterfeit does please us. He that retireth
from the world, and betaketh himself to vacancy and idleness, is soon taken for
a great Philosopher. Craft goes for Wisdom, Silence and Reservedness for
Policy: and as St. Bernard tells us, Diabolus suos habet martyrs, that the
Devil has his martyrs, so says St. Augustine, Diabolus habet suos mansuetos,
the Devil also has his meek ones as well as Christ. Look upon the common
deportment of men, and you would think that Meekness were no stranger upon
earth, but a virtue common to the children of men. You may see it floating on
the tongue, bowing the body, dressing the countenance with a smile, falling
down at your very feet, excusing faults, undervaluing injuries, making crimes
errors, and errors virtues, by interpretation. Every man almost is mansuetus,
quasi ad manum suetus, as Festus gives the Etymon, as mild and gentle as if he
were brought up to hand. Nothing more common in the world; nothing more
deceives us. Experience has taught us that Anger, when it is loud and sudden,
breaths it self out like the wind, whilst it strives to overthrow; and
therefore we have learnt, with the Tyrant in Tacitus, Velare odium fallacibus
blanditiis, to hide our anger in a complement, to speak quietly to our enemy,
that we may smite to the heart; to kiss him, that we may betray him. We rake up
our revengeful thoughts, as we do fire under the ashes, ut non compareat nisi
cum adurat, that it may be felt sooner then seen, and burn and consume our
enemy on the sudden. The greatest mischief we do is cum praefatione clementiae,
with a preface of mildness, and with a friendly address. I love you, is the
word, which being inerpreted is, I will destroy you. Meekness shall we call
this? We may as well call the Devil meek, qui arridet ut saeviat, blanditur ut
fallat, who smiles that he may rage, and flatters that he may deceive, and
never biteth more deadly then when he fawns. But yet this is Meekness in the
worlds account, which goes for no more, with us then a fair spoken man; meek
Joab, and meek Absalom, and meek Judas, courteous Devils, which gain the
applause of men, even then when they deceive them; nor does Meekness show it
self in the full perfection of beauty otherwise then in a smile, a cringe, a
kiss, a complement, when that smile may be a snare, that cringe a stab, that
complement a lie, and that kiss treason. For experience has proved that to be
true which St. Augustine has taught us, Potest odium blandiri, charitas
saevire; Charity may come with a rod, and Malice turn Parasite, the one to
better us, the other to deceive us. There is oil in the reproof of a friend;
but there is wormwood and bitterness and poison in the oil of an enemy. Now we
cannot deny but these may be the outward expressions of Christian Meekness,
which is not locked up and imprisoned in the heart, but manifests its self in
the outward gesture; (for certainly he is no meek man whose tongue is either a
rasour or a sword) but yet Revenge and Rancor of heart may borrow these
expressions, may make its approaches in a pleasing posture, and may break an
enemies head with oil. And indeed Revenge is never more bloody then when it
speaks in a still voice and the dialect of Love. Nemo hostilius vulnerat quam
qui amabili manu; no wound more deadly then that which is given with a friendly
hand. For he strikes home, and without fear, who is not feared when he strikes.
That we may therefore take this old Devil off the stage, which makes such
desolation in the shape of an Angel of light, we will set before you the common
provocations of Anger, in repressing of which our Meekness especially consists.
The Philosopher in his Rhetoricks, l. 2. c. 2. has furnished us with three. The
first is (...), contempt of our persons; which is a sharp provocation. And he
is undoubtedly a great Proficient in the School of Meekness who has learnt to
be contemned. Therefore David makes it his Prayer, Remove from me reproach and
contempt. Such a temptation he looked upon with fear and trembling. The second
is (...), an incommodation, or despiteful usage. Which frequently affronts us;
men being many times of that vile disposition as to delight in mischief, and to
look upon it as a purchase, though they reap no other fruit then the bare doing
of it. The last is (...), which is injury with grief and loss and disgrace. Our
Savior here points out to it in this Chapter, when he tells us of a Blow on
the cheek, of Taking our coat, of Violence. And the second he mentions in
express terms, v. 44. (...), pray for them who despitefully use you. Now he
that has learnt to be contemned; he that can drink down injuries, and digest
them; he that is so spiritually poysed and ballasted, that no tempest, no wind
of the unrighteous can shake him; he that is as ready to forgive as wicked
persons are to wrong him; he that so absteins from offense as if he pardoned no
man, and yet so pardoned others as if himself were an offender, may challenge a
title to this Beatitude, and to the inheritance of the earth.

And now further to display the beauty of this Virtue, we will proceed to show
you the extent of it. The Philosophers may seem to have too narrowly confined
it: If therefore we will behold Meekness in its full proportion, we must look
for it not at Athens, but Jerusalem; not in the Philosophers Schools, but in
porticu Solomonis, in the house of Wisdom, in the Gospel of Christ. Reckon up
all the Precepts which Philosophy has given us, all the examples which have
been shown, and though we shall find enough to shame us Christians, yet we
shall not find that degree of Meekness which is required of Christians. We read
in Tully, that Justice requires that we endammage none, nisi lacessiti injuria,
till we are provoked by some injury. And Lactantius well censureth it,
Simplicem veramque sententiam duorum verborum adjectione corripit, he spoiled a
good sentence by the addition of two words; lacessiti injuria, provokt by
injury. For a Christian hurts no man, though he be provokt. Seneca speaks more
like a Christian, Magni animi est, omnium veniam dare, nullius petere; It
proceeds from a great and well-subacted mind to pardon all injuries, but to
walk in that simplicity that it needs ask pardon of none. But yet this does not
fully express a Christian; Who does not only pardon injuries, but in a manner
reward them. It is a great commendation which Tully gives Caesar, that he
forgot nothing but injuries, nor ever hurt an enemy, nisi in agris stantem, but
fighting in the field. He was one of the stoutest and greatest Champions of the
world. He stood the shock of fifty set battles, besides all sieges and
outrodes. He took a thousand Cities and walled Towns. He overrun three hundred
several Countries. And in his Wars were slain well-near twelve hundred thousand
men, besides all those which dyed in the Civil Wars: And yet he protested of
himself, and that most truly, that he never drew blood but in the field. Here
is indeed a pattern of Meekness, and such a pattern, that most Christians are
unwilling to take out: yet this does not reach home. Novam certe mansuetudinem
docet Christus; Certainly Christ has drawn out Meekness in other colors; and
except our Meekness exceed the Heathens, we shall not enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven. Will you see the full extent of Meekness? It is hard to show it. For,
as I find it in the Fathers, who walked by the light of Scripture, it is made
almost boundless. Not to be angry, To forgive, Not to revenge; these yet do not
reach it. To suffer with patience and a quiet mind the greatest injuries; this
is not home. To forgive seventy times seven times; this number is yet short to
teach our Meekness to keep time with the Malice and Injustice of men. It must
yet press further, and manifest it self not only in suffering, but in doing.
Do thou know, says St. Chrysostom, that thy brother intends particular
mischief against thee, that he would embrue his hand in thy blood? (...), yet
kiss that hand: For the Lord did not refuse to kiss that mouth which made the
bargain for his blood. Has he robbed thee of all thy goods? Be not angry: but
if by chance any thing be left, give it willingly to him who has taken away
all. Nay, says Basil, if thine enemy hunger, though thou have but one loaf to
sustein thy self, yet give it him, and rely upon Gods Providence to feed thee.
You will say now perhaps that I have stretched it too far, even beyond its line
and compass; and as Pythagoras instructed his Scholars to do, where there was
burden enough already, laid on more. If I have, yet I have done it magnis
autoribus, and have no less then St. Chrysostom and St. Basil for my defense.
Indeed Meekness cannot be too far extended, where with evil handling it has
been shrunk up almost to nothing. What? kiss his hand? Nay, off with his head.
Feed our enemy with bread? Nay, strike a dagger into his throat. This goes for
current Doctrine; not in the Camp alone, amongst barbarous Soldiers, but in
the habitations of peace, amongst Christians. As for true Meekness, we find it
in paginis, non in operibus, in our looks perhaps, but not the least syllable
or character of it in our manners and deportment. I have often wondered that
Christians should make so little esteem of this Virtue, which is theirs alone,
and especially directed unto them. The very Pagans by the light of Nature saw
the horror of revenge, and abhorred it -- ferus est, legumque videtur
Vindictam praestare sibi; --
could Claudian say. And the Jew, though many things were by way of indulgence
permitted him for the hardness of his heart, yet renounced it utterly. You may
hear the Jews of Alexandria speak it plainly in Philo, (...), Lord, we delight
not to take revenge upon an enemy. Only the Christian, who has received this
Precept in that latitude in which neither Nature nor the Law did ever tender
it, has more estranged himself from it then either Jew or Pagan; no heathen
story ever finding out a parallel to the malice of a Christian. I speak this to
our shame: But the Philosopher will tell us, Corruption optimi est pessima, The
most pure complexions are most noisome when they putrify: and of all men a
wicked Christian is the worst. And indeed something there is in our very
Religion which the Devil makes use of to deceive us: The Gospel is news of
Peace, and speaks nothing but forgiveness and salvation: Our Savior is a meek
Savior, we are sure; and because he is willing to pardon us when we fall down
before him, we nourish a false hope that he will pardon us our malice also, and
forgive us our debts, though we take our brother by the throat. Besides,
Revenge may be numbered amongst those sins which go down glibly and with
delight, because no humane Law does punish it; nay, in some case does seem to
countenance it. Adultery, and Drunkenness, and suck like sins carry shame in
their very foreheads, and, when they are committed, strike the Soul with some
regret and sorrow, which many times begets a repentance not to be repented of;
but Ambition, and Revenge, which is commonly a handmaid to Ambition, these lurk
secretly in our heart, and are commonly in men of great wisdom and spirit, who
will not have their credit poured out upon the ground as water, but preserve it
choicely as a precious ointment. They carry commonly content and honors and
riches with them for their reward. And therefore we conceive that these
Precepts of Meekness and Forgiveness are spoken rather cohortatorie quam vere,
rather by way of exhortation, then strictly exacting that we should perform
them. And now though the meek be blessed, yet we count it a kind of happiness
that we are not meek; and for the inheritance of the earth, we can never
purchase it, we think, with so sheepish a disposition. And therefore what
morosity do we put on? How punctual are we in our behavior that we be not
wanting to our selves where the Law can help us? We love the Proverb well that
tells us that he that makes himself a Sheep, the Wolf will eat him. For
Meekness and Forgiveness, you shall hear of it perhaps in our last Will and
Testament. We refer that to our Deathbed, when indeed we should have nothing
else to do but to dye. And if we give up our last gasp meekly, we are meek
enough. And now tell me, Beloved, when Meekness is thus contracted, nay lost,
in our manners, can we blame these holy men who have enlarged the curtains of
her habitation, and required more at the hands of a Christian then perhaps ever
any Christian attained to: There is no danger here of excess; no, there is no
fear but that in this we will come short. Melius ultra quam citra stant mores;
I cannot do too much, I may too little. And as Quintilian speaks, where he
gives the rules of a perfect Orator, omnia sunt praecipienda ut plura fiant;
We command all to be done, that we may do the most. For suppose we observed our
Saviors Precepts literally; Suppose I gave him my cloak that took away my
coat, and went two miles with him that compelled me to go one; Suppose I kissed
the hand that struck me, and made my enemy the sole inheritor of all my estate;
what inconvenience would follow hence? or what danger could it bring unto my
soul? Nay, how like would this make me to the Protomartyr St. Stephen, who
prayed for his enemies? and to the great Martyr (as the Fathers call him)
Christ himself, who died for his enemies? The world perhaps might put upon me a
fools coat: but what need I fear this imputation, when Angels clap their hands,
and applaud my Meekness, and God himself has promised a robe of Glory? That
folly is my glory which makes me wise unto salvation. Beloved, the Doctrines
which teach Perfection are not dangerous; nor can they be too often urged in
this dull and heavy age, which has so long talked of Imperfection, that
Imperfection is almost become a duty. We must be no better then we are; we are
Pelagians and proud if we conceive any hope of it. As if our Savior, when he
commands us to be perfect, did speak more than he meant, intending only this,
that we should be imperfect. Be not deceived. God requires at our hands
Perfection, and the fulfilling of his Law: But indeed it is one thing what God
requires, and another what he will accept. He will accept of our endeavors if
they be serious, and if we strive forward to perfection: But if our endeavors
grow feeble and faint, and fail upon conceit of I know not what weakness, he
will not accept them. If we think that any degree of Meekness is enough, we
have forfeited our Blessedness, and the Promise is made of none effect. The
Orator in his Institutions speaking of men that were famous for their strength
of memory; of Themistocles, who learnt the Persian tongue in one year; of
Mithrydates, who spoke as many several Languages as he governed Nations, which
were no fewer then two and twenty; of Cyrus, who could call his Soldiers by
name; tells us the truth of this was uncertain; habenda tamen fides est, vel in
hoc, ut qui crediderit and speret; Yet, says he, every man that desires to
improve his memory by industry, ought to believe it, that believing it to be
so, he may hope also by practice to gain as good a memory as they. Quicquid
enim fieri potuit, potest; For whatsoever has been once done by any man, may
be done again by every man. The same may we apply to our present purpose. Do we
read of any that kissed that hand that struck them? That gave their enemies
bread when themselves were like to starve for hunger? That gave him a Talent
who had robbed them of a Mite? let us not entertain these stories as fabulous,
but believe that it was and should be so, ut qui crediderit and speret; that
Belief may raise our Hope; and the Hope that so much may be done, may make it
easier for us to do the most; to cool our Anger, to curb our Desire of Revenge,
to empty our hearts of all gall and bitterness, to be like unto Moses, who
under the Law was the meekest man upon the earth, and to Christ himself, who
was brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a Sheep before her shearers is
dumb, so opened be not his mouth.

And now having showed you the nature of Meekness, in the next place we will
seat her in her proper subject, and that is Every man as he is a Private man,
not as he bears the Sword of Justice. For our Savior, when he commends
Meekness, does not strike the Sword out of the hand of the Magistrate. Nullum
verbum hic de magistratu, and ejus officio, says Luther; Here is no mention
made of the Magistrate and his Office. It is far better, that I loose my coat
then revenge my self: for by the Law of equity no man can be Judge in his own
cause: But let the Magistrate strike, and the blow is not of Revenge but
Justice. Justice, says Plutarch, accompanies God himself, and breaths revenge
against those which break his law; which Men also by the very light of nature
use against all men (...), as they are citizens and members of a body politic.
Meekness is that virtue which sweetly orders, and composes our mind in
pardoning those injuries which are done to our private persons; but it has no
room in the breast of a Judge, who looks upon the Offender vultu legis, with no
other countenance then that of the Law. In my own case licet mihi facere quod
volo de meo, it is lawful for me to do what I will with my own. I may give it,
or I may suffer it to be torn from me: and by this loss I may purchase the
inheritance of the earth. But when I sit on the Tribunal as a Judge, the case
is not my own. It is Meekness to pardon wrongs done unto our selves; but to
deny the course of Justice to him that calls for it, to sheath the Sword when
it should cut off the wicked from the earth, may peradventure commend it self
by the name of inconsiderate pity, but meekness it cannot be. For the
Magistrate, as he is the Keeper of the Law, so in his proceeding he must be
like it. Now the Law is surda res, as the young men in Livy complained, deaf
and inexorable: Though thou speak it fair, it hears thee not; and though thou
speak in tears, it regards thee not. It is immovable as a Rock, and it stares
the Offender in the face. No complement can shake it, no bribe move it, no
riches batter it. If it seem to change countenance and turn face, it is not its
own face, but the paint and visard of the Magistrate. When the Magistrate is
grown meek on the sudden by the operation of a bribe, when Injustice beats upon
this rock of the Law to mollify and allay its rigor, that falls out which
Tertullian observes of Infidelity meeting with a convincing argument, Injustice
prevails, and the Law is vanquished; and, what is monstrous, the Ship is safe,
and the Rock shipwrackt. Therefore the Magistrate, when he is to condemn an
Offender, may put on the passion of Anger, and raise it up against his
Compassion; and then strike him, says Seneca, with the same countenance he
would strike a Serpent. Histrionibus, etsi non iratis, tamen iram simulantibus
conducit; The very counterfeiting of this passion helps the Tragedian in his
action. And the judge may set it against those assaults which may move him to
unnecessary compassion, and which may turn him to the right hand or the left.
We need not here enlarge our selves in a case so plain. That which the Private
man may demand may be now more useful, Whether it be lawful to implead our
brother in any Court of Justice. Questionless it is. For to deny it were not
only to pluck the Magistrate from the Bench, but to cancel and disanul all the
Laws of Christian Commonwealths. Morality teaches us To do no wrong: That
which Religion adds is no more but this, To keep our mind in an habitual
preparation of suffering. And so the Casuists and St. Augustine interpret these
Precepts of our Savior, That we must then retain the heart of a friend when we
have taken upon us the name of an adversary, and so compose our selves that we
should choose rather to loose our right then our charity. But Charity seeks
not her own. A good Argument, not only to keep me from the Tribunal, but to
drive me also from the Church. For he that bids me cast my bread upon the
waters, has also prescribed that form of Prayer, Give us this day our daily
bread. It is true, Regulae charitatis latius patent quam juris, the Rules of
Charity are of a larger extent then those of the Law. If thou owe a hundred
measures of oil, Charity takes the Bill, and sits down quickly, and writes
fifty; and if thy vessels be empty, she cancels the bill, and teareth the
Indenture. But it is as true too, that Charity begins at home, and that He that
provides not for his family is worse then an Infidel. To conclude this point;
It will concern every man to take heed quo animo, quibus consiliis, with what
mind and upon what advise he brings his brother to the Bar. Necessitas humanae
fragilitatis patrocinium; Necessity is a good plea; but where Necessity
inforceth not, I may say of it as St. Paul does of Marriage, He that impleadeth
his brother may do well; but he that impleadeth him not does better. And I
cannot but commend that resolution of St. Hierom, Mihi etiam vera accusatio
adversus fratrem displicet. Nec reprehendo alios, sed dico quid ipse non
facerem. And happy is he who can take up this holy Father's Language, It is
troublesome to me to bring an accusation, though never so true, against a
brother. I censure not those who do it, but only declare what I would not do my
self. Indeed our Savior bids us agree with our adversary, and forgive him; but
we do not read that any where he has commanded us to implead him. And this
should make us suspect our selves in such a case: For here are two parts, Not
to implead him, and To implead him. The one is most evidently lawful; It is in
our power. The other doubtful. When our judgment then is at a loss, and cannot
resolve on the one side, the best wisdom it will be to cleave unto the side
which is evident and plain, unless we please to put it to the venture and
harase our souls, and try conclusions with God. But most commonly so it is,
Praevalent dubia, Things doubtful in themselves have more power over us then
those things which are plain and certain; and men are easy of belief in those
things which they would have done. What is wanting in the evidence, we supply
in our will: and although our opinion point to the plainest side as safest, yet
we secretly wish that the more doubtful part were true; and at last, though we
have small evidence, yet we adhere and stick close unto it. From hence those
stabbings and digladiations amongst Christians. From hence it is that because
we may lawfully implead our brother; we think we may as lawfully undo him; and
because I may redeem my cloak by law, by law I may purchase my brothers cloak
also. I conclude this point with that of the Apostle, Prove all things; hold
fast to that which is good. Abstein from all appearance of evil. 1 Thessalonians. 5.
21, 22.


I should now proceed to lay open the Object of our Meekness: but I see the
time has prevented me. Only give me leave to tell you, It is not enough to lay
down our malice for a day, and then to raise it up, and breath it out against
our brother upon the next occasion: For this is a strong evidence that our
malice was never laid down. For though it must set before the Sun, yet it must
not set as the Sun, to appear again and show it self in our Hemisphere the next
morning. The Civilians will tell us, Qui comitiali morbo laborant, ne iis
quidem diebus quibus morbo carent sanos recte dici; They that are troubled with
the Falling Sickness are not to be reckoned as free from it when the fit is
off. If the disease return again, be the term and date of time what it will, it
is but the intermitting of the fit, no freedom from the disease. And so Malice
and Anger, which is a kind of Falling Sickness, though for some time we are rid
of it, yet if it return again, we are still guilty of the sin, though we made
some pause, and suffered it not for a while to break out. Will you know where
you may make use of your Anger? Make use of it upon your selves. In propriis
erratis securissimus hic affectus, This affection does never good, but when it
looks inward, and frowns upon our own misdeeds. For by this turning our Anger
upon our selves and our sins, foemininum irae, masculinum facimus, that which
is womanish in Anger is made masculine and heroic; nay, ferinum irae divinum
facimus, that which is brutish in Anger is made Divine, and fights the Lords
battles, beats down imaginations, destroys principalities and powers, treads
down strength, all our pride and animosity, and works a conquest on our sins,
the greatest enemies to God and our selves. And thus, if we invert the
operation of Anger, and turn its edge upon our selves, if our Meekness and
Moderation be shown unto all men, and our indignation rest upon our sins, it
shall prevent that Anger which is as just as terrible, and shall entitle us to
this Blessedness here, even all those blessings which are the purchase of the
Prince of Peace, and the blood of that meek Lamb shall cleanse us from all our
sins.

The Second SERMON. PART II.
MATTHEW. V. 5. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
IN the morning we laid before your eyes the Virtue of Meekness; A virtue by
which, as St. Chrysostom says, a man may know a Christian better then by his
name. Tertullian tells us that anciently, among the Heathen, Professors of
Christianity were called, not Christiani, but Chrestiani, from (...), a word
signifying Sweetness and Benignity of disposition. I know not how you were
taken with the beauty of this divine and useful Virtue, and with what
affections you beheld her in those colors in which the Gospel has showed her:
Some perhaps heard the report of her as they do news from a far Country, not
able to contradict, nor yet willing to believe it. To others her description
was but picta nebula, quae non longius delectat quam videtur, as a painted
cloud, which is forgot with the removing of our eye, and delights no longer
then it is seen. But yet as the Queen of Sheba spoke of the wisdom of Solomon,
so will I of this excellent virtue; The one half is not yet told you. We will
therefore proceed on, and pass by those lines which we first drew, and having
showed her in her general Description, and confined her to her proper Subject;
we will, according to our method proposed, in the next place present you with
the Object of Meekness, by which I mean those persons in respect of whom this
Virtue is to be exercised.

We have not so confined Meekness, and shut her up in the breasts of private
men, but we shall as far enlarge her in respect of her Object; which is in
compass as large as all the world. (...), says the Apostle, Let your softness,
(your moderation, your meekness, your Phil. 4. 5.
equity) be known unto all men. For though Meekness and Equity be not one and
the same Virtue, yet every meek man so far participates of Equity that he is
not (...), too exactly just, but makes himself less then he is; that he is
willing to depart from his own right, and will not do all that strict and rigid
Justice warrants as lawful. Nor is this Virtue cloistered up to shine in a
corner, but, like the Sun it self, non uni aut alteri, sed statim omnibus in
commune profertur; she display's her beams not in good men alone, or Christians
alone, but to wicked men, to erring men, to all men, even to the whole world.
For this end God does permit some evil persons in the world. Omnis malus aut
ideo vivit ut corrigatur, aut ideo vivit ut per illum bonus exerceatur, Every
wicked person does either prolong his life for his own good and amendment of
himself; or for the good of others, to their trial. If there were none to
injure us, Meekness were but a fancy, or like a Rose in Winter, would have a
being, an essence perhaps, but no existence. If there were no evil men, there
would not be any good, at least not known to be so. Utraque turba, says
Seneca, opus est, ut Cato possit intelligi, There must be both good and evil
men, to make Cato's Virtues known. And Nazianzene, in his Epistles, speaking of
the factious behavior of men, and the troubles of the times, says, that all
those things were to come to pass ut Basilius cognosceretur, that Basil might
be known; that he might manifest that wisdom which long experience had taught
him, and so shine forth as a light in the midst of a froward generation. Whilst
the heavens are clear and the weather fair, and no wind nor tempest stirs, in
glomis subit portum, the Pilot arriveth indeed at the wisht-for haven, but
without praise or glory. And were our life becalmed, and if no tempests of
injuries beat upon us, what room then had Meekness to show her self? Sed cum
stridunt funes, and gemunt gubernacula, when Malice rages, when wicked men
provoke us; when there are Ismaels to scoff at us, Shimei's to revile us,
Zedekiah's to smite us on the cheek; when injuries, like the billows of the
Sea, follow close one on the neck of another; then is the world a stage for
Meekness to act her part on. An easy thing it is to be meek where there is
nothing to raise our Anger; and Revenge has no place where there is no
provocation. The Philosopher in his Rhetorics, giving us the character of
Meekness, tells us that most men are gentle and meek to those who never wronged
them, (...), or who did it unwillingly; to men who confess an injury, and
repent of it; (...), to those who humble themselves at their feet, and beseech
them, and who do not contradict them; to those whom they reverence and fear.
For Fear and Anger seldom lodge in the same breast. But Christianity raises
Meekness to a higher pitch, where no injury can reach it. A studied and plotted
injury, an injury made greater by defense, an injury from the meanest, from him
that sits with the dogs of our flocks, any injury at any time, from any man,
makes a fit object for Christian Meekness, which in the midst of all
contumelies and reproaches, in the midst of all contradictions is still the
same. Should we insist upon every particular, our Discourse would be too large.
We will therefore fasten our meditations upon those which may seem most
pertinent, and so take off all those pretenses which we Christians commonly
bring in as Advocates to plead for us when we forget that we are Christians.
There be two errors in our life, the one of Opinion, the other in Manners and
Behavior, which is far the worse: and though these of themselves carry no fire
with them, yet by our weakness commonly it comes to pass that they are made the
only incendiaries of the world, and set both Church and Commonwealth in
combustion. If our brothers opinion stand in opposition to ours, if his life
and conversation be not drawn out by the same rule, we presently are on fire;
and we number it amongst our virtues, to be angry with those who in their
Doctrine are erroneous, or in their lives irregular. Now in this I know not how
blessed we think our selves, but I am sure we are not meek. For if we were
truly possessed of that Meekness which Christ commends, as we should receive
the weak in Faith with all tenderness, so should we be compassionate to the
wicked also, and learn that Christian art which would enable us to make good
use both of Sin and Error. And first for Error, though many times it be of a
monstrous aspect, yet I see nothing in it which of it self has force to fright
a Christian from that temper which should so compose him that he may rather
lend an hand to direct him that errs, then cry him down with noise and
violence; seeing it is a thing so general to be deceived, so easy to err, and
so hard to be reduced from our error; seeing with more facility many times we
change an evil custom then a false opinion. For Sin carries with it an argument
against it self. Hoc habet quod sibi displicet, says Seneca: As it fills the
heart with delight, so it does with terror. Like the Viper, matter est funeris
sui, it works its own destruction, and helps to dispossess it self. But Error
pleases us with the shape of Truth; nor can any man be deceived in opinion,
but as Ixion was by embracing a cloud for Juno, and Falsehood for the Truth. He
that errs, if he were persuaded he did so, could err no longer. And what guilt
he incurs by his error, the most exact and severe inquisition cannot find out;
because this depends on that measure of light which is afforded, and the inward
disposition and temper of his soul, which are as hard for a stander-by to dive
into as to be the searcher of his heart. The Heresy of the Arians was as
dangerous as any that ever did molest the peace of the Church, as being that
which struck at the very foundation, and denied the Divinity of the Son; yet
Salvian passes this gentle censure on them, Errant, sed bono animo errant; non
odio, sed affectu Dei; They erred, but out of a good mind; not out of hatred,
but affection to God. And though they were injurious to Christ's Divine
generation, yet they loved him as a Savior, and honored him as a Lord. The
Manichees fell upon those gross absurdities that Reason, when her eye is
weakest, may easily see through; yet St. Augustine, who had been one himself,
bespeaks them in this courteous language, Illi saeviant in vos qui nesciunt
quocum labor verum inveniatur; Let them be angry with you who know not with
what difficulty the truth is found, and how hard a matter it is to gain that
serenity of mind which may dispel the mists of carnal phantasmes: Let them be
angry with you who were never deceived, and who do not know with what sighs and
groans we purchase the smallest measure of knowledge in Divine mysteries. I
cannot be angry; but will so bear with your error now as I did with my own when
I was a Manichee. A good pattern to take out, and learn how to demean our
selves toward the mistakes of our brethren, and to bear with the infirmities
of the weak, and not to please our selves with the pretense of Zeal and
Religion, which loose their name and nature, and bring in a world of iniquity,
when we use them to fan the fire of contention. I do not see that relation or
likeness between Difference of Opinion and contrariety in affections, that one
would beget the other, or that it should be impossible or unlawful to be united
unto him in love who is divided from me in opinion. No; Charity is from heaven,
heavenly, and may have its influence on minds of diverse dispositions, as the
Sun has on bodies of a different temper, and it may knit the hearts of those
together in the bond of love whose opinions may be as various as their
complexions. But Faction and Schism and Dissension are from the earth, earthly;
and have their beginnings and continuance, not ab extra, from the things
themselves which are in controversy, but from within us, from our Self-love
and Pride of mind, which condemn the errors of our brethren as heresies, and
obtrude our own errors for Oracles. I confess, to contend for the Truth is a
most Christian resolution, and in Tertullians esteem a kind of Martyrdom. It is
the duty of the meekest man to take courage against Error; and as Nazianzene
speaks, in a cause that so nearly concerns us as the truth of Christ a Lamb
should become a Lion. I cannot but commend that of Calvine, Maledicta pax cujus
pignus desertio Dei, That peace deserves a curse which lay's down the Truth and
God himself for a gage and pawn; and benedicta praelia quibus regnum Christi
necessitate defenditur, those battles are blessed which we are forced to wage
in the name of the Lord of Hosts. And thrice happy he who lays down his life a
sacrifice for the Truth. But Religion and Reason will teach us that all this
may be done without malice or rancor to their persons, whose error we strive
against, and that the Lords battles may be fought without shedding of blood.
Surely Meekness is the best Director in these wars, where he gains the greatest
conquest who is overcome. The Physician is not angry with him whom he intends
to cure, but he searches his books, and uses his art and all diligence,
morbum tollere, non hominem, to remove the disease, and not to kill the man:
How much more should we be careful how we handle our weak and erring brother,
lest we make him weaker by our rough and unskilful usage, and cure him indeed,
but in the Tyrant's sense in Suetonius, who boasted he had done a cure, when he
cut off a man's head, or otherwise put him to death, who had offended him. We
read that Paul and Barnabas were at some difference about the choice of their
Acts 15.
companion; the one determined to take Mark with them, the other thought it not
good: From whence sprung that paroxysme, as the Evangelist terms it, which
divided them the one from the other. Yet St. Hierom will tell us, Quos
navigatio separavit, hoc Christi Evangelium copulavit; Though they sailed to
several Coasts, yet they were both bound for the same negotiation, even the
preaching of the Gospel. Paul withstood Peter to his face; yet in Gal. 2. 11.
the same Chapter he calls him a Pillar of the Truth. A Father may differ from
his Son, and the Wife from the Husband in opinion; yet this difference breaks
not the bond of that relation which is betwixt them; but the Father may, nay
must perform the office of love, and the Son of duty. And why may not
Christians be diversely persuaded in some points of Religion in earth, and yet
the same Heaven hold them both? That which deceives us are those glorious
things which are spoken of Zeal. We read of Phinehas, who was blessed for
thrusting his Javelin through the adulterous couple; of the austerity of
Elijah, the zeal of Simon the Canaanite, the severity of Peter, which struck
Ananias and Sapphira dead; the constancy of Paul, who struck Elymas the
Sorcerer blind. And we are told, Non est crudelitas pro Deo pietas, That in
God's cause the greatest piety is to be cruel. But we willingly mistake our
selves: for neither here is the cause alike, nor the person the same. We know
not of what Spirit we are. Every man is not a Phinehas, an Elijah, a Paul, a
Peter. Nor did Elymas loose his sight, and Ananias his life, for their errors,
but for their witchcraft, and grand hypocrisy. Nor are times the same. We
cannot but commend Zeal as an excellent quality in man: but as Agarick or
Stibium being prepared and castigated are sovereign Physic, but crude and
unprepared are dangerous: so Zeal, which so many boast of, seasoned with
discretion, is of singular use and profit; but taken crude and in the Mineral,
it oft-times proves deleterial and unfortunate. Zeal is a light, but by
occasion it troubles the eye of the understanding; and being by degrees enraged
by our private ends and phansies, at last it puts it quite out, and leaves us
fighting in the dark. (...), and (...), an unlearned Zeal and supine Negligence
are both so bad that it is not easy to determine which is worst: only
Negligence lets inconveniences slily steal into the Church, but unguided Zeal
much plies those errors which Negligence lets in: and, as if error were
indeed a Hydra, it never strikes off the head of one error, but two arise in
the place. And therefore St. Bernard, in his forty ninth Sermon on the
Canticles, will tell us, Semper zelus absque scientia minus utilis invenitur,
plerumque etiam perniciosus sentitur; Zeal without knowledge is always
unprofitable, many times most dangerous. And therefore the more hot and fervent
it is, and the more profuse our Charity, with the more care and diligence
should we set our Knowledge and Reason as a Sentinel, quae Zelum supprimat,
spiritum temperet, ordinet charitatem, which may abate and cool our Zeal,
temper our spirit, and compose and order our Charity. For if we do not keep our
souls with diligence, and carry a strict and observant eye upon our Zeal, our
Meekness will be consumed in this fire, and with it the whole crop and harvest
of spiritual Wisdom lost. We shall be heady and high-minded, lovers of our
selves, unwilling to pardon one error to our brethren, and to acknowledge any
of our own. This is it which has been the mother and nurse too of all those
outrages in the Church of Christ that Story has transmitted to Posterity, and
those too which later and our present times have been too guilty of, that men
will neither subscribe to the opinion of others, lest they may be thought not
to have found the Truth, but have borrowed it; nor will yet retain so much
meekness as to give their brother leave to err, but, when they cannot convince
him by Argument, fall heavy upon him with Reproach: A fault sometimes in him
that errs, and sometimes in him who holds the truth, the one obstinate, the
other indiscreet, both ready to maintain with violence what they cannot
persuade by reason. The Arians betook themselves to this guard, and called in
the temporal Sword to defend their Cause against the Orthodox; and when they
could not prevail by Argument, they made use of outward force: And so this
faction, says the Father, plainly showed quam non sit pia, nec Dei cultrix,
how destitute it was of piety and the fear of God. The Donatists styled
themselves filios Martyrum, the offspring of Martyrs; and all other
Christians, progeniem traditorum, the progeny of those who basely delivered up
the sacred things. They broke the Chalices, demolisht the Altars, ravished
Virgins and Matrons, flung the holy Eucharist to the Dogs, slew those who were
not of their faction, beat down the Bishop Maximinian with batts and clubs even
as he stood at the Altar, and did those outrages on Christians which Christian
Meekness would have forbidden them to commit on a Jew or Infidel: the Monks of
Egypt were indeed devout and religious men, but for the most part
Anthropomerphites holding that God had hands and feet and all the parts that a
Man has, and was in outward shape and proportion like unto one of us. That
having got Theophilus, a learned Bishop of Alexandria, into their hands, so
roughly used him that he could not get out of their fingers till he made use of
his wits and sophistry, and told them in a kind of complement that he had seen
their face as the face of God. Nor did this evil rest here, amongst the vulgar
and discontented persons, quibus opus erat bello civili, as Caesar spoke, who
could not subsist but in times of noise and hurry, but it blasted the fairest
plants in all the Church; Chrysostom would not consent to give his suffrage for
the condemnation of Origen's works; Epiphanius subscribes to it, and makes St.
Chrysostom a Patron of those errors which did no doubt deserve a censure: Both
forgot that Meekness which they both commended in their Writings. Epiphanius
curses Chrysostom, and Chrysostom Epiphanius; and both took effect: for the
one lost his Bishopric, and the other his Country, to which he never after
returned. An infirmity this is which we cannot be too wary of, since we see the
strongest Pillars of the Church thus shaken with it; An evil which has always
been forbidden and retained in all Ages of the Church; Zeal being made an
apology for Fury, and the Love of Truth a pretense to color over that
behavior which has nothing in it to show of Truth or Christianity. And
therefore the Church of Christ, which felt the smart of it, has always
condemned it. When Eulalia the Martyr spit in the face of the Tyrant, and broke
and scattered the Idols before, Prudentius and others were fain to excuse it,
that she did it impulsu Divini spiritus, by special revelation from the Spirit.
Which was indeed but an excuse, and a weak one too. For that Spirit which once
descended in the shape of a Dove, and is indeed the Spirit of Meekness, cannot
be thought to be the Teacher of such a Lesson. But when other Christians in the
time of Dioclesian attempted the like, and were slain in the very enterprise,
to deter others from such an inconsiderate Zeal; it was decreed in the Council
of Eliberis, and the 60 Canon, Siquis idola fregerit; If any hereafter break
down the heathen idols, he shall have no room in the Diptychs, nor be registered
with the number of the Martyrs, although he be slain in the very fact, quatenus
in Evangelio non est scriptum, because we find nothing in the Gospel that casts
a favorable countenance upon such a fact. I have brought this instance the
rather, to curb those forward spirits now adays which, did not Fear more
restrain them then Discretion, would be as good Martyrs as these, and with the
same Engine with which they heave at the outwork, in time would blow up Church,
Religion, and all; who are straight angry with any thing that does but thwart
their private humor, or with any man that by long study and experience and
evidence of reason has gained so much knowledge as not to be of their opinion.
What mean else the Unchristian nicknames of Arminians, and Pelagians, and
Socinians, and Puritanes, which are the glorious Scutchions the Meekness of
these times does fix in every place, and the very pomp and glory of their
triumph, when factious men cry down that truth which they are not willing to
understand? Does this rancor, think you, proceed from the spirit of Meekness?
or rather from the foul Spirit of Destraction. Little do these men think that
the Truth it self suffers by such a Defense, that rash Zeal cannot be excused
with intentions and the goodness of the end which is proposed; that the crown
of Martyrdom will sit more gloriously on his head who rather suffers that the
Church may have her peace, then on his who dies that he may not offer sacrifice
to idols. For in this every man has been merciful and good to himself; but in
the former he merits for the whole, and is a sacrifice for the public peace of
the Church whereof he is a part. Talk of Martyrdom what we please; never was
there any Martyr, never can there be any Martyr made without Meekness. Though I
give all my goods to feed the poor, though I give my body to be burnt in the
justest cause for the truth of the Gospel, and have not Meekness, which is a
branch of Christian Charity, it profitteth me nothing: For my impatience will
rob me of that crown to which my sufferings might otherwise have entitled me.
The Canonists speak truly; Non praesumitur bono exitu perfici quae malo sunt
inchoata principio, The event of that action can never be good whose very
beginning was unwarrantable. Philosophers have told us that when the Sea
rages, if you throw in oil upon it, you shall presently calm it. The truth of
this I will not now discuss; but give me leave to commend this precious oil of
Meekness to power upon your souls, when Zeal or Ignorance shall raise a tempest
in your thoughts. Have men of wisdom tendered to you something which falls
cross with your opinion? If you obey not, yet be not angry? If your obedience
appear not in your practice, yet let it be most visible in your Meekness.
Remember that private men, who converse in a narrow Sphere, must needs be
ignorant of many things which fall not within their horizon and the compass of
their experience; that they may have knowledge enough perhaps to do their own
duty, which will come short in the performance of another, especially of a
Superiors. If an erroneous Conscience bind thee from the outward performance of
what is enjoined, yet let Truth and Scripture and Meekness seal up thy lips
from reviling those qui in hoc somnum, in hoc vigilias reponunt, who do watch
for thy good, and spend their days and nights too that thou may live in all
good conscience before God all the days of thy life. To conclude this point;
Do thou know or suppose thy brother to be in an error? Take not mine, but St.
Paul's counsel, and restore such a one in the spirit of Meekness, considering
that thou also may be deceived. And peradventure this may be one error, that
thou art persuaded that thy brother errs when Truth and Reason both speak for
him: Pride and Self-conceit are of a poisonous quality, and, if not purged out,
exhalat opaca mephitia, it sends forth pestiferous vapors, which will choke and
stifle all goodness in us. But Meekness qualifies and prepares the mind, and
makes it wax for all impressions of spiritual graces; it does no evil, it
thinks no evil, it cannot be provokt with errors in opinion, nor with those
grosser mistakes and deviations in men's lives and conversation.

We have brought Meekness to its trial indeed. For sure where Sin once shows
its deformity, all meekness in a Christian, whose Religion binds him to hate
sin must needs be lost. It is true, all created natures we must love, because
they have their first foundation in the love and goodness of God; and he that
made them saw that they were good. But Sin is no created entity, but without
the compass of Nature, and against her, against that order and harmony which
Reason dispenses. This only hurts us; this is that smoke which comes from the
very pit of Hell, and blasts the soul; even then when the body is untoucht:
This is the furnace in which men are transformed into Devils. We cannot then
hate Sin enough. Yet here our Christian skill must show it self; and we must be
careful that our Anger, which frowns upon Sin, do not rage against the Sinner,
and that whilst we strike at one we do not wound both. Our Anger must be, not
(...), but (...), not an hatred of the person, but a detestation of the sin. A
hard subtlety indeed it is, to distinguish things thus confounded and blended
together. Facile est atque proclive, says St. Augustine, malos odisse, quia
mali sunt; rarum autem and pium, eosdem ipsos diligere, quia homines sunt; It
is an easy thing to hate evil men because they are evil; but to love them as
they are men, this is a rare and pious thing. And therefore we must be wary
that our Anger be not too hot and extreme against the actions of others, for
fear least at last we transpose it upon the men themselves. Timon, that great
hater of mankind, made this his apology, That he hated evil men because they
were evil; and all others, because they did not hate them. He thought it a sin
not to be angry with those who did commit sin. But Christianity begets no
Timons, but Children like unto the Son of God, who though he knew no sin, yet
was content to lay down his life for sinners. There is no man so evil but has
some good thing to commend him, though it break not out, as being clouded and
darkened with much corruption. Therefore Christian Meekness is very wary, and
does not think there is nothing else but evil where she often sees it. And
though she cannot nourish a good opinion of the man, to think him good; yet she
will a charitable hope, that he may be so. And as those who seek for treasure,
give not over by reason of clay and mire, so long as there is any hope to
speed; so does not Meekness slack her hand and cast off her industry, though it
be spent on the most polluted soul, and ad quaedam sana, in quorum delectatione
acquiescat, per tolerantiam perducatur. Many for want of this Meekness destroy
the work of God, Dum ita objurgant quasi oderint, whilst they reprove their
brother as if they hated him, and upbraid rather then reprehend him. They make
it their virtue rixari cum soeculo, to chide the times and manners. They
suppose they are bound to hate sinners; and will be just rather in showing
mercy to their beast then to their brother. Away with him, away with him from
the earth, is quickly said; but is commonly breathed from a soul as much
stained and polluted as his is whom we suppose to be sick to death. What
Tertullian spoke is most true, In Majestatis reos and publicos hosts omnis
homo miles est, Against traitors and public enemies, every man is a Soldier.
And it is as true, that every one that is of strength to pull a soul out of the
fire, is, when his brother sins, a Priest also, and may, nay is bound to rebuke
him: but he must be careful that his counsel and advise be the dictates of his
Love, not of his gall and bitterness; that he take God himself for a pattern,
qui non homines odit, sed vitia; who never hated men, whom he made, but Sin,
which, being God, he could not make. The Prophet David puts it up in the manner
of a question unto God himself, Do not I hate them, O Lord, that hate thee? and
am not I grieved with Psalm. 139. 21, 22.
those which rise up against thee? and presently gives himself the answer, I
hate them with a perfect hatred, I count them mine enemies. Quid est illud,
PERFECTO ODIO? says St. Augustine; What is that the Prophet means by perfect
hatred? No more then this, He hated the vices in them, not the men; How then
will this perfect Hatred and the Love of our enemies subsist together? To wit,
by this, That we hate this in them, that they are wicked; and love this in
them, that they are men. The 109 Psalm is a Psalm of cursing. There we find
such fearful imprecations that a true Christian must needs tremble but to hear
them read. St. Chrysostom in his very first words upon that Psalm, says (...),
He that will take this Psalm into his hands had need be discreet. Whether it be
a Prophecy or a collection of bitter imprecations, is not much material: In
the Gospel there is no such gift of Prophecy, nor liberty of cursing granted.
He that foretells his brothers ruin, is a Prophet also of his own: and he that
curses his brother secretly in his heart, though it be for sin, has committed
that sin which will bring a heavy curse upon himself. I know it has been used
in the Church; and it has been thought a heavy curse to say DEUS LAUDUM upon
any man, which is the very first words and title of that Psalm. A common thing
it was in France, says Calvin, if any man had an enemy that molested him, to
hire with a sum of money a Monk or a Franciscane every day to repeat this
Psalm. A Gentlewoman of great note procured one of that Fraternity to use that
very form of imprecation against her only Son. So dangerous are the examples
even of the Saints of God; which we are too ready to follow when they are ill;
and when they are good and warrantable, as ready to mistake them. Si David, cur
non ego? If David that Saint of God, that man after Gods own heart, did fill
his Psalm with Imprecations, why may not we also set our Prayers to the same
tune, and curse our enemies with a DEUS LAUDUM? I will grant we may, when as we
find such a roll of curses under the Law; we find also such another under the
Gospel. If the Proverb will suffer the Jew but to creep into Mount Ebal, sure
Christianity should be a sense to keep a Christian from coming near it. I
cannot conceive but that God does exact this duty in far greater measure from a
Christian then from a Jew. For though this precept in equity bound the Jews as
well as us, yet God, who dispensed with them, has not done that favor unto us,
who have received far greater from him, but requires this duty of Meekness from
us in the highest degree. If he demanded of the Jew an Omer, he will exact from
us Christians an Ephah.

For conclusion then, and to make some use of that which has been spoken; Let
us not go in the ways of the Gentiles, nor in theirs who are so fully bent
against those who are not of the same opinion, that in the prosecution they
forget they are men, and that there is any such virtue as Meekness; that, like
Hannibal, cannot live without an enemy; or, like those ancient Spaniards in
Justine, are so out of love with concord that they swell at the very name; that
have no other reason or inducement to quarrel but to quarrel, and think
Religion consists in words of gall and acts of vengeance, that Clamor is Zeal,
and Fury Piety, and that then they reign as Saints when they wash their feet in
the blood of their brethren; that call every opinion that is not theirs
Blasphemy; and that are not so hot against a foul pollution in the heart as
against an error in the understanding, nor so angry with a crying sin as with a
supposed mistake. If these be Saints, then certainly our Savior is not so meek
as he has told us, or we must believe, what is past understanding, that our
meek Savior, as he once had Judas, so may now have these men of Belial for his
Disciples. If these men be Saints, why may not Lucifer recover his place? What?
a Saint with fire and sword? with axes and hammers? with fire devouring before
him, and a tempest round about him? like the bottomless Pit, sending forth
smoke as out of a furnace, smoke out of which come Locusts to devour the
earth? a covetous, malicious, deceitful, treacherous, adulterous, murderous
Saint? Such Saints peradventure may walk on earth, or under that name; but sure
they will never follow the Lamb, nor appear in those new heavens and new earth
wherein dwells Righteousness. Let us, I say, not be like these. For they say,
and do not; they say, and do the contrary. What profit, what honor will it be
to be such an Angel as appears here in light, and is reserved to be kept in
chains of darkness for ever? such a Saint as shall be turned into a Feind? Let
us rather take upon us the yoke of Christ, who was meek; and bear the burdens
of these contentious men, as St. Paul exhorts. Let us not assault one another
with lies in the defense of Truth, nor break the bonds of Charity in the behalf
of Faith, nor fly asunder in defense of the Cornerstone, nor be shaken in
pieces to secure the Rock. If they separate themselves, let not us withdraw our
affection from them. Si velint, fratres; and si nolint, fratres; If they will,
let them be our brethren; and if they will not, yet let them be our brethren.
And in these times of hurry and noise, in the midst of so many divisions and
sects, let us look upon every man with an eye of Charity and Meekness, or, as
Erasmus speaks, with an Evangelical eye; and leaving all bitterness and rancor
behind us, let us walk on in a constant course of piety and holy contention
with our selves, not answering reviling with reviling, but beating down every
imagination which is contrary to Meekness; doing that upon Sin in our selves
which we cannot do upon Error in others. When they spurn at our Meekness, and
defy our silence, and rebuke our innocence, let us be meek and silent and
innocent still. When they will kill us, be as silent as they who have been dead
long ago: that so we may possess our souls when they are ready to take them
from us; and be like the people of Nazianzum, who by their peaceable behavior
in times of great dissension gained a name and title, and were called The Ark
of Noah, because by this part of spiritual Wisdom they escaped that deluge and
inundation of fury which had wel-near overflowed and swallowed up all the
Christian world.

In the last place; let us level our Wrath and Indignation against Sin, but
spare the Sinner, since our selves so often do call upon God to spare us: And
if he did not spare us, where should the righteous, where should the best
Saints appear. It is one mark of Antichrist, that he sits as God in the 2 Thessalonians. 3. 4.
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God, thundering out his
excommunications, canonizing, damning, absolving, condemning whom he please.
Thus (...), to overlook our brother, thus to look down upon our brethren, and
dart a heavy censure at them for that which we should shed a tear, is so far to
follow Antichrist as to take the seat and place of God; nay, to put him out of
his seat, and to do his office; nay, to do that which he will not do, to
sentence him to death whom God for ought we know, has chosen to eternal life.
Nay, though it does not make a man the Antichrist, yet it makes him so much
Antichrist as to place him in a flat opposition to Christ himself. For he is
not such an angry Bishop, such a proud High Priest, as cannot be touched with
the feeling of our sins, but one who being meek and tempted himself, is able
and willing to compassionate those that are tempted. Did we feel the burden of
our brethrens sins, as he did; Did we apprehend the wrath of God, as he did; we
should rather offer up prayers and supplications, with Psalm. 69. 26.
strong cryings and tears for them, then tell of the misery of these wounded
ones, (that is, speak vauntingly and preach thereof, as the word signifies)
then let our Anger loose against them, and beat upon them with all our storms.
I confess, prudent and discreet Reprehension is as a gracious and seasonable
rain, but rash and inconsiderate Anger as a tempest, a hurricane, to waste a
soul, and carry all before it, and dig up Piety by the root. As it is truly
said that most men speak against Riches, not out of hatred but love unto them,
so do many against Sin, not out of hatred to sin, but love of themselves, which
may be as great a sin as that which they are so loud against. Signum putant
bonae conscientiae, aliis maledicere; They count it a sign of a good conscience
in themselves, to be angry with and speak evil of others: They think themselves
good if they can say others are evil: Whereas true Righteousness speaks always
in meekness and compassion; but that which is false and counterfeit breaths
forth nothing but wrath, reviling and indignation. O beloved! what soloecismes,
what contradictions may we observe in the School and Church of Christ! men
raging against Sin, and yet raising a Kingdom from it in themselves! loathing
it as poison, and yet drinking it down as water! angry with it, and loving it!
whipping it with scorpions, and yet binding it about them as a garment! Jacob's
sons declaiming against Uncleanness with the instruments of cruelty in their
hands! Absalom bewailing the Injustice of the times, when himself was a
Traitor! Judas angry with Mary's ointment, when he would have it sold and put
into his bag! What a pageant is it to see Sacrilege beating down Idolatry?
Covetousness whipping of Idleness? Profaneness pleading for the Sabbath?
Gluttony belching out its fumes against Drunkenness? Perjury loud against
Swearing? and Hypocrisy riding in triumph, and casting out its fire and
brimstone on all. And what is a groan or a sigh from a Murderer? What is a
Satyr from a Sodomite? or a Libel from a man of Belial? If Hell has any
music, this is it, and the Devil danceth after it, after the groans and sighs
and prayers and zeal of a Pharisee. And do they then well to be angry? Yes,
they say, they do well to be angry, even to death; but not at their sin, of
themselves, but their brethren. For Meekness and cruelty cannot harbor in the
same breast. Nor will it come near the habitations of Covetousness, Ambition
and Hypocrisy: for where these make their entrance, Meekness takes the wing,
and flies away. Therefore, to conclude, let us mark these men, and avoid them,
as the Apostle counsels. And though they bring us into bondage, though they
smite us on the face, though they take from us all that we have, let us pity
them and send after them more then they desire, our prayers, that God will open
their eyes, that they may see the snare of the Devil which holds them fast
while they defy him and all his works; and what a poor and narrow space there
is betwixt them and Hell, while they think they are in the presence and favor
of God. In a word, though they curse, let us bless; though they rage, let us
pray: and, as the Apostle counsels, Let all bitterness, and wrath, and anger,
and clamor, and evil speaking be put away from us, with all Ephesians. 4. 31, 32.
malice. And let us be kind and meek one to another, tenderhearted, forgiving
one another, even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us.

The Third SERMON. PART III.
MATTHEW. V. 5. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
WE cannot insist too long upon this subject, yet we must insist longer then at
first we did intend. For this holy oil, like that of the Widows, increases
under our hands, and flows more plentifully by being powered out. That which our
last reached unto you was the Object of Meekness, which we found to be as large
as the whole world. (...), says St. Paul, Let your moderation be known unto
all men. For Meekness is not cloistered up within the walls of one Society, nor
does it hide it self behind the curtains of Solomon but looks further, upon the
tents of Kedar, upon Bethel and Bethaven. We could not, nor was it necessary to
gather and fetch in all particulars; but we then confined our meditations to
those which we thought most pertinent, and within their compass took in the
rest; which were Error in opinion, and (which is the greater error, nay the
greater heresy, says Erasmus) Error in life and conversation: Where we took
off those common pretenses and excuses which Christians usually bring in as
Advocates to plead for them, when they forget that Meekness without which they
cannot be Christians. For what is in Error or in Sin which may raise my anger
against my brother? Errantis poena est doceri, says Plato; If he err, his
punishment is to be taught: and if he sin, we must molest and pursue him, and
beat upon him with line upon line, with reprehension upon reprehension, till we
convert him. If he err, why should I be angry? and if he sin, why should I
hate him? The way to uphold a falling House is not to demolish it; nor is it
the way to remove Sacrilege to beat the Temple down. When we fight against Sin
and Error, we must make Christ our pattern, qui vulnus, non hominem secat, qui
secat ut sanet; who levels his hand and knife against the disease, not against
the man, and never strikes but where he means to heal. And now to add something
which the time would not before permit; Let us but a while put upon our selves
the person of our adversaries, and ours upon them, and conceive it as possible
for our selves to err as for them; and if we do not thus think, we fall upon
an error which will soon multiply, and draw with it many more. For we cannot
err more dangerously then by thinking we cannot err. And then to this let us
join a prudent consideration of those truths wherein we both agree, which
peradventure may be more and more weighty then those in which we differ, that
so by the luster and brightness of these the offense taken by the other may
vanish as the mist before the Sun. For why should they who agree in those
truths that may lift them both up together to Heaven, fall asunder and stand at
distance as enemies for those which have no such force and activity? This is to
hazard the benefit of the one for the defense of the other, and for the love of
a truth not necessary to abate our love of that which should save us; to
forfeit our Charity in a violent contention for Faith; and so be shut out of
Heaven for our wild and impertinent knocking at the gates. Therefore in all our
disputes and debates with those whom we are so ready to condemn of error, let
us walk by this rule which Reason and Revelation have drawn out to be our guide
and direction, That no Text in Scripture can retain the sense and meaning of
the blessed Spirit which does not edify in Charity. Knowledge puffs up,
swells us beyond our sphere and compass, but it is Charity alone that does
edify, which in all things dictates what is expedient for all, and so builds
us up together in a holy Faith. We cannot think that Doctrine can be of any use
in the Church which exasperates and envenoms one man against another. It is St.
Bernards observation. And therefore Moderation and Meekness is that Salt which
Christ requires to be in us; that wise and prudent seasoning Mark 5. 90.
of our words, that purging of our affections, amongst which Ambitions and
Envyings are the most violent. Have this salt in your selves, and then, as it
follows, you shall have peace one with another; And this Peace will beget in
you a holy emulation to work out your eternal peace together with fear and
trembling. Secondly, for Sin why judge thou thy brother? or so much
forgettest that name as to be enraged against him? The judgment is the Lord's,
who sees things that are not as if they were. What though he be fallen upon a
stone, and sore bruised? he may be raised again, and be built upon that
foundation which is sure, and has this zeal, The Lord knows who are his.
This open Profaner may become a zealous Professor; this false witness may be a
true Martyr; this Persecutor of the Church may at last be a glorious member of
it, and a stout Champion for the Truth. He that led the Saints bound to
Jerusalem did himself afterward rejoice in his bonds, and suffer and dye for
that truth which he prosecuted. The Apostle, where he erects a kind of
discipline amongst the Thessalonians, thus 2 Thessalonians. 3. 14.
draws it forth, If any man obey not our word, that is, be refractory to the
Gospel of Christ, have no company with that man, that he may be ashamed; that
seeing others avoid him, he may be forced to dwell at home, to have recourse
unto himself, to hold colloquy with his own soul, and to find out the plague in
his heart which makes him thus like a Pelican in the Wilderness, or an Owl in
the Desert, like the Leper under the Law, whom no man must come near. Have no
company with him, that is, by thy company and familiarity give him no
encouragement in his sin. For good words and courteous behavior may be taken
for applause: a smile is a hug, and too much friendship is a kind of
absolution. And yet for all this, have company with him: for it tells us, Count
him not as an enemy, but admonish him as a brother; Deal gently and meekly with
him; but this we cannot do if we wholly separate our selves from him, and avoid
his company. The rule of Charity directs us to think every man an heir with
Christ; or, if he be not, at least that he may be so. And this is a kind of
privilege that Charity has in respect of Faith. Faith sees but a little
flock, but few that shall be saved; makes up a Church as Gedeon did his Army,
who took not all that were pressed out for the war, but out of many thousands
selected a band of three hundred and no more: but Charity takes in all, and
sees not any of that company which she will dismiss, but thinks all, though now
their hands be weak and their hearts faint, in time may be sweetly encouraged
to fight and conquer. You will say this is an error of our Charity. But it is a
very necessary error: for it is my charity thus to err, and it is not a lie,
but virtue in me, in my weak brothers case to nourish a hope of that strength
which peradventure he shall never recover. The holy mistakes of Charity shall
never be imputed as(...)s; no, nor be numbered amongst those of Ignorance. For
he that errs not thus, he that hopes not the best of all he sees, though
weltring in their blood, wants something to complete and perfect him, and make
him truly worthy of the name of a good Christian. And this error in Charity is
not without good reason. For we see not how nor when the Grace of God may work,
how sinful soever a man be. Peradventure, says St. Hierom, God may call unto
him lying and stinking in his sins as in a Grave, Lazarus, come forth. Charity
therefore, because she may err, nay because she must err, looks upon every
man with an eye of Meekness. If he err, she is Light; if he sin, she is a
Physician, and is ready to restore him with the spirit of Meekness. And thus
much for the Object of Meekness: We proceed now to that which was in order
next; and as we have drawn forth Meekness in a complete piece, in her full
extent and latitude, so will we now in the last place propose her to you as a
Virtue, 1. most proper, 2. most necessary to a Christian: By which degrees and
approaches we shall press forward toward the mark, even the reward of
Meekness, the inheritance of the earth. Of these in their order.

Meekness, we told you, is that virtue by which we may better know a Christian
than by his name. And this the very enemies of Christianity have acknowledged.
Vide ut se invicem diligunt Christiani, was a common speech among the Heathen,
See how the Christians love one another! when they broke the laws of Meekness,
and did persecute them. Male velle, male facere, male dicere, male cogitare de
quoque ex aequo vetamur; To wish evil, to do evil, to speak evil, to think
evil, are alike forbidden to a Christian; whose profession restrains his
will, binds his hand, tacketh up his tongue to the roof of his mouth, and
curbeth and fettereth his very thoughts. For as we are not (...), without a
Head, so if we will be members, we must be suppled with that oil of Meekness
which distilleth down from our Head Christ Jesus. He came not, says
Tertullian, into the world with Drum and Colors, but with a Rattle rather; not
with a noise, but like the rain into a fleece of wool; not destroying his
enemies, but making them his friends; not as a Captain, but as an Angel and
Ambassador of peace; not denouncing war, but proclaiming a Jubilee; and with no
sword, but that of the Spirit. Look upon all the acts of our Savior, whilst he
conversed on earth amongst men and we shall find they were purely the issues of
Tenderness and Meekness. He went about doing good: As he cured men's bodies of
diseases, so he purged their souls of sin. When he met with men possessed,
though with a Legion of Devils, he did not revile, but dispossess them; he
rebuked the Devil, but not the man. His mouth was so filled with the words of
meekness. Thy sins are forgiven thee, that he seldom spoke but the issue was
comfort. He pronounced indeed a woe to the Pharisees; (and so he does to all
sinners: For Woe will follow the Hypocrite whethersoever he goes, though it be
not denounced a Wce to drive them from sin to repentance; not a curse, but a
precept to fright them from that woe which he denounced. It is but pulling off
the visour, casting away their hypocrisy, and the Woe will vanish and end in a
blessing. He called Herod a Fox: for, as God, he knew what was in him: and to
him every wicked person is worse then a beast. No Fox to Herod; no Goat to the
Wanton, no Tiger to the Murderer, no Wolf to the Oppressor. Obstinate sinners
carry their Woe and curse along with them, nor can they fling it off but with
their sin. And Christ's profession was to call sinners to repentance. When the
Reed was bruised, he broke it not; and when the flax did smoke, he quenched it
not. As he has a Rod for the impenitent (and it is the last thing he uses) so
he comes in the spirit of Meekness, and opens his arms to receive and
embrace them that will meekly yield and bow before him, and repent, and be meek
a(...) is meek. Now our Saviviour is disciplina morum, the way and the truth.
And that gracious way which it has pleased him to tread himself before us, the
very same he has left behind to be gone by us, and has ordered a course of
religious and Christian worship, which consists in Meekness and sweetness of
Disposition. An incongruous thing therefore it is that he having presented to
us the Meekness of a Lamb, we should return the rage of a Lion; that he should
speak in a still voice, and we should thunder.

And this is most proper to Christianity and the Church. For first, what is the
Church of Christ but a Congregation of meek ones? We cannot bring Bears and
Lions and Tigers within that pale. Quomodo colligemus? as Tertullian speaks,
How shall we gather them together? -- jungantur tigribus ursi. We cannot bring
them together into one body and collection; or, if we do, but, as Sampson did
his Foxes, to look several ways. We are told indeed that the Wolf shall dwell
with the Lamb, and the Leopard lie down with Isa. 11. 6.
the Kid, and the Calf with the young Lion; but it is when they are so
cicurated and tame that a little Child shall lead them. It is true, the visible
Church is made up of both. For not only without, as St. John speaks, but
within, are dogs, and sorcerers, and whoremongers, and murderers, and
idolaters; Rev. 22. 15.
as there were in the Ark of Noah both clean and unclean beasts. In this Church
is Cain as well as Abel, Esau as well as Jacob, Judas as well as Peter; but
they are no parts of that general Assembly, no parts of the Church of the
firstborn which are written in heaven, nor to be numbered amongst the spirits
of just men made perfect: That part of the Church which is thus militant in
Earth, shall never be triumphant in heaven. Cruel Dives shall never be seen in
Abraham's bosom, nor the bloud-thirstie man in his arms who shed no blood but
his own, and that for the sins of the world: The Church which shall be saved
was not planted in blood; or, if it were, it was in the blood of a Lamb. It was
built upon the Faith of Peter, not upon his Sword: When he used his sword, he
was commanded to put it up; but his Faith was to be published to the whole
World. And if he had any grant or title to be the Head of the Church, it was
not for cutting off Malchas's ear, but for laying down his own life for the
Faith. Many Notes have been given of the true Church by those who acknowledge
none but their own, notes which show her not: Multitude of true believers: Why?
the number is but small. Infallibility: It is an error to think so. Antiquity:
The Church, that is now ancient, was once new; and by this note, when it was
so, it was no Church. Continuance to the end of the world: We believe it; but
it is no note; for we cannot see it. Temporal felicity: This is oftener seen in
the Tents of Kedar than at Jerusalem, in a band of Soldiers than in the
Church, which wins more conquests in adversity than in prosperity, and
works out her way to glory in her own blood. These are Notes quae nihil
indicant, which show nothing; Trumpets that give an uncertain sound. But if I
should name Meekness as a note of the true Church, I should have a fairer
probability to speak for me than they. For meek men, if they be not of the
Church, yet are not far from the Kingdom of Heaven. But a meek Christian is
entitled not only to the earth, but to heaven also. The Church is a Church,
though her Professors be but of yesterday, and though they fall into error.
And though it be in tribulation, yet still it is a Church; yea it is never more
glorious then in persecution. But without meekness it cannot be a Christian
Church, no more then a man can be a man without a soul. For Meekness, if it be
not the essence of the Church, yet is a property which flows from its very
essence. For that Faith is vain which leaves malice or rancour in the heart. A
Christian and a Revenger, if they meet together in the same person, the one is
a Box of poison, the other but a title.

Again, in the second place, our Reason will tell us that Meekness is most
proper to Christianity and the Church, because humane Reason was too weak to
discover the benefit, the pleasure, the glory of it: Nor was it seen in its
full beauty till that Light came into the world which did improve and sublime
and perfect our Reason. To humane Reason nothing can seem more unreasonable,
more unjust, then To love an enemy, To surrender our coat to him that has
stripped us of our cloak, To return a blessing for a reproach, and anoint his
head with oil who has stricken us to the ground. This is a new Philosophy, not
heard of on earth, till she was sent down from heaven. On earth it was A blow
for a blow, and a curse for a curse. Dixerit insanum qui me, totidem audiet. If
injuries be meted out unto us, we mete them back again in full measure; pressed
down, and running over. Revenge is counted an act of Justice; the Pythagoreans
(...), a reciprocation of injuries. And what need any other law then our Grief
or our Anger? or where should Justice dwell but on the point of our Sword?
(...). It was the law of Rhadamanthus, It is equity that he that does, should
suffer what he does; and he that suffers, should return it in the same kind.
When those brethren in evil, having slain Hamor and Shechem, and spoiled their
City, were rebuked by their Father Jacob, they were ready with this plea,
Should he deal with our Sister as with a Harlot? No sooner is the blow given,
Genesis 34. 31.
but the first thought is to second and return it; and Nature looks upon it as
upon an act of Justice. In the world it goes thus: All Power and Dominion and
Justice is tied to the hilts of our Sword; which if we can wield and manage
dexterously, with skill and success, that which otherwise had been an injury, is
made a law. The Turk, to settle and establish his Religion, as he first built
it in blood, so gives way to every thing that best sorteth with humane
corruption, to make it easy, that men may not start back for fear of
difficulties: and as he wrought it out with his Sword, so his best argument for
it (as it is most times in a bad cause) is his Sword. The Philosophers cried
down Revenge, yet gave way to it; chid their Anger, yet gave it line thus far:
And both Tully and Aristotle approve it. But Munit nos Christus adversus
Diaboli latitudines, says Tertullian; Christian discipline is a fense to keep
us from these latitudes and exspatiations, and points out to the danger of
those sins which the Heathen commended for virtues. Many indeed have dealt with
these precepts of our Savior as skilful cooks do by some kind of meats which
of themselves are but harsh and unpleasant, cooked and sawced them, to make
them savoury dishes. For when we see our journey long and full of rubs and
difficulties, we fancy something that may both shorten and level it, and make
it more plain and easy then indeed it is. Christ our Master is so great an
enemy to Murder, and would have us so far detest it, that he has not suffered
us to be angry. Now the interpretation is, We must not be angry (...), without
a cause. And this emboldneth us to plead for our Wrath, as Jacob's sons did,
when it is cruel, and upon this very color, that there is good reason we
should be angry. For be the storm never so high, be our anger never so raging,
yet we can pretend a cause, and that cause we pretend as just; otherwise we
would not pretend it: For who would pretend that for a cause which is unjust?
To love our enemies, this is a harsh and an iron speech; and he must have the
stomach of an Ostrich who can digest it: therefore we have dressed and sauced
it, to make it palatable and of easy digestion: and some have thought, and
been bold to say it, that this is no peremptory Precept, but only a counsel and
advice, and left to our choice whether we will keep it or no. If we neglect and
pass it by, we hazard only aureolam, not auream; we hold fast eternal life, but
lose some little Coronet and addition which the full performance would have
purchased. When Julian the Apostate urged the Christians, and laid it to their
charge that their Religion was destructive of all rule and government, because
the Precepts which Christ gave forbad them to resist evil, or go to law with
their brother; Nazianzene confesses that our Savior did indeed leave behind
him these Injunctions, but that he added withal, (...), that they did not
belong to every man, but to those only who could (...), by their holy
endeavors lift themselves up to the highest pitch of virtue. For those that
keep them there was a reward laid up, but no fear of punishment to those whose
endeavors fell short. Which answer of his does not satisfy: For if it be
better not to implead my brother then to implead him, the Apostat's argument is
still of force, because Christianity commends that as best. From this source
and fountain sprang that River of Evangelical Counsels that overfloweth in
works of Supererogation, which are drawn up by the power of the Keys into the
treasury of the Church, and then showred down in Pardons and Indulgences, to
water the dry places of the earth, to quench the insatiable thirst of the Court
of Rome. Had the Father but distinguished betwixt public and private revenge,
he had peradventure stopped the mouth of the Adversary, and not unhappily
occasioned others to open theirs against the truth. Whatsoever his mistake was,
it is not so dangerous as theirs who think these Precepts concern Christians
not at all, and who conceive that our Savior was so far from adding any thing
unto the Law, that he brought in his hand a dispensation from it, that for us
so strictly to observe the Moral Law is not so necessary, that this ease and
benefit accrews to Christians by the coming of Christ, that they may be more
indulgent to themselves, since they have him for their Advocate who is their
Lawgiver, and has proclaimed a Jubilee rather in sin, yea from it. We will not
deal with these men as those hard Taskmasters did with the Israelites, because
they rest from their burden, withdraw their straw, and yet require the whole
tale of Bricks; but we may make their burden greater because they have more
straw. I might here enlarge my self. All that I intend is only this, To show
you how proper this virtue of Meekness is to a Christian; that God requires a
higher degree of it in Christians then he did formerly in the Jews; that our
Savior does now bind our hands and tongues and thoughts in those cases where
the Law of Moses did give more line and liberty; that the name of Brother,
which was heard of only in Jewry, is not now shut up in the narrow confines of
a House or Family, but must be the Language of the whole world. He that is
within the Pale of the Church, and he that is not of the Church; he that is a
Christian, and he that never heard of Christ; he that is so near me as to be my
friend, and he that stands at the distance of an enemy; a Christian, a Turk,
a Jew, a Friend, a Foe, every man, now is my Neighbor. We who are Disciples of
a better Testament, sanctiores incolae, inhabitants of that Jerusalem which is
from above, must look up upon that light which our great Master has held out
to us in his Gospel, and not content our selves and sit down as if we were at
our journeys end, when we have only walked on along with the Jew a
Sabbath-dayes journey, and made no further progress in Meekness then the Dictum
ab antiquis, the Law of Moses, points to. For how little of a Christian has
he who dares foment so much anger as might glow in the heart of a Jew and not
consume him? I love not to rake in the ashes of the blessed Saints of God,
whose memory is as sweet as honey in every man's mouth, and as Music at a
Banquet of Wine. Eccl. 49. 1.
But an evil custom men have got, to make good men's errors more authentic
then their virtues, and for sins against the Gospel suborn apologies out of the
Law, and not strive to pass the narrow Gate because the Jew had the favor to
find admittance at a wider. David had the praise of ten thousands; Eccl. 47. 6.
God honored him amongst his Saints, and gave him a Crown of Glory: Yet every
action of David is not a rule for a Christian, though never laid to his charge:
and David by especial dispensation might do that, and yet not forfeit his soul,
which would now sink a Christian's to the lowest Pit. In 2 Samuel 19. 23. he
forgiveth Shimei, who had cursed him, and tells him he shall not dye, and
swears unto him; and yet 1 Kings 2. 8, 9. even with his last breath, he
leaves it in charge with his son Solomon, to bring his hoary head down to the
grave with blood. David no doubt is a glorious Saint in Heaven: but should any
Christian follow his example, and make Revenge a part of his last Will and
Testament, if our Saviors rule be true, which is most plain, That if we
forgive not our enemies, God will not forgive us, that Gate of mercy, which was
open to David, will certainly be shut to him. Yet how have men beat their
brains to make good this fact of David's, which can find no excuse, for ought
we know, but from the times and particular indulgence and dispensation? Some
say he pardoned him only for the time, and retained a power of revenge to be
put in execution when he pleased, or when convenience should favor him. But
what is this but to make David guilty of a lie, and Jesuitical equivocation?
Some say he sinned not, because he did it not himself, but left it to his Son.
And what difference is there whether I kill a man my self, or cause him to be
put to death? Some; that the Oath was to be taken not as Shimei, but as David
himself understood it, because when all is in the power of him that swears,
the meaning of the words is in his power also. This has been the absurd
impiety of these days, and makes an Oath, which is the strongest confirmation,
of no use, but as a thread of Tow, which every man may break asunder at his
pleasure. Others; that it was an Oath not upon compact but liberality. As if an
Oath which is freely made binds not as much as that does which is upon
agreement. Lastly, some; that he forgave him as he was David, but not as he was
King of Israel: which is in effect, As a private man, he swore that he should
not dye; but as a public person, he commanded his Son to cut off his head.
(...). These excuses and apologies do not acquit but condemn this blessed Saint
of God; and with the least breath, you see, they are scattered as leaves before
the Wind. It is not our intent to agravate that fact as a sin in David, which
yet in a Christian would be crimen devoratorium salutis, a sin that stands in
adverse aspect to the Spirit of the Gospel, and would deprive of all right to
that promise which is here made to the meek, and leave no hope of salvation.
For after our Savior had given that Precept of loving our ememies, he
presently backeth it with the strongest reason that can be brought, That ye
may be the Children of your Father which is in Heaven, who makes his Sun to
rise on the evil and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the
Matthew. 5. 45.
unjust. We conclude this point with that of Tertullian, Novam certe
mansuetudinem docet Christus, etiam vicem injuriae prohibens permissam a
Creatore; Christ has brought in a new kind of meekness into the world,
forbidding that liberty of revenge which the Maker of all things had for some
reason permitted for a time. But this may seem to be durus sermo, a hard
saying; and the world is not very fruitful of such men as are able to bear it.
For if this be true, the language of the Gospel is more harsh then that of the
Law, and speaks in more terror then the Thunder from Mount Sinai: we are come
again to blackness, and darkness, and tempest, and to the voice of words, which
we entreat may be spoken to us no more. Not to hate an enemy; To love an enemy;
To do good to an enemy; Not to be angry; if this be Gospel, our case is far
worse then that of the Jew. Indeed, says St. Basil, this was the very reason
why the Jews would not receive Christ and his Gospel: they said, (...), That it
was a hard saying. Laboriosa omnia ignavis; All things are toylsome to the
sluggard: A pain it is to him to pull his hand out of his bosom. Continence is
a hard lesson to the wanton, Prove. 26. 15.
Temperance to the Glutton, and Meekness to a Nabal, ^^ a Son of Belial, who
will swell and quarrel at a very Look, and though the winds be still about him,
and not the least injury so much as breath on him, yet has wind enough shut up
in his heart to raise a tempest. Semper offendunt bona malos, pia impios,
sancta profanos; Good things are always scandalous and offensive to evil men.
If you enjoin Meekness, you put a Thorn in their sides to prick and trouble
them. And you may to as much purpose bid a dead man rise and walk, as win him
that loves his passion to lay it down. But yet how hard soever our talk is, we
find that the Jews had an expensive and laborious Religion, that they were sub
elementis mundi, as children, or rather as slaves, under the Elements of the
world, that they had many Ceremonies, many Statutes and Laws, in quibus non
vivebant, sed puniebantur, in which they did not so much live as were punished.
And now what does God Mic. 6. 7, 8.
require of thee, O Christian? Not to circumcise thy foreskin, but thy heart;
not thousands of Rams, but to forgive seventy times seven times; not ten
thousands of rivers of oil, but only this precious ointment, which may fall
upon the head of thy brethren, and run down to the skirts of their Garments, to
their lowest infirmities; Not the fruit of thy body for the sin of thy soul,
but to forgive, that thou may be forgiven. And what is easier then this?
says Chrysostom. Non opus est peregrinationibus; Thou need not go on
Pilgrimage, or take any long journey, to atchieve it: It is but going out of
thy self, and leaving thy pride and animosities behind thee. Thou need not
sail for it, thou need not plow for it: It is but plowing up the fallow
ground of thy heart, and then sowing the seed of Meekness. Sufficit ut velis
tantum, and jam virtus illa suum opus implevit: If thou can fight against thy
Flesh, degrade thy Ambition, and shut out the World, if thou can work in thy
self a willingness to forgive, this virtue has its work and consummation. Habe
charitatem, and fac quod vis, as it is in the Gloss of the Canon Law: Have
Charity, put on the bowels of Compassion and Meekness, and do what thou will.
For if thou caust but once love its countenance, thou will soon embrace it.
Amor, magus; Love is a kind of Magician, and has spells and enchantments to
charm our passions, and conjure down this Devil. You may now think your selves
in a very slippery place, when not a violent tempest, but a gust, a puff of
wind will overthrow you; when not Murder, but Anger; not a Word, but a Thought;
not Revenge, but Not doing good; not Rage, but Impatience; not Noise, but a
Whisper, may endanger your title to this crown of Blessedness. Fear not, only
be strong and of good courage. The Stoic looked pale in a Tempest, but he
imputed it Subitis motibus officium rationis praevertentibus, to those
fantasies and sudden motions which do unawares suppress the Reason, and give
her no time to deliberate: So a Christian may be shaken with those assaults
which by subreption may steal upon him: he may speak what afterward he will
revile more than his enemy, and do what he will detest more than an injury:
cast a look of dislike, and soon distaste that look; cloud his countenance, and
chase it away with a prayer; be moved, and within a while be more moved for
being so, and so remain the same meek man and a Christian still. For God forbid
that an injected thought, a sudden motion, a forced frown, a word struck out by
some outward and unexpected violence, should shut any man out of the Covenant
of Grace, and hope of happiness. If God should thus mark extremely what is done
amiss, no flesh would be saved, but the whole world would be as Sodom and
Gomorrah. That which the Gospel requires at our hands, is, that every man
should severely watch over himself, watch and deprehend himself, and then
double his watch, suspect a temptation, and fight against it before it come,
fight against it though it never come, and not easily entertain any act which
stands in opposition to this virtue, nor any occasion which may draw on that
act. For to be bold to think evil, so I vent it not in language; to imagine I
may vent, so I do not strike; and when I strike, to comfort my self because
another little finger is greater than my Loins; to commend the Rod because it
is not a Scorpion; to say of those sins which surprise me because I do not fear
them, as Lot did of Zoar, Are they not little ones? may I not commit them, and
yet my soul live? to make my Not doing of evil an apology for my Not doing of
good, my Not thrusting my Neighbor out of his own doors a sufficient warrant
for my Not receiving him into mind; to think that any degree of Meekness is
enough, is to forfeit all, and loose my title to the inheritance of the earth.

It is, I confess, a sad observation, but too manifestly true, that if Meekness
be a virtue so proper, so essential to the Church, then the Church is not so
visible as we pretend, but we must seek for the Church in the Church it self.
For if Meekness have yet a place, it must be (which is very strange) in the
hearts of men, in the inward man. For to the eye, every hand is lifted up,
every mouth open; and they who call themselves the Members of the Church, are
very active to bite and devour one another: And it is not probable that their
hearts should melt within them, and their bowels yearn, whose mouths are as
open Sepulchers; and whose feet are swift to shed blood. Is Meekness a note of
the Church? Certainly we may distinguish Christians from the World by nothing
surer then by Malice, in which they surpass both the Turk and the Jew. And
where most is required, least is found ODIUM THE OLOGORUM, The Malice of
Divines, was in Luther's time a Proverb: but now the Proverb is enlarged, and
will take in the greatest part of Christendom. The Papist breaths nothing
but curses and Anathema's, and makes his way with sire and sword where Reason
and Religion shut him out. Others, who are no Papists, yet are as malicious and
bloody as they, and persecute their Brethren under that name, call them
Papists, and spoil them as the Heathen did of old, who put Christians into the
skins of Beasts, and with Dogs baited them to death. If you think not, if you
act not, if you look not, if you move not as they do, you are a child of
perdition, devoted to ruin and death. If you preach any other Doctrine then
that which they receive then you are accursed, though you were an Angel from
Heaven. Forgive you? that were a sin not to be forgiven. Heaven and Earth shall
pass away, rather then one tittle and jot of what they have set up shall fail.
I have much wondered with my self how men could so assure themselves of Heaven,
and yet kindle such a Hell in their breasts; how they could appropriate a meek
Savior to themselves, and even claim him as their peculiar, as the Heathen did
their Deities, and yet breathe nothing but hailstones and coals of fire; how
they should call themselves Evangelicos, the only Gospellers, and yet be such
strangers, such enemies to that virtue which is most commended in the Gospel;
how they should forgive none on earth, and yet so boldly conclude that their
pardon is sealed in Heaven; that they should expect so much mercy from that God
whom they proclaim so cruel as to damn men as they destroy their Brethren, for
no other reason but because he will. I cannot here but wonder and lament, and
pray that this malice of their heart may be forgiven them: for we cannot but
perceive that they in the very gall of bitterness and the bond of iniquity. And
I bespeak you as our Savior did his Disciples, to beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees. For if a little leaven will leaven the whole lump, what will such a
lump of malice do? Even infect the whole body of your Religion. Your Hearing,
your Prayers, your Fasts will taste of blood. Let us then mark and avoid them.
Let us divest our selves not of all power, but of all will to hurt. Let that
always sound in our ear, which is as good Gospel as, That Christ died for the
World, That, if we forgive not, we are in the number of Unbelievers, and are
condemned already. Let us reserve nothing to our selves but that which is ours,
Meekness and Patience; and leave to God that which is his, Judgment and
Retribution. Commit all Jovi Vindici, to the God of Revenge. For he is the best
Umpire for our patience. If we put our injury into his hands, he is our
revenger; if our loss, he can restore it; if our grief, he is our Physician; if
our death, he can raise us up again. Quantum mansuetudini licet, ut Deum habeat
debitorem. Lord! what a power has Meekness, which makes God our debtour for
our losses, for our contumelies, for our reproaches, for our death, for all!
who has bound himself to repay us with honor, with riches, with advantage,
with usury, with the inheritance of the earth, and with everlasting life!

The Fourth SERMON. PART IV.
MATTHEW. V. 5. Blessed are the meek: for they shall inherit the earth.
I Have bestowed many words upon this Virtue of Meekness: But I have not yet
said enough; neither indeed can I, licet toto modio dimensum darem, as he
speaks, though I should give it you out by the bushel, full measure, pressed
down, and running over. Nunquam nimis dicitur, quod nunquam satis discitur; We
cannot repeat that Lesson too often which we can never be so perfect in as we
should. And he certainly is no friend to Meekness who is impatient at her name,
though it sound never so often in his ear. For can he love Meekness that is
afraid of her picture and description? Or can he stand out the shock of those
evils which wait upon and follow every motion of his life, who cannot bring a
few hours patience to hear of that virtue which is the only buckler to quench
those darts? I would I could give you her in a full and complete piece, the
whole Signature, every line, all her Dimensions. I would I could present her
naked before your eyes, in all her rays, with all her beauty and glory; her
power in conquering, her wisdom in defeating those injuries which press hard
upon, yea overthrow and triumph over all the power and policy of the world,
that so you might fall in love with her, and fasten her to your souls, and make
her a part of them. For then indeed we should see concurrere bellum atque
virum, every man strong against a battaglia, every man chasing his ten
thousand: we should see a meek soul in contention with the world, and by doing
nothing treading it under foot. And this we have attempted formerly to do, but
we have not done it in so full and fair a draugh, as we desired. Yet though you
have not had the one half told you, you have heard enough to move you, with the
Queen of Sheba, to draw near unto it, and prove it in your selves. And when you
shall have practiced it in your selves, you will say it was true indeed that
you heard, but you will feel more then you have heard or could hear by report.
We will therefore yet awhile longer detain you. You have beheld the face of
Meekness in her proper Subject, which is every private man, and in her proper
Object, which is as large as the whole world, and takes in not only the Israel
of God, but the Amorite, the Hittite, the Amalekite; not only the Christian,
but the Turk, the Jew, and the Pagan; any man that is subject to the same
passions, any man that can suffer, any man that can do an injury: For Meekness
runs round the whole circle and compass of mankind, and binds every evil
spirit, conjures down every Devil she meets with. Lastly, we presented unto
your view the Fitness and the Applicableness of this virtue to the Gospel and
Church of Christ, and told you that it is as it were the very breath of the
Gospel, the echo of that good news, the best gloss and comment on a silent,
weeping, crucified Savior, the best explanation of his last Prayer, Father,
forgive them. For the notes and characters of a Christian, as they are
described in the Gospel, are Patience, are easy putting up and digesting of
injuries, Humility, a preferring of all before our selves. And St. James tells
us, that the wisdom which is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated; where he gives the first place unto Purity. It would be
a sin almost to compare Christian virtues together, and make them strive for
precedence and place: yet he that shall mark how every where the Scripture
strives to commend unto us Gentleness and Meekness, and that Peace is it quam
nobis Apostoli totis viribus Spiritus Sancti commendant, as Tertullian speaks,
which the Apostles endeavor with all the strength and force of the Holy Ghost
to plant amongst us, might be bold a little to invert the words of St. James,
and read them thus, The wisdom which is from above, is first peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, then pure. For the Son of God, who is the Wisdom of the
Father, and who for us men came down from above, first and above all other
virtues commended this unto the world. At his birth the Song of the Angels was,
Peace on earth, and Goodwill toward men. All his Doctrine was Peace; his whole
life was Peace, and no man heard his voice in the streets. And as Christ, so
Christians. For as in the building of Solomon's Temple there was no noise of any
hammer, or other instrument of iron, so in the spiritual building and frame of
a Christian there is no sound of any iron, no noise of weapons, nothing but
Peace and Gentleness and Meekness. Ex praecepto fidei non minus rea est Ira
sine ratione suscepta, quam in operibus legis Homicidium, says Augustine;
Unadvised Anger by the law of Faith and the Gospel is as great a sin as Murder
was in the Law of Moses. Thus you have seen how proper Meekness is to the
Gospel and Church of Christ. Now in the last place we shall draw this Virtue
forth to you as most necessary to the well-being not only of a Church, but of
every particular member of it; necessary to lift us up to the Reward, the
inheritance of the earth; Which whither you take for that Earth which is but
earth, or that Earth which by interpretation is Heaven, ad omnia occurrit
mansuetudo, Meekness reaches both, both the Footstool and the Throne of God;
it gives us title to the things below, and it makes us heirs of the Kingdom of
Heaven. Without this we can have no mansion in Heaven, nor any quiet and
peaceable possession of the earth. And thus with our last hand we shall set you
up that copy which you may draw out in your selves. For Meekness in character,
in leaves of paper, in our books, is rather a shadow than a picture, and soon
vanishes away; but being drawn out in the soul and practice of a Christian, it
is a fair and lasting piece; even the image of Christ himself, which the Angels
and God himself desire to look upon. And with these we shall exercise your
Christian Devotion at this time.

And first Meekness may seem most necessary to Christians, if we consider the
nature of Christianity it self, which stands in opposition to all other
Professions in the world, confutes the Philosopher, silenceth the Scribe,
strikes Oracles dumb, cries to every man in the world to go out of it. Behold,
says our Savior to his Disciples, I send you forth as sheep in the Matthew. 10
16.
midst of wolves, which will tear you to pieces for no other reason but because
you are sheep. It is a disease very incident to men, to be jealous of every
breath which blows in opposition to that which they have already received, to
swell against that which is contrary to them; and though it be true, to suspect
it; to wonder what it should mean; to be troubled, and afraid of it, as Herod
and all Jerusalem were when the new Star appeared; and, though it be as visible
to any wise man as the Star was in the East, yet to seek to put it out, or, if
they cannot, to destroy those over whom it stands. And therefore Tertullian
tells us, Cum odio sui coepit, that Christianity was hated as soon as known,
and did no sooner show it self in the world, but it found enemies who were
ready to suppress and cast it out; men that could hate it for no other reason
but because it taught to love; that could be angry with the Christian because
he was meek, and destroy him because he made it his profession to forgive; men
who counted Revenge no sin, as the ancient Grecians did sometimes Theevery,
because it was so commonly practiced amongst them. Again, as it was planted in
rerum colluvie, in the corruption of men and manners; so it does in a manner
bid defiance to the whole world. It tells the Jew his Ceremonies are beggarly;
the wise man of this world, that his Philosophy is but deceit, and his wisdom
madness. It plucks the Wanton from the harlots lips, tumbles down the Ambitious
from his pinnacle, disarms the Revenger, strips the Rich. It writes over the
Rich man's Gates, Blessed are the poor; over the Doctor's Chair, Where is the
disputer of this world? over the Temple, NON LAPIS SUPER LAPIDEM, That not a
stone shall be left upon a stone which shall not be thrown down. For a NON
OCCIDES it brought down a NE IRASCARIS, and made Anger Murder; for a NON
MAECHABERIS a NON CONCUPISCES, and made Desire adultery. It brought down sin to
a look, to a thought: and therefore no marvel if there arose against
Christians tot hosts, quot extranei, as many enemies as there were Heathen, or
Jews. But besides their open and professed adversaries, they found enemies
amongst those who were of their own household. What was there which could make
men miserable, or move their impatience, which did not break in upon them every
day? Could Contempt? They were counted the offscouring of the world. Could
Violence? It was counted Religion to kill them. Could Hatred? Accusabantur
vocabula, the very name of CHRISTIAN was an accusation. If there were any seeds
of evil in them, so much fire as is in the Flint, there was outward violence
enough to strike it out. So that a Christian may seem to be, as he spoke of
Palladius, coagulum omnium aerumnarum, the very compound of all calamities, and
the Center wherein all miseries meet. Now it is almost natural to Misery to
breath it self out in complaints, as Lovers use to do, to complain to the Day
and the Night, to the Sun and the Moon. Flesh and blood draws it self in at the
very sight and approach of any thing that distasts it; and when it is touched,
it swells and evaporateth. A hard thing it is for men in disgrace not to be
impatient, and a common thing (...), for men who have struggled long with
afflictions, with injustice and injuries, to grow fierce and revengeful; and
because they are contemned of all, to hate all, and to treasure up that wrath
which, if ever opportunity breath upon it, will break forth and burn like fire.
Whence the Historian observes of Otho, that he was longo exsilio efferatus,
grown fierce and cruel upon long exile; Agrippam ignominia accensum, that the
disgrace which Agrippa received had much altered his disposition. Therefore our
Savior here to prevent the like in his Disciples, who but for the hope of that
which is to come were of all men most miserable, teaches them a new method of
Revenging injuries, by forgiving them; of Subduing misery, by enduring it; of
Conquering an enemy, by falling down at his feet: to take up no other buckler
then Meekness against the worst of those evils which he saw would befall them.
And thus he provided that, though the Religion which he did set up might
displease, yet those whom he sent forth to publish it should offend no man, and
save themselves as it were by the fire of Persecution. This is the Policy which
Christ has established in his Church, and by which he establishes the pillars
of it. For Meekness in the Sepulcher, the Land of Oblivion, in which all
injuries are buried, never to rise again, nor see the light; when I forgive, I
do by Injuries as God does by my Sins, forget them, cast them behind my back,
and blot them out, that no tittle of them appear to raise an angry thought. But
Anger and Revenge are an irrational and treacherous remedy. They take not away
the evil, but double it, invenom and inrage it, make that a Scorpion which was
but a whip, and that a monster which to Meekness is nothing; they perpetuate
and transmit it from youth to age, from age to the very hour of death, nay from
one generation to another. The sting of an Injury is Impatience, and the
strength of Impatience is Revenge; but to forgive an injury is to swallow it up
in victory. I call it therefore the Wisdom and Policy of Christ, though the
world call it by another name, and count them but fools that practice it. For
lay open all the Books in the world which have been written of Republics and
Government, yet we find not any directions which can propagate a Government,
and make it everlasting: But now perhaps we see a State flourish; but anon it
will decline, and at last have its fatal period, and fall to pieces. But this
Christian Wisdom makes the Church and every Member of it as immovable as a
Rock, more glorious in adversity then in peace, more happy in a tempest then in
a calm, victorious when ready to fall, and most safe when forsaken. Besides,
the Wisdom of this world how often does it meet with a check! how often is it
defeated, and in a while changes its name, and is turned into folly! How many
digg a pit, and fall into it! How many has their Wit brought almost home to
their intendments, and then left them looking after them with anger and grief!
How many has it brought to the end of their desires, and ruined them there!
How many have built up their hopes with one hand, and demolished them with the
other. The Devil, says Basil, is the great Politician of the world; but yet he
is deceived with his own Sophistry, and taken in his own craft; and in setting
hard at the Church, he falls himself to the ground; or, if he destroy a soul,
he does but add torment to himself, and with his own malice enrage the fire of
Hell. The Jews, to keep out the Romans, did banish themselves; and taking
counsel together against Christ, they put him to death, at whose death the Veil
of the Temple rent in twain. All the imaginations of men have been either faint
and feeble at first; or else, making haste to that which they proposed, they
have lost that which they so eagerly pursued; and overtook nothing but what
they looked upon with horror. All the wisdom in the world, if you put it into
the balance, will be found but light: but this necessary wisdom, this wisdom
which is from above, never fails; but though it be sown in dishonor, it
rises again in honor, and through scorn and contempt, through poverty and
death it self, it makes its way to that effect which it is as powerful to
produce as it is weak in show. Oh that we were wise, so wise as to rely on the
wisdom of God, which through uncouth and desolate paths, through the
wilderness, through a sea of blood, will safely waft us over to the heaven
where we would be; and not trust to our own sensual, vain and uncertain
providence, which, though the way be smooth and pleasant, yet reaps nothing but
bitterness in the end; which carries us on in a giddy, staggering, pleasing,
displeasing course, but evermore into the pit; which makes our feet like Hinds
feet, lifts us up on the wings of Hope, and at last knocks out our brains
against the mark we aimed at; which brings us to the honey we long for, and
smothers us in the Hive. Number up all the fatal miscarriages of the Sons of
men, and you shall find they were all from this, and this alone, That they took
upon them to be wiser then God. If we were content our ways should be as Gods
ways, and would walk in those ways which he has appointed, and steer our
course by his Compass, we should then look upon Revenge as a fury, and cleave
to Meekness as our Angel-keeper; we should soon see the weakness and folly of
the one, and the victories and trophies of the other; we should find the one
the most noxious thing in the world, and the other most necessary.

For, in the next place, as the observance of this duty has promoted the
Gospel, so the neglect of it has hindered the growth of Christianity, and made
those rents and schisms in the Church which good men may lament with tears of
blood, but the wisest cannot make up again with all their care and endeavor,
which most times we see, in stead of closing and healing such wounds, do make
them wider then before. We see the undiscreet and unseasonable defense of the
truth does but call in more company to side with the opposer, draws down even
Zelotes themselves to an indifferency, in which they do not long stand
wavering, but soon fall into error. It is not noise, but silence that
prevails. It is not the rough but tender hand that binds up these wounds. It
is not power nor subtilty of wit, not disputation nor consultation, not the
tongue of the eloquent, nor the pen of the ready writer, which can compose
these differences in the Church. We cannot but observe that after all the
labor and travel of the learned, there is yet Altar against Altar, Religion
against Religion, and Christ against Christ: and the wounds the Church has
received, bleed still afresh, and are every day more inflamed, more incurable.
What have all our prisons and whips and fire and sword done? What one hair have
they added to the stature of Christianity? Is she not rather contracted and
shrunk? Is she now of so large a size and proportion as she was in her infancy
and cradle? Is she as powerful in her Catholic extent and universality as she
was in a few Fishermen? Certainly the best balm is this Wisdom of our Savior,
by which we are directed to forgive injuries and errors, to yield so far to our
brethren as not to hate them, not to be angry with them, because they are not
of our opinion. The want of this temper, of this softness and sweetness of
disposition, was the true Mother of Schism, which Meekness has not edge
enough to make. It is but taking it up again, and all this business will be at
an end, and conclude in peace. Yet do I not here derogate from Counsels or
Disputations. These are the means appointed by God himself to settle men who
doubt. We must consult before we give sentence, and he that instructs disputes.
No; these are (...), the pillars and tropheys where all Heresies are hung up,
engraven and shown openly to the Sun and the People. I know they may be
Antidotes against the poison of the Serpent, who is as ready to cast his mist
about the Understanding part as to infect the Will: and I may subscribe to that
of Isidore, Ideo Christi veritas in diversas haereses est scissa, etc. That
Origin. 6.
Christianity had formerly been divided into so many Sects, because before the
times of Constantine, and those halcyon-dayes, the Bishops durst not meet
together to consult. This indeed may be a reason, but not all the reason which
may be given. For even in Constantine's time did the Arian Heresy show and
vaunt it self, and after the Council of Nice, so famous over the world, did so
prevail that it was a doubt which way the Church did look and incline; whether
to the Arian tenants or the determination of that Council, because the Arians
did almost equal the Orthodox in number, and in eloquence and learning far
exceed them. Afterward this Heresy was revived, though with another name, in
the Origenists: and not long after tot erant symbola, quot professores, there
were almost as many Creeds as Professors. And one main reason thereof, I
suppose, was the want of Meekness and Moderation; when the noise and violence
of the one party would not give the other so much leisure as to bethink
themselves; when men would raise tempests only for a thought which did not
please them, and most men were like Scaurus in the Orator, qui nullius unquam
impunitam stultitiam transire passus est, who would not suffer a soloecisme or
any error to pass without a heavy censure; when, as Luther speaks, for the
omission of a syllable or of a letter they would novos infernos cudere, make
another Hell, and devote their brethren to the Devil, thundering out Anathema's
one against the other, which many times both deserved rather for their heat and
bitterness then for their errors. For the Church may err: but if she drive
Charity and Meekness out of her quarters, she is no longer a Church. Ambition
and Covetousness, these break down her hedges, and Malice is the wild Boar
which destroys and eats up her grapes. When this fire is once kindled in her
bowels, then ruit Ilium, then her Pillars shake, and she is ready to fall. But,
as I remember, I have spoken at large of this heretofore.

You see, Beloved, then that Meekness is necessary to the Church ad been esse,
to keep its parts together from flying asunder; and so to every Christian, to
keep him compact and at unity with himself and others. But now, in the next
place, I may say it is necessary to the very being of the Church, as without
which no man can be admitted into the Congregation of the firstborn which are
written in Heaven. With wanton Christians, that trifle away their souls, and
would walk to Heaven with earthly members and unwashen feet, there is but unum
necessarium, one thing necessary, and that is Faith; which because it does
alone justify, we leave it alone, naked and destitute, or take it along with
us as a comfort to us whilst we labor and sweat in a world of wickedness. For
what title to Heaven can the most Christians show but this CREDO, I believe?
The rest of the copy is Malice and Envy and Covetousness, the black lines of
reprobation: Poverty and Mourning and Meekness are no part of their claim. But
let us look upon our Charter again, and we shall find Meekness to be one of
those paucissima necessaria, of those few things necessary to give us right to
our inheritance, and that Faith is nothing, is dead, and so cannot give life,
if it do not work by Love, even work out all our venom and malice, and so leave
us liable and open to receive reproaches and blows, but without tongues or
hands to return them, as so many dead marks for every dart to stick in, till by
the power of Meekness they drop from us, or by the hand of the highest are
plucked out, and shot back upon our enemies. A truth so plain that I dare
boldly say there is not a plainer in the whole Scripture. For what can a guilty
condemned person plead for himself that he should enter into this inheritance,
but forgiveness? For this is the object of our Faith, That God will be
reconciled to us in his Son. And then this is plain English, I am sure, That if
we forgive, God will also forgive us: But if Mat. 6. 14, 15.
we forgive not men their trespasses, neither will our heavenly Father forgive
us ours. Et qui ad tam magnum tonitruum non expergiscitur, non dormit, sed
mortuus est, says St. Augustine; He that awakes not out of his pleasant dream
of Revenge at this thunder, is not asleep, but dead. For, He will not forgive
you, is the same with this, He will damn you with those malicious Spirits, the
Devil and his Angels; and, He will forgive you, is equivalent to this, He will
receive you into his Kingdom, to his seat of mercy and glory. We may say then
that Meekness is necessary, as a cause to this effect, as a virtue destined to
this end, at least, causa sine qua non, a cause so far as that without it there
is no remission of sins. For though I have faith to remove mountains, and have
all Knowledge, yet if I have not Meekness, there is no hope of heaven. Or it is
causa removens prohibens, a cause in as much as it removes those hindrances
which stand between us and the Mercy of God: For how can I appear before the
Father of compassion with a heart spotted and stained with the gall of
bitterness? How can I stand before the Mercy-seat with my hands full of blood?
And thus Meekness is a cause of Forgiveness, and may be said to produce this
effect, because though it have no positive causality, yet without it mercy will
not be obtained. Blessedness is joined to Meekness as in a chain which has
more links: and If you shall forgive your enemies, my Father will forgive you,
does not show what is sufficient, but what is necessarily required to the
expiation of sin, and the inheritance of heaven.

Again, by Meekness we resemble him who is a God that blotteth out
transgressions. When we are angry, we are like unto the beasts that perish,
yea, we are as the raging waves of the Sea, foming out our own shame: But when
we yield to our brother's infirmity, and forgive him, we are as Gods.

Thirdly, This virtue is seldom, I may say never, alone; but it supposes
Faith, which is sigillum bonorum operum, the seal to every good work, to make
it current and authentic, yea, and all that fair retinue of Virtues which as
Handmaids wait upon Faith, and make her known to the world. For he whose mind
is so subact as to bear another man's burden, and to lift himself up upon the
ruins of himself, and create virtue out of injury and contempt, cannot be far
from the Kingdom of heaven, nor destitute of those sacrifices wherewith God is
well pleased. And this, I say; though it be not necessary, yet is very
probable. For these, to be Covetous, to be Luxurious, to be Wanton, and to be
Meek, cannot lodge in the same breast. For we see Prodigality as well as
Covetousness is a whetstone to our Anger, and makes it keen and sharp: And the
Wanton will as soon quarrel for his Whore as the Miser for his Purse. But
Meekness believes all things, hops all things, bears all things, and does
nothing unseemly. For the mind of the Meek is like the Heavens above: Semper
illic serenum est, there is continual serenity and a perpetual day there. It is
as Wax, fit to receive any impression or character of goodness, and retein it;
a fit object for Gods benefits to work upon; ready to melt at the light of his
countenance, and to yield at the lifting up of his hammer. And therefore;

In the last place, this Meekness and Readiness to forgive makes us more
capable of the Gospel of Christ and those other Precepts which it does contain,
and so fits and prepares and qualifieth us for this Blessedness, for this
great benefit of Remission of sins. For he that is ready to forgive all
injuries, will be as ready to be poor, very forward to go to the house of
mourning, merciful, a peacemaker, one that may be reviled and persecuted, and
so rightly qualified for those Beatitudes. And he who can suffer an injury will
hardly do one; whereas they commonly are most impatient of wrongs who make
least conscience of offering them; qui irascuntur quia irascuntur, who play the
wantons, and are angry with their brother for no other reason but because they
are pleased to be angry. Now the Orator will tell us that Nullus rationi magis
obstat affectus, there is no affection which is so great an enemy to Reason as
Anger. For Sorrow, and Fear, and Hope, and the rest, make an assault and lay
hard at us, but anger as a whirlwind overwhelms us at once. I may be stricken
with Fear, and yet hearken to that counsel which will dispel it: I may hang
down my head with Sorrow, and yet be capable of those comforts which may lift
it up again; for every one is not as Rahel, that would not be comforted: but we
deal with Angry men as we do with men overcome with drink, never give them
counsel till the fit be over. For fairly to be speak a man thus transported, is
to as much purpose as to bid the Sea go back, or to chide the Winds. And as the
Reason and Judgment are dimmed and obscured with that mist which sudden Anger
casts, so are they also by that which they call (...), a lasting or abiding
Anger, which is the forge or alembick of Revenge, and works it by degrees. And
till this be dispelled and scattered, there is no room for the Doctrine of the
Gospel, which breaths nothing but meekness and forgiveness. Disce, sed ira
cadat naso: To be angry and To learn are at as great a distance as To be in
motion and To stand still. He that fills his thoughts with Revenge, can leave
no room for the Precepts of that Master who was led to the slaughter as a
sheep: But the Meek man is like him, is a Sheep, his Sheep, and will soon hear
his voice, draw nearer and nearer unto him, and by Meekness learn Purity and
those other virtues which will bring him into the arms of his Savior and the
Kingdom of Heaven. And thus you see how necessary a virtue Meekness is for the
Church, and for every part of it, for every Christian, to entitle him to the
inheritance of the earth; as the earth is taken for that new earth, Rev. 21. 1.
the Earth not of living, dying men, but that Earth where we shall live for
ever; that state of happiness which, like the Earth, shall stand fast for ever.
For what is Meekness but a pregustation and fore-taste of that quiet and
peaceable estate which is no where to be found but at the right hand and in the
presence of God? That as God, who is slow to anger and full of goodness and
mercy, is properly and naturally in a constant and immovable state of bliss,
so Christians, who by divine grace and assistance raise themselves up to this
height and pitch as to look down from a quiet mind, as from heaven, upon all
the injuries and reproaches which shall be thrown against them, so communicate
as it were with God, and are assimilated to him, may also by the grace and
favor of God participate with him of the same lasting and unchangeable glory.
And now we should descend to show the title the Meek have to the Earth, as it
is in the letter, and signifies temporal happiness, and the quiet possession of
the things of this world: but the time is well-near spent; now therefore we
will add but a word or two by way of Application of what has been already
spoken, and so conclude.

And did I say that Meekness was a necessary virtue to the Church of Christ,
and that without it we cannot receive the Gospel, nor be our selves received
into the Kingdom of Heaven? Certainly I mistook: at least the greatest part of
Christendom will rise up against me, and arraign me as guilty of a dangerous
heresy. For in their practice they confute it every day. It was indeed a
necessary virtue for the infant, baby Church, when she could not move her arms,
nor her tongue but in prayers and blessings; when Christians were ready to
suffer, but knew not what it was to strike; when they were expeditum morti
genus, readier to breath forth their souls in the fire then to kindle one,
readier to receive the sword into their bowels then to draw it: But now the
Church is aged and forgetful, and men have learnt to dispute and distinguish
themselves out of their duty, have found out a new light, by the guidance of
which they may walk on securely, and follow their brutish passions and covetous
desires to the mark they have set up, and by this light wade on and wash their
feet in the blood of their brethren. It was a virtue; it is now the mark of a
lukewarm Reprobate: It was the beauty and glory of the Church; but later times
have looked upon it as a fowl dishonor: It was the only buckler the former
Christian had; but those of aftertimes have thrown it away, and for it took up
the sword, which they brandish with terror, as that weapon which Christ himself
has put into their hands: It was the proper virtue of Christians and most
necessary for them; it is now an Anathema. Now not to curse, deserves a curse.
The Church was a flock, a little flock of sheep; it is now become as terrible
as an army with banners, and Christ is already brought into the world in that
posture in which the Jews expect their Messiah, with Drum and Colors. Shall I
tell you what is counted necessary now? It is necessary to contend for the
Faith, to stand up against Error, to be zealous for the glory of God. And what
man of Belial dare be so bold as to stand up and say this is not necessary? God
forbid that Faith should fail; that Error should take the chair, that the Glory
of God should be trod under foot. It is true: but then though this be
necessary, it is necessary to do it in that way and order which Christ himself
has prescribed, and not in that which our Malice and Covetousness and Ambition
draws out in blood. And the Sword of the Lord, the Word of God, managed with
the Spirit of Meekness is more apt and fit to enter the soul and the spirit
then the Sword of Gideon. Religionis non est cogere religionem, says
Tertullian; Religion cannot be forced, which, if it be not voluntary, is not at
all. For there cannot be a grosser soloecism in Divinity then to say a man is
good against his will. And sad experience has taught us that they who thus
contend for the Faith with noise and fury do name Christ indeed, but mean
themselves. We may instance in the Church of Rome. They who defend the Truth,
non syllogismis, sed fustibus, as St. Hierome speaks, not with Reason and
Scripture, but with clubs and swords, do but glance upon the Truth, but press
forward to some other mark. And THE GLORY OF GOD is but written in their
foreheads, that whilst men look steadfastly upon that, they may with more ease
and less discerned lay hold on the prey, and so be Villains with applause. Ye
suffer fools gladly, 2 Cor. 11. 19, 20.
says St. Paul, such as boast, and count themselves the Sages of the Age,
because you your selves are wise in your own conceit, though as very fools as
they. Ye suffer if a man bring you into bondage, (what do not the Romish
Proselites endure?) if a man devour you, if a man take of you, if a man exalt
himself, if a man smite you on the face. For how willing have men been to be
deceived, and to canonize them for Saints who wrought the cheat, to think them
the best Pastors who devour them, and them the humblest men who exalt
themselves, and them the most gentle friends who smite them on the face. Such a
Deity, such an Idol, such a Nothing is Religion and Christianity made in this
world; cried up with noise, and beat down with violence; pretended in every
thing, and denied in every thing; magnified in those actions which destroy her,
forced to draw that sword which she commanded her disciples to put up, made a
sanguinary and shedder of blood, of which (could she prevail, and have that
power which God has given her) there would not one drop fall to the ground.
But the World is the World still, and would make the Church like unto it: And
though it be Ambition, or Covetousness, or Malice, yet we call it Religion; and
when that word is once spoken, then down goes all Morality, all Humanity, all
Meekness, and Religion it self. Is it not for her cruelty that we make the
Church of Rome the seat of Antichrist, and call her the BEAST? And let it be
the mark and character of the Beast still. Let not that which a Turk or Jew
would run from with disdain, be fastened as an ornament of glory on the
Christian, who is better drawn and expressed in chains and fetters then with
his feet on the neck of his enemies. For where should a Christian be seen but
under the Cross? When he flings it upon others, he may call himself by what
name he please, but he is not a Christian. Do we not make this our plea against
the Church of Rome, That sentence of death was never past upon any of them for
Religion? and therefore let not our words anathematize, and our actions
justify them. Let us not do that which in a Papist we call an abomination. Let
us not name the Lord Jesus, and then fall down and worship the Prince of this
world, when he lures us to him with the glory of it, and those things which he
will give us. A strumpet is not a whit the less a strumpet because she calls
her neighbor so; and the name of Antichrist will belong to us as well as to
that Church, if we partake with her in those sins for which we call her so. And
it will little avail us to call her Antichrist, whilst our selves are drunk
with the blood of our brethren. But -- Dii talem terris avertite pestem; God
banish from the earth this kind of Popery. And let us be able to make that
glorious profession which the Christians did to the Heathens in the times of
Nazianzene, QUAM LIBERTATEM VOBIS ERIPUIMUS? When our Emperor was a Christian,
and the Church had peace, and flourished, what one part of your liberty did we
deprive you of? Did we spoil you of your wealth, or cast you into prison? Did
we raise up the people to rage against you? Did we call for the sword of the
Magistrate, and invite the secular Power to destroy you? Did we degrade you
from your honors, or remove you from your offices? Did we displace your
Praetors? They are the Fathers own words. What did you hear from us but hearty
wishes, earnest exhortations, and vehement prayers for your salvation? So far
were we from shedding your blood, that we were ready to power out our own for
your souls. This was all our violence: and indeed you esteemed it so. You
imputed to us even our very meekness as a crime, and counted our patience to be
violence. This we can, but this you cannot say for your selves. You by most
exquisite torments would force us to a false Religion, who by our very Religion
are forbid to use any violence to draw you to a true one. It is true, the
Kingdom of Heaven cannot be taken but by violence: but it is by violence upon
our selves; upon our Anger, to bridle it; upon our fleshly Lusts, to control
them; upon our unruly Affections, to moderate them; upon the Old man, to
crucify him. We make our addresses unto you in the spirit of meekness, we
beseech you to be reconciled unto Christ; but we were never taught to present
our Religion to you on the point of the sword. O that we could make this
glorious profession! This is the Gospel-way, the only way to open the Gates of
Heaven to our selves and others: For we wrestle not, says St. Paul, against
flesh and blood, against the Neros and Nabals of the earth; against the Jews,
who solemnly curse us three times a day, says St. Hierome; against the Turk,
who delights in our blood; against the Papists, who make it a sport to
anathematize us; nor against those who hate them with a perfect hatred, and are
worse then they; not against the Slanderer, whose tongue is a rasour; nor
against the Oppressor, who has the teeth of a Lion; nor against the
Detractour, whose whisper is as the sting of a Scorpion, and hurts unseen: but
we fight against Principalities and Powers, and the Rulers of the darkness of
this world. These are a Christian man's enemies, and with these he solemnly
wageth war. And his weapons are answerable, the Breastplate of Righteousness,
the Shield of Faith, the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of the Spirit,
which though they are mighty to pull down strong holds, yet will they not touch
an enemy that appears in the shape of a man. The Breastplate of Righteousness
will not defend me from them that shoot their arrows in private. The Shield of
Faith, though it quench the fiery darts of Satan, yet will not quench that
fire, destroy that Tongue, which is a world of iniquities. And the Sword of the
Spirit cannot beat back the malice of an enraged enemy, or smite down those
that hate us. But if we believe, and trust to this part of providence which the
Wisdom of the Father has taught us, we shall see greater things then these. We
shall find our selves disarmed, with never a hand to strike, with a tongue that
cannot curse, with weapons which may resist a Devil, but cannot hurt a man;
which will cast down a sin, but not an enemy: not able to move when the heathen
rage, and when the enemy drives toward us, like Jehu, furiously; making the
greatest preparation against our own Impatience; fighting against our Anger,
when we will not hold up a hand against those that hate us; for the Truths sake
Romans 8. 36, 37
killed all the day long, and appointed as sheep for the slaughter, yet in all
these things more then conquerors. These are the riches of Damascus and the
spoils of Samaria. These are the victories and trophies of a Christian, a
ploughed back, a face spit upon, hands bound, and feet in fetters, and a heart
melting and bleeding for them, that do it, and pouring forth supplications and
prayers for them, the only coals he heapeth upon their heads. And thus the
Christian does, seculi fluctus calcare, praeeunte Christo; he treads upon the
proud waves of this world, Christ going before him; he walks in Christ's steps;
he wadeth not in the blood of his enemies, but in his own, to that inheritance
which is laid up for him. He learneth of Christ, who is meek and lowly, and so
heals every malidy, binds up every wound, wipeth off all disgrace, triumphs
over all the evil in the world, and so finds that rest unto his soul which our
Pride, our Animosities, our Rage can never purchase us. To conclude; Though
Meekness do not open the Gates of Heaven, yet it makes our admittance more
easy: Though it be not sufficient to save us, yet it is a fair means to make
us wise unto salvation: Though it do not merit remission of sins, yet it makes
us like to our Father which is in Heaven. And at the great day of retribution
this also which we have done shall be mentioned, and our Father shall say unto
us, Well done, true and faithful servants: You have bowed down your backs to
the smiter, you have loved your enemies, and prayed for your persecutors;
behold, I have loosed you and forgiven you all your debt: enter into your
Masters joy. To which He bring us who has dearly bought us with his blood,
JESUS CHRIST the Righteous.

The Fifth SERMON. PART I.
EPHESIANS. V. 1. Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children.
THE words are plain, and need not the gloss of any learned Interpreter, That
God is our Father, and we his children; That as children we must be followers
of him in those ways which lead us to him. There is no man so much a child in
understanding but will understand this without a Philip, without any man to
help or guide him. But yet, Beloved, many times the plainest places of
Scripture require our pains and labor as much as the obscurest, and are far
more useful and necessary then high and deep speculations; as we find a stone
out of the Quarry more fit to build a house with then a Diamond. These words,
which I have read, as plain as they are, are as a rich Mine, which being well
searched into, will yield abundance of ore, even the rich treasury of that
wisdom which will make us wise unto salvation. If we desire Wealth, the earth
is the Lords, and all that therein is; if Strength, he is the Lord of hosts; if
Wisdom, He created her, and saw her, and numbered her, and powered her out upon
all his works; if Life, he is the living God; if Immortality, he only is
immortal. There is none like unto the Lord our God; and if we follow him, we
shall be rich, and wise, and strong; we shall live, and live for ever. Let us
then look steadfastly upon these plain words: And upon the opening of them we
shall behold the Heavens open, and God himself looking down upon the children
of men, upon his children, displaying his rays, and manifesting his beauty, to
draw them near unto himself, to allure and provoke them to follow after him;
teaching Dust and Ashes to raise it self to the region of Happiness, Mortality
to put on Immortality, Death to put on Life, and our Sinful nature to make its
approaches nearer and nearer to Purity it self, that where He is, there we may
be also.

My Text is a general Proposition depending upon that which our Apostle had
told the Ephesians in the former Chapter. And it is an Exhortation to a Duty of
a high nature, even reaching to Heaven it self; a Persuasion to look upon God
as an ensample, Be ye followers of God. But what? must the Ephesians be
enjoined a duty where impossibility stands in the way between them and
performance? Not so. They are Gods children, and they are his dear children.
And as he is their Father, so he will be their Pattern too. He will draw with
his finger as it were the lines by which they must walk: nay, he will go before
them in the way, and they shall hear a voice saying, This is the way; walk in
it: I am merciful; be ye merciful: I am long-suffering; be ye patient: I
forget your transgressions; do ye forgive your enemies: Be ye followers of
me. This is as if the Apostle had thus bespoken the Ephesians, My task is to
persuade you to forgive one another: What better argument, what stronger motive
can I use then to tell you that you are Gods dear children. If you be Children,
it is the glory of a child to resemble his Father: But you are children; and
not that only, but (...), dear children; and Children strive to imitate their
Parents, to whom they are dear. Nay, farther yet, you are not only (...)
dilecti, but (...) diligibiles, through Christ, who has made you worthy to be
beloved. And the more you imitate your Father, the more lovely still you
appear. Be ye therefore followers of God, etc.

So now you may see here a medicinal water, and not an Angel, as in the pool of
Bethesda, but God himself moving of it, and calling us to enter, that we may be
healed. Or you may behold that great Penman of the holy Ghost drawing out as it
were, and setting the Ephesians, a copy, so legible, that one may run and read
it. Briefly, you have a Pattern proposed, Be ye followers of God; and the
Persons whose duty it was to be imitators, the Ephesians, who were dear
children. Or thus; Here is a Duty enjoined, Be ye followers; the Object of
imitation, God; the Motive, as you are dear children; or, because you are dear
children; 1. Because you are children; 2. Because you are dear children. Of
these in order.

What the Orator spoke of his Art is most true of ours; Magna pars artis
continetur imitatione. The greatest part of Rhetoric consists in imitation; So
too does our Christian profession. God has not only fixed the two Tables for
us to look upon, or his Command to be our direction: That indeed is via
veritatis, the way by which we are to walk. But there is too lumen vitae: He
has also placed many lights in the way; the light of spiritual Understanding,
that we may see the way; and the light of Imitation, that seeing others walk in
the way we may tread in their steps. So Abraham shall teach his family; so
Solomon shall look upon King David; and My son, hear my voice, says Solomon:
So the weak Christian, and he that eats milk, shall walk as it were upon the
strength of him that eats stronger meat. And lest these helps should not be
strong enough to uphold our weakness, lest these lesser lights should be too
divine to lead us, God himself has cast his rays upon us, and has made even
those Virtues which He is, exemplary. And indeed how much we stand in need of
this help of Example, in respect of our frailty, our Savior laid open when he
took our nature. He was disciplina morum; His whole life was so as if he had
descended only to be an Ensample. Yea, although he himself were ensample enough
to have instructed the whole world, yet he proposes others. The Samaritane
shall instruct the Lawyer: And if the Lawyer approve the Mercy of the
Samaritane to the man wounded on the way, our Savior is ready with his, Do you
likewise. If the Apostles grow proud, he will bring a Child in the midst of
them; and if contentious, to wipe out that stain, he will wash their feet. We
are not only deprived of our former health in paradise, as the Papists would
have it, but we are also wounded and maimed, and stand in need of these
crutches, as it were, of Precepts and Ensamples. We are still going on in the
paths of death, and thither we would hasten with hinds feet, did not God pull
us back again, and sometimes lead us with the cords of men, with the bands of
love, and sometimes drive us by his threatenings, and sometimes hearten us with
the sight of others laboring on the way. And if the opinion of some were true,
that Original sin consists most in imitation, here were ample and sufficient
remedy, in that God leads us by ensample. To this end he has placed us in the
communion of Saints; a gift which we either understand not, or undervalue; and
he has wisely ordein'd that one Christian should be a lesson to another, which
he should take out and learn, and teach again, and then strive to improve. For
it is here as in Arts and Sciences, Qui agit ut prior sit, forsitan, si non
transierit, aequabit; He who, spurred on with an holy ambition, makes it his
industry to exceed his pattern, shall no doubt become as glorious a star as he,
and by his holy emulation far outshine him. Only endeavor we must, and not
shut our eyes when God has set his lights in his candlesticks. A shame it is
that Lot should be in Sodom, and his Devotion be imprisoned at home with him;
that David's soul should be where there are haters of peace; that Peter should
pass by, and not so much as his shadow reach us; that the lesser stars, nay the
Sun it self, should shine, and we be in darkness; that it should be noonday
with us, and we grope as if it were midnight. The Philosopher would not speak
it without a Pudet dicere, without a Preface of Shame, Nunquam apertius quam
coram Catone peccatum, That for all so great an ensample of severity as Cato
was, yet Vice was still impudent. And Pliny speaks it as a commendation of
Trajane, That he was good among the worst: For, says he, when Camillus and
Scipio lived, when Virtue had as it were made her self visible in those
Worthies, it was a matter of no difficulty to be good: Tunc enim imitationis
ardor, and semper melior aliquis accenderet: For then the heat of Imitation
inflamed men, and still the life of some better man was a silent call to the
weaker to follow after. Beloved in our Lord and Savior, the time was when this
our Land was overcast with as thick a darkness as that of Egypt, and there was
no Goshen for a true Israelite, no light but that of the faggot, no place to
profess safely in; yet they then were followers of Christ, and in the
Scriptures diligently searched out the steps of the Apostles, and in spite of
fire and persecution walked in them. And although the Gospel was unto them but
as a light in a dark cloud, yet by this light they traced the paths of the
primitive Fathers, sub Principe dura, Temporibusque malis; and in bad times
they durst be good, when the Queen was even as a Lioness amongst the Lions, and
Cruelty lurkt no where more then under a Mitre and Rochet. The case, God be
thanked, is otherwise with us now; The bands of our cativitie are snapt
asunder; The cup of God's wrath is taken out of our hands, and God has made us
as it were a strong brazen wall, and his enemies and ours have fought against
us, and have not prevailed. Antichrist is revealed, the mystery of iniquity
laid open, errors of all kind detected, the Bible unclasped, teachers of truth
like stars in the firmament, eminent, Wisdom cries out in the streets, and
Religion has as it were placed her tabernacle in the Sun; and shall we still
have a frost at our heart? shall we have withered hands? shall we be cold and
benumned, and not able to set one foot forward in the steps of our Forefathers?
Beloved, let us look over into the tents of our enemies, into the tabernacles
of Wickedness. What does that Church of Rome more crack of than of Antiquity,
how like she is to the Church in former times, how she has still the same
gate, and traceth the same paths? and that we are but of yesterday, that Luther
breathed into us our first breath, that it troubles us much, says Gregory of
Valence, that we are not able to show any company of people in times past known
to the world, whom we follow in our Doctrine and Religion? If we would pull
down the Images out of their Church, they cry us down with a Populus eruditur,
They are the Books of Laymen, by which they are instructed in the Articles of
Faith, and have as it were before their eyes laid open the wholesome examples
of the faithful, which may move them to compose their lives to the imitation of
them. If we would pull off those wings which they have given to Nature to soar
up above her power, if we deny their Freewil, if we pull down their Babel of
Merits, they then tell us of the ancient Worthies of their Church, and add some
Saints that were wicked men; yea some that never were men. They will show you
what they have laid up for others in the treasury of the Church, to discharge
their Debts before they owed them. They say that we walk blindfold in our own
ways, and will not open our eyes to see the times of old, that we have run
away from the bosom of our Mother, and now suck strange breasts. It is true
indeed, that we can both silence them in their boast, and wipe out their
accusation; we can tell them that Rome is unlike her self: Non Roma praestat
Romam, as Scaliger speaks: That the Church began not with Luther, but began
then to be les, corrupt: That we left not her, but her Superstition: That we
walk in the old way, and are followers of the Professors of the primitive Truth
which was then embraced when the Popes kitchen was not yet heated by the fire
of Purgatory, when his Exchequer was not filled by Indulgences, when there was
no corner-Mass, when Transubstantiation was yet unbaked, when all Sins were
accounted mortal, when Pardons were sold only for Prayers and Repentance, when
there were no Merits heard of but our Saviors, when the people were not
cousened of the Cup; when the Pope was not Jupiter fulminans, when he had no
thunderbolt, no power of deposing Kings and Emperors. But, Beloved, our
Christian care and industry should be, that we rank not our selves amongst
those of whom St. Paul affirms that they Romans 1. 18.
held the truth of God in unrighteousness, that we walk as children of the
truth, ne dicta factis deficientibus erubescant, as Tertullian speaks; that
our life give not our profession the lie; that we may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men, as St. Peter says, that when they speak evil of us,
they 1 Pet. 3. 16.
may be ashamed which blame our good conversation in Christ: For if we follow
Christ and his Apostles only in word and show, if we wear Christ's colors, and
fight under the Devils banner, the title of CHRISTIAN will no more befit us
then that of BONIFACE a hard-visage, or that of URBANUS a cruel Pope. Therefore
a Christian is well defined by an ancient Father to be qui Christum verbis and
operibus quantum homini possibile est imitari nititur, that striveth, as much
as lies in the power of Man, to imitate Christ, by making his Hand as active as
his Tongue, to imitate him both in his deeds and in his words.

You see, Beloved, that our Weaknes's stands in need of that which God has
graciously reached out unto us, this help of Example. As he has made the Ear,
so the Eye also, to obtein Learning. And lest we should complain of
impossibility to perform what he commands, he has proposed unto us men of the
same mould we are of. This Doctrine then concerns us two ways; 1. in respect of
our selves; 2. in respect of others. In respect of our selves, 1. to remove the
letts and hindrances of Imitation; 2. to observe the rules of Imitation. Now
there are diverse hindrances. I will mention but three.

The first is spiritual Pride and Self-conceit. We willingly persuade our
selves that we are out of danger, and that we can go upon our own strength;
that we may rather be examples to others than follow them. At a sight only of
our Savior, at the least feeling of the operation of the Spirit, with Peter,
we cast our selves into the Sea, we venture upon any temptation, and think we
can walk in the most dangerous places without a leader. And this Self-conceit
proceeds from want of grace. Grace teaches us to remove this hinderance. Non
extollit, sed humilitat, says one: Grace does not puff up, but humble a man:
It shows him unto himself. The more a man tastes of these spiritual vanities,
the greater is his hunger, and he will leap for joy to eat them at any table.
Therefore it was a good rule of St. Hirome, Omnium simus minimi, ut omnium
fiamus maximi, Let us in our own opinion be the least of all, and then we shall
strive forward and forward, and by a willingness to follow others example grow
up to be the greatest of all. This Self-conceit works in us a Prejudicate
opinion, and makes us undervalue and detract from the worth of our brother,
Which is the second hinderance. We may see it in the Scribes and Pharisees.
They were forsooth Moses disciples, and were swelled up with the thought of
that chair: As for Jesus, he was not known unto them from whence he was. And
how crafty were they, being cheated themselves, to deceive others. They buzze
into the peoples ears that he was but the Carpenters Son, that none of the
rulers believed on him. And so daily in themselves they increased a willing and
obstinate ignorance; and at last, not knowing him, they crucified the Lord of
life. Therefore the Apostle, speaking of the diversity of gifts, and offices of
the members of Christ, gives this counsel, In Romans 12. 10.
giving honor, go one before another. Our honor, our preferment, our
precedencie is to honor our brother. If we honor him for those good gifts which
God has bestowed upon him, we shall strive to benefit our selves by them,
lumen de lumine accendere, to light our candle at his, to borrow of his luster,
to sit at that heavenly fire which warms his breast. When Naaman was to be
healed of his Leprosy, Elisha bad him wash himself seven times in the River of
Jordan: but at this the Syrian was wroth, and his 2 Kings 5.
thoughts were at home. Abanah and Pharpar, Rivers of Damascus, were better
with him then all the waters of Israel. And if he after had not been better
advised, he had still remained and died a Leper. Beloved, if thy brother has
tasted of Gods graces, If the river of God has made his heart glad, and God
has appointed that thou should wash at this river, that thou should amend
by his fruitful example, and thou then esteeming him to be dry and barren,
think of a fountain at home, of thine own ability, take heed that thou still
retain not thy leprosy of sin; take heed thou perish not in thy sin, and that
it may not truly be said of thee, He that is a scholar to himself has a fool
to his master. To this end let Charity possess thy heart, that excellent gift
of Charity, quae se consiliis suis non credit, which trusts not her self to her
own counsels, as Ambrose speaks, which envieth not, which thinks not evil.
Whose contemplation blesses it self with the 1 Cor. 13.
Patience of Job, the Sincerity of David, the Courage of Nehemiah, the Industry
of Paul: Which writes in our memories these good examples, and teaches us to
turn them over every day: Which will not suffer us to undervalue our brother;
but makes us nourish the least spark of goodness in him, and, if we can, blow
it and enliven it into a flame both in his breast and ours.

The third and last hinderance of Christian Imitation is spiritual Drowsiness.
The Schoolmen call it Acedia, the Devils dormitory and sleepy potion, by which
each faculty of the soul is laid in a deep sleep; so that though God call never
so loud by his cryers, the Preachers of his word, by the open and visible
examples of good men, yet we hear not, we stir not, we walk not, or, if we do,
it is but like those that walk in their sleep: our fancy is troubled, and we
know not whether we do or no. If we stir and move, it is but like the Sluggard
in the Proverbs, to fold the hands, to lie down, and sleep again in sin; like
Eulychus in the Acts, whilst Paul is a preaching, whilst the example of good
men is vocal, we are fast asleep, in danger to fall down, and break our necks.
By this we suffer our souls to gather rust, which should shine and glister with
the continual exercise of good works, which should be rubbed and furbished as it
were with the frequent meditation of the good life of others. By this we are
utterly deprived of that great help in our warfare, the Imitation of others.
Rowse then up your selves, Beloved, and remove this hindrance: awake from this
sleep, and stand up. Let the quire of Angels and the joys of Heaven wake you.
Let the howling and gnashing of teeth, the noise of the damned, stir you. As ye
have heretofore drunk nothing but the top of the cup, the sweet of sin, so now
take and drink the dregs of it, that it may be bitter to your soul, and that
your spirit may be wounded: and then ye will not be able to bear it, then ye
will stir and move and be active, then ye will make use of the examples of
good men, and do any thing to be rid of this cup.

Thus we have opened the door, and removed the bar, and are now as it were in
the plain field, in our walk: In the second place we must take heed how we
walk, and observe the Rules of Imitation.

And first we must not take our pattern upon trust; no, not St. Paul himself. He
brings it in indeed as a Duty, Be ye followers of me; but he adds 1 Cor. 11. 1.
this direction, as I am of Christ. For in imitation, besides the persons,
there is also to be considered, says Quintilian, quid sit, ad quod efficiendum
nos comparemus, what it is we must imitate in the persons. We must no further
follow them than they follow the rules of Art. And he tells us of many in his
age who thought themselves perfect Ciceronians if they could shut up a period
with esse videatur. Some there were quibus vitium pro exemplo erat, says
Seneca, who imitated nothing but that which was bad in the best. It is so in
our Christian profession; We must view, and try, and understand what we are to
imitate. We must not make use of all eyes, but of those only which look upon
the Lord. We must not walk as it were upon other men's feet, unless we know what
paths they tread. We must not follow all guides: for some may be blind, and
lead us into the ditch. To this end God has bounded and limited us in our
walks, and drawn out as it were certain lines. In the Scripture he tells thee,
Thus far shall thou go; Thus far shall thou follow, and no further. If any do
transilire line as, as Tertullian speaks, leap over the lines, pass the limits,
thou must leave him there, and keep within thy bounds. All other ways are
dangerous, all others paths slippery, all other imitation damnable. This the
Church of Rome is well acquainted with; and therefore she breaks down the
bounds, pulls down the limits, hides the lines, dammeth up the Kings highway.
She pulls out thy eyes, and there she leads thee in a way indeed, but not of
Truth, in a by-path, in a way leading out of the way. The way of Truth it
cannot be: For veritas nihil erubescit, nisi solummodo abscondi; Truth blusheth
at nothing, but to be hid: But I must walk their way, and not know whether it
be a way or no. Though I doubt, yet I must not dare to question it, but must
still walk on, and put it to the adventure. If Idolatry and Superstition and
blind Obedience will saint a man, then I am sure to be a Saint in heaven. That
Church reaches forth unto thee a cup, and says it is of the water of life,
when indeed it is but poison. She has an open breast, and a motherly
affection: she shows thee a milky way, but which neither Christ nor his
Apostles ever trod in: No tracking of them but by blood. She shows thee an
easy way, a sensual way, made passable by Indulgences, and Pardons, and
private Masses, and Supererogation: only thou must walk in it without offense
to the Church of Rome. Thus, like those Physicians Sidonius speaks of,
officiose occidit, she will kill thee with good words; like some kind of
Serpents, she will sting thee, and thou shall dance when thou art stung; she
will flatter thee to thy destruction, and thou shall perish as it were in a
dream. Beloved, what shall we do then? We will pray to God with Paul, to guide
our journey; with David, to make our way upright. We will say as Israel said to
Sihon King of the Amorites, We will neither turn aside into the fields, nor
into the vinyards, Numb. 21. 22.
neither drink of the waters of the wells. We will neither walk in those
specious pleasing ways, nor taste of the Wine which that Harlot has mingled,
nor draw water out of those Wells which they have dug unto themselves: but
we will go in the Kings highway, even in that way wherein the Apostles, the
Prophets, the blessed Martyrs, the holy Saints, all our Forefathers, by the
light of Scripture have gone before us.

The second Rule of our Christian Imitation is, That we strive to imitate the
best. Stultissimum est, non optimum quemque proponere, says Pliny; It is great
folly not to propose always the best pattern. And, Elige Catonem, says Seneca;
Choose a Cato, a prime eminent man, by whose authority thy secret thoughts may be
more holy, the very memory of whom may compose thy manners; whom not only to
see, but to think of, will be a help to the reformation of thy life. Do thou
live with any in whom the good gifts and graces of God are shining and
resplendent, who are strict and exact, and so retein the precepts of God in
memory that they forget them not in their works: Then, as St. James says, Take
the Prophets for example, so I say, Take these for an ensample; lodge them in
the closet of thy heart; confer with their virtuous actions, and study them:
And if at any time the Devil and the World put thee upon those actions which
might make thee to forget thy copy, then take it into thy hands, and look it
over again; and as St. Cyprian would often call for Tertullians works, with a
Da magistrum, Give me my master; so do thou, Da praeceptores, Give me the
instructing examples of these good men; let them always be before my eyes, let
them be a second rule by which I may correct my life and manners: Let me not
loose this help which God has granted me, of Imitation.

But, Beloved, here beware we must, that we mistake not the Goats for the
Sheep, the left hand for the right; that we weigh not Goodness by the number of
Professors. For it is the Devils policy to make us think that the most are the
best: and so he shuts us out of the little flock, and thrusts us into the folds
of Goats; and thus we deceive our selves. Plerique ducimur non ad rationem, sed
ad similitudinem; We are not guided by Reason, but let her slip, and so are
carried away as it were in a throng, non qua eundum, sed qua itur, not indeed
whither we should go, but whither the many-headed multitude lead us. Therefore
thou must take this as a Rule, Multitudo, argumentum mali; No surer argument
that men are evil, then that they are many. The City of the Lord is not so
peopled as the City of the World, which the Devil has erected; neither is
Heaven so full as Hell; nor are there so many Saints as there are Devils, not
so many chosen as there are past-by, not somany good examples as there be bad
ones. We undervalue true professors, we make their Paucitie a blemish, whereas
our Savior tells us his flock is little, a lily amongst the thorns; and when
God commands us Exodus 23. as in this so in all actions, not to follow a
multitude in evil.

And this in our Christian Imitation we must observe in respect of our selves.
We must be careful too in respect of others. And since God has made Imitation
such a help to our Salvation, we must strive to be guides and lights unto our
weaker brethren, not an ignis fatuus, or lambens, a fat and foggy meteor, to
lead them out of the way, but stellae micantes, bright and glistering stars, to
lead them to Christ. And this in the first place concerns the Ministers and
Messengers of God. It is St. Paul's charge to Timothy, even before the holy
Angels, that he should keep himself unblamable before all men: Valentinian's to
his Bishops, that they should vita and verbo gubernare, govern the Church both
with their life and with their doctrine; and as Nazianzene spoke of Basil, they
should have thunder in their words, and lightning in their deeds, (...),
speaking and doing: Not like Lucian's Apothecary, who sold Medicines for the
Cough, when he and all his household were infected with it; nor like those
Physicians Nazianzene speaks of, (...), laying their hands to cure the wounds
of others, whilst themselves were full of sores: But striving to come forth
glorious and wholesome examples, that they humble not those with their life whom
they have raised up with their doctrine; Considering that sin does not only
show but teach it self. And what a heavy doom will reach them, if they beat
down those with a bad, whom they should raise up and set a walking with a good
example!

But, Beloved, I here mistake my Auditory, and speak to this Congregation as if
I were amongst an assembly of Levites. And yet I know too, and I need not fear
to speak it, that it is an argument of a wicked and profane heart, of a sensual
love of the world, that no doctrine now-adayes is more acceptable then that by
which a Minister may be arraigned; no Sermons more applauded then those that
strike at the Ephod; nothing that the peoples ears do more itch after, or more
greedily suck in, than the Disgrace or Weakness of their leaders. I will speak
it, (and, as Salvian spoke in another case, utinam mentirer, I would to God in
this I were a liar; I would you might accuse, I would you might justly reprove
me) no news more welcome, especially to the wicked, then that which carries
with it the sin of a Teacher. No calling more spurned (I mean by the wisest)
then that of Priesthood. As Job speaks, they whose fathers he refused to set
with the dogs of his flock mocked him; so the children of fools, more vile then
the earth, make their Pastors their song; and the greatest sinners, the most
debaucht sinners, when they have outcries within them, when they have a tempest
within them, when their conscience affrights them with doleful alarums, will
still the noise, will becalm the tempest, will drown the cries with this
breath, with this poisonous blast, with a defamation of the Messengers and
Ministers of the Lord. But let these men know that a day will come, when no
excuse shall lull them asleep, when their conscience shall awake them, when the
billows shall rise higher, when the tempest shall be louder, when the cry shall
be more hideous, when they shall know that though God will require their blood
at their Pastors hand, yet it is a poor comfort to them to dye in their sin;
whenas he shall be punished for giving, and they for following a bad example.

But as this concerns most especially the Ministers of the Lord, and those that
serve at the Altar, so, in the next place, it concerns the people too, and
that nearly, as nearly as the safety of their souls concerns them. For Beloved,
the womb of Sin is not barren, but she is very fruitful, and brings forth too
without sorrow or travel. The Devil has his Crescite and multiplicate,
Increase and multiply. It is enough for Sin to show her self, and be delivered.
And therefore most true it is, Plus exemplo peccatur quam scelere, We sin more
against God by example then by the sin it self. Adultery, whilst it lies close
in the thought, is only hurtful at home; but if it break forth into act, it
spreads its contagion, and it seizes upon this Christian and that Christian,
and in them it multiplies, and; like the Pestilence, goes on insensible,
invisible, inavoidable. If the father be given to that great sin of Taking Gods
name in vain, it will soon be upon the tongue of the little infant, and he will
speak it as his own language; nay, he will speak it before he can speak his own
language, before he knows whether it be a sin or no: he will be, as by birth,
so by sin a child. It was held a miracle that Nicippus Sheep did yean a Lion:
and almost impossible it is that he should swear that never heard an oath
before; that the child should be like a Lion, greedy of the prey, and the
father as innocent as a Lamb; that so many should trace the paths of Death, the
broad way to Destruction, without a leader. Hence it is that in punishing of
sin God looks not only with the eye of Justice upon it, as it is (...), a
transgression of the law, but as it is exemplary, as it hinders the edification
of the body of Christ, and the gathering together of the Saints; and is the
millstone that hangs upon the neck of the sinner, and sinketh him, not only for
the particular sin it self, but because he has been an occasion of his
brothers fall. Thus then you see we must be careful in the performance of this
duty in respect both of our selves and of others also: of our selves, in
removing the lets and observing the rules of Imitation; of others, in so going
before them that we lay not a stumbling block for them in the way. And thus
much the general doctrine of Imitation employed here has afforded us. Behold
now the love of a good Father, the tender care of our best Master. He will not
only set his best Scholars over us, and teach us by others, but he will read
the lecture himself, and be a pattern for our Imitation. And so I come to the
more especial Object of Imitation here proposed, and that is GOD; Be ye
followers of God.

The Soul of man, as it takes not the infection of original sin before its
union with the Body, so makes the Body her minister as it were and helper, to
abate Corruption, to keep down Concupiscence, to make the shafts of the Devil
less mortal. She sees with the eyes, and hears with the ears, and reaches
forth the hands, and walks with the feet. But yet all this is an argument of
weakness and imperfection, that we stand in need of these helps; that I must
learn of him whose pedigree is the same with mine, who is an Adamite as well as
I, who was conceived in sin as I was; nay more, that a rational and immortal
creature must be sent to School to an Ox and an Ass, nay, to the Pismire.
Therefore Isa 1. 3. Prove. 6. 6.
the Soul is then most her self, and comes nighest to her former estate, when
forgetting the weight and hinderance of the body, she enjoyes her self, and
takes wings as it were, and soars up in the contemplation of God and his
goodness; cum id esse incipit quod se esse credit, as Cyprian speaks, when she
begins to be that which she must needs believe her self to be, of a celestial
and heavenly beginning. When the inward man lifts it self up with the contempt
of the outward, then we are illuminated with blindness, we are clothed with
nakedness, we see without eyes, we walk without feet, we hear without ears, and
we increase our spiritual wealth by not making use of those outward gifts which
seem to enrich us. Hence it is that God so often calls upon us to take up our
thoughts from the earth, and employ them above, and to have our conversation in
heaven. And to this end he speaks to us in Scripture after the manner of men,
and tells us that he is gracious, and merciful, and long-suffering. And when he
calls that cruel servant to account for pulling his fellow by the throat, he
condemns him by example, O thou wicked servant, I forgave thee all that debt,
because Matthew. 18. 32, 33.
thou desiredst me. Ought not thou also to have had pity on thy
fellow servants, even as I had of thee? Not that these virtues are in God as
accidents. To say this, were to be blasphemous, and to deny him to be God. They
are so indeed in Man, and admit degrees of perfection and imperfection: but in
God they are essential. He is Justice, he is Mercy, he is Truth, he is Wisdom
it self. And therefore the Schoolmen call them, as they are in God, exemplares
virtutes, no otherwise Virtues then as they are exemplary, because these Divine
virtues, which are essential to him, must be exemplary to us. We must make him
the rule of Goodness in all our actions: we must be just, to observe the Law;
valiant, to keep down our passions; temperate, to conform our wills to the rule
of Reason; and wise, to our salvation. But there is no virtue that makes us
more resemble God then this the Apostle here exhorts the Ephesians to; and that
is Mercy. For although all virtues are in the highest degree, nay above all
degrees, most perfect, in him, yet in respect of his creatures, none is so
resplendent as Mercy. If thou callst him Health, I understand thee, says St.
Augustine, because he gives it thee. If thou call'st him thy Refuge, it is
true, because thou fliest unto him. If thou say he is thy Strength, it is
because he makes thee strong. But if thou namest his Mercy, thou have named
all: for whatsoever thou art, thou art by his mercy. His Goodness is infinite,
and looks over all; even his Justice has a relish of it. It is extended unto
the very damned: for their torments are not so great as God could inflict, or
as they deserve. And in respect of us it exceeds his Justice: For his Justice
has a proportional object to work upon; we being children of wrath, and worthy
of punishment: but his Mercy has none at all; we deserve not to fly to its
sanctuary, to be covered under its wings. When we lay weltring in our blood,
there could no reason be given why God should take any of us out: He did it
(...), says S. James, because he would. There were none then that could have
interceded and pleaded for us, as the Elders did for the Centurion, They are
worthy that thou Luke 7.
should do this for them. Mercy is the Queen and Empress of Gods Virtues; It
is the bond and knot which unites Heaven and Earth, that by which we hold all
our titles, our title to be Men, our title to the name of Christian, our title
to the profession of Christianity, our title to Earth, our title to Heaven. I
could loose my self in this Paradise; I could build a Tabernacle upon this
Mount Tabor; I could still look upon this Mercy-seat: Even to speak of it is
great light. But from the contemplation of God's Mercy I must descend lower,
and lead you to the imitation of it, and with the Apostle here exhort you to be
followers of God, to forgive one another, to walk in love, even as Christ loved
us; and when God reaches out his hand of mercy to you, not to draw in yours to
your brother. And here I see three paths, as it were, to follow God in, three
things required to this Imitation: 1. the Act of Imitation it self; 2. That
this Act be performed ex studio imitandi, out of a love of God's Mercy, and a
desire to imitate him; 3. A Conformity of the act of imitation to the pattern
followed. In the first place then as God forgiveth us, so we must forgive our
enemies. It will not be enough to have Gods Mercies on our tongues, or to speak
of them with admiration, with joy to go over the bridge, and then pull it up to
our brother. We account him not a good Painter who can only commend a Picture,
and not use the Pencil himself to draw a line: Neither is he fit to be
governor of a ship that having past a tempest does only praise the Pilate, but
scarce knows the Rudder himself. Good God! what a soloecisme in Christianity is
it to have a cruel heart, and a tongue speaking nothing but Mercies? to be in
the gall of bitterness, and most devilishly malicious, and yet to cry out,
Taste and see how gracious the Lord is! Hierome censureth Virgil for his Foelix
qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas, for calling him happy that knew the cause
of things; Apparet ipsum ignorasse quod laudat; He was ignorant, and knew not
that happiness which he commended: So these merciless Patrons of Mercy ignorant
quod laudant, they praise they know not what. They talk of Forgiveness, and
cloth themselves with malice. Their tongue is smooth, and their heart is
rugged. They speak in a still voice, but in their breast is thunder. Their
words are more soft then butter, but they think of swords.

In the second place, as we must forgive, so Gods Mercy must be the motive: we
must do it ex studio imitandi, out of a desire to imitate God: Not out of
propension of nature, out of meekness of disposition. For we cannot say the
child does imitate his father in eating, because eating is natural. Not out of
a Stoical affectation, contumeliam contumeliae facere, to think it revenge
enough to beat off an injury with a witty jest; Not out of love of peace, and
fear of trouble: Nor, lastly, out of necessity, therefore to forgive because
thou can not revenge? Quod necessitas facit, depretiat ipsa. For as he told
the Emperor that wearied Cruelty is not Clemency, so an inability or an
impossibility of revenge is not Mercy. A Lion, though within the grates, is a
Lion still, as fierce, as wild, as ravinous as before; and a Bear is a Bear
still, still greedy of blood, though without a tooth, without a paw. Thou say
thou do forgive thy enemy with all thy heart? But O quam cuperes tibi ungues
esse! thou want but fangs, thou want but ability to revenge. If the lines
were loosed, and thy teeth sharp, thou would grind thine enemy to powder,
thou would triumph in thy revenge, thou would show what thy Forgiveness
was. Though a wall be placed between thee and thy enemy, that thy Artillery
cannot reach him, and thou can not be revenged, yet voto jugulasti, as St.
Hierome speaks, thou have performed it in thy wish. And thus to forgive,
Beloved, is so far from following God, that we run away from him. God forgives
not because he is not able to destroy thee. No; as Caesar once spoke, and nobly
too, Facilius est facere quam dicere, It was easier for him to be revenged than
to talk of it. So did not Gods Mercy restrain him, he could with a word destroy
the whole World. He has a Sword, and Fire, and a Quiver; a glittering Sword, a
Sword that shall eat flesh; and a Fire kindled in his wrath, that shall burn
unto the bottom of hell; and a Quiver full of arrows, of arrows that shall
drink blood; yet he will in mercy sheath Deuteronomy. 31.
his Sword, he will quench his fire, he will hide his arrows in his Quiver,
that when we feel the operation of the sweet influence of his Mercy within our
selves, we may also with an upright and sincere heart derive it to our brother.
Lastly, we must conform our Imitation to the Pattern. He with one act of mercy
wipes out all scores; so must we. When he forgives our sins, he is said to cast
them behind him, never to think of them, so to forget them as if they never had
been; so must we. He does it too without respect of persons; and so we ought to
do. We must forgive all, for ever; and so far must we be from respect of
persons that we must acknowledge no title but that of Christian. To conclude
this point; How slight soever we make of it, there is no surer mark that we are
not in the true Faith, than Hatred of our brethren; no stronger Argument that
we are not Members of that Body whereof Christ is the Head, then the (I will
not say Hatred, but) Not-loving of the weakest Member of it. For he that loves
not his brother, the love of God cannot dwell in him. He may slatter himself
with a vain opinion that he loves God, but the love of God is not really in
him; it abides not, it dwells not, it has not residence in him. And he that
hates his brother is in 1 John 2. 11.
darkness. He may think he enjoyes the light of the Gospel, and that he is
under the Covenant of Grace, but there is no such matter. He is Diaboli
ludibrium, the Devils laughing stock; nay, the very forge of Satan, wherein he
hammereth and works all iniquity. And he walks in darkness, says S. John.
His Hatred has blinded his eyes so that he walks on, and thinks he is in the
right way. He labors in his vocation, he goes to Church, he receives the
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ, he can do any Christian office, and
so he thinks he is sound and healthful, even when the poison is at his very
heart. And therefore S. John adds, He knows not whither he goes: He falls
into many sins, whilst he thinks he does well. An opinion he has he is in the
right way to Heaven, but no Christian knowledge thereof, because that darkness
has blinded his eyes, so blinded his eyes that he discerns not any as he
should. If he be a Prophet, he obeys him not; if a just man, he respects him
not; if otherwise a friend, he knows him not. For Malice has as it were
informed his soul; and as she makes the Body her instrument, so the Soul the
place of her dominion; and she reigns there as the Devils Tributary, Custos
peccatorum, the keeper of the door of the soul, that Sin fly not out. And
watchful she is too: for she never sleeps. If but a thought of repentance
arise, she will chain it up. So that whilst Hatred possesses thy heart, thy
heart is a stone: Broken it may be; but softened it cannot be. And though thou
flatterest thy self that thou have repented of thy sins, yet it has no more
reality then thy Eating or Running in a Dream. Oh then, Beloved, let us put on
brotherly love, the certain sign and note that God in Christ has begotten us
his children. Let us forgive our enemies, that so we may resemble our Father.
Let us root out the bitter weed of Malice; the strongest Argument of a true and
serious Repentance. Let us cloth our selves with Charity, which will make our
ways, otherwise rugged and uneven, to be smooth and passable, being the very
bar and petard to break up each door and hinderance in our way. Lastly, in our
Apostles words, Let us be followers of God, as dear children.

The Sixth SERMON. PART II.
EPHESIANS. V. 1. Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children.
WHEN my meditations first fastened themselves upon this parcel of Scripture, I
then thought that the space of an hour would have both quitted them and me. But
this holy Oil, like that of the Widows in the Book of Kings, increased under my
hands, and I could not then pour it out all unto you. I therefore then became
your debtor. And it is (...), a holy and sacred debt: and I am come now to quit
my promise, to pour out the remainder of the Oil, and to pay my debt, even
there where I obliged my self, in the holy Sanctuary. I then observed that
these words contained in them a Duty, Be ye followers of God, and the Persons
enjoined this Duty, the Ephesians, who are styled dear children. Which title
includes motives to win and enforce them to the Duty, 1. because they were
children, a great prerogative; 2. because dear children, a gracious adjunct.
The Duty has been handled. The Motives remain. Which I say, include a high
privilege or prerogative. For if, as we are men, we esteem it honorable to be
of such a race and stock, to be descended from this Potentate or that Prince;
surely then, as we are Christians, when we have put on our better and more
heavenly thoughts, we shall account it the greatest honor to derive our
pedigree from Heaven, to be called the Sons of God as St. John speaks, to be
filii Divini beneficii, as St. Augustine, children of the Divine kindness, to
be children of God, and heirs of a Kingdom, and that a heavenly Kingdom; to
have title to a Crown, and that a Crown of life: But so it is, Beloved, that
when we hear of charters and grants, of privileges and prerogatives, our
thoughts go no farther, but stay themselves in the mere grant and privilege.
The Gospel is indeed (...), good news; and we delight to hear of a Savior, of
a Prince of peace, of one that shall make our peace, and take away the sins of
the world: But we think not of any allegiance or duty which we owe to this
Prince. Glad we are he is victorious, and that he has the Keys of Hell and of
Death. And wear his colors too we would; but we would not come under his
banner, we would not fight his battles. Children we all would be; but where is
our Duty? We desire to be endeared; but where is our gratitude? Nay further
yet, we would be accounted lovely, and yet remain enemies to the Grace of God.
Our sins we would have covered, but not blotted out: We would have God forget
them, and yet still walk in them. And here we mistake the nature of a
Privilege. For the tie thereof is as strong as that of the Law; and the
greatest sins are those against the Gospel. Our own Chronicles will tell us
that riots and disorders in Cities in one Kings reign, have weakened and
disannulled Charters and Privileges granted by a former King. Beloved, God is
the King of Kings, the same to day, and yesterday, and for ever: and he grants
not his privileges or charters that we should let loose the rains to Impiety,
and make our strength the law of unrighteousness. The trumpet of the Gospel
sounds not that we should take up the weapons of Sin to prepare our selves to
the Devils battle: Neither did that Tree of life grow up that we should sin
securely under the bough and shadow of it. And therefore the Apostle here,
exhorting the Ephesians to Imitation of God, uses this method. He takes not
his argument ab inutili; He shows them not Gods quiver, nor points to the arrow
which is now set to the very breast of them if they obey not. He tells them not
it will be disadvantageous unto them if they follow not God. But he draws his
argument a congruo. He lays open and unfolds before them the riches of Gods
Mercy: He proposes God in his full beauty; his head as the most fine gold, his
locks curled, his cheeks as a bed of spices, and as sweet flowers, and his lips
like lilies dropping down pure myrrh. He brings him in as a Father, not
dropping only, but ready to pour out his choicest blessings on his children. Or
rather he draws his argument a necessario: They must needs be obedient, and
imitate their Father, or else they cannot be children. And he rises as it were
by a Gradation: 1. They are children; and Children ought to learn of their
Parents. 2. They are dear children; and here the tie is made stronger. 3. They
are (...), diligibiles filii. Their sins are wiped out, and they appear lovely
through Christ. And here is the fullness of Gods Grace, and it will bring us
with David to a Non plus, to a Quid retribuam? What shall I return to the Lord
for this his kindness? Thus these Waters of comfort issue forth like those in
the vision Ezekiel. 47. and God leads all his through them. 1. They are children:
and here the waters are as it were to the ancles. 2. They are dear children:
and here they reach up to the loins. 3. In Christ they are worthy to be
beloved: and here the waters are risen, they flow, and cannot be passed over:
No line can measure them, no cogitation fathom them, no gratitude reach them;
our thoughts, our words, our actions, all are too weak to express the depth of
them. Now each Christian must be as a fruitful tree planted by this river of
waters, whose seat faaes not, and whose fruit fails not. If he be a child, he
must be obedient; if he be dear, he must be the more grateful; if he be made
worthy of love, his conversation must be as becomes the Gospel of Christ. So
we have heard beneficium and officium, a Benefit, and a Tie; the Benefit,
telling us whose children we are; the Tie, pointing out to our obedience. We
will plainly and briefly view them both.

In the first place, the Ephesians are Children: A great prerogative, if we
consider their former estate, what they were before. They were Satani mancipia;
no otherwise: servants, and that servants and slaves to Satan; under the Law,
and that a killing Law; but now redeemed, that they Gal. 4. 5.
may receive the adoption of sons; and having this adoption sealed too, and
that by the Spirit of God; and their names written in a Book, and that not only
in libro vocationis, amongst those who are outwardly called, but in the Book of
life, which admits no blot, no blur, no defacing; in which whosoever is
written, is one of Gods Children, and is accounted so, and shall be so to all
eternity. Now the Civilians define Adoption to be the Receiving of a stranger
in alienam familiam, inque jus familiae, into another family, and to have title
and right to be of that family. And strangers the Ephesians were, even aliens
from the Covenant of Grace, sine spe, sine operibus, as he told his adopted
Jugurtha; without the least hope, without any spiritual wealth or endowments,
naked and languishing, and even panting under the terrors of the law, and
(which was the complement of their misery, and an addition to their contumelius
condition) not deserving a better estate. And this, Beloved, raises the worth
and dignity of the benefit, and begets in us at once both comfort and wonder,
That Children we are, and yet deserve not this adoption, this filiation.
Amongst men it is otherwise; Desert always was the ground of Adoption. The
Emperor Nerva adopts Trajane, and takes him to be his son, h. e. unicum
auxilium fessis rebus, says the Orator, as a stay and prop to his declining
estate. Temere fecerat, si non adoptasset; He had done very unadvisedly if he
had not done it. And Galba adopts Piso, quia eo necessitatis ventum erat,
because he was driven unto it by necessity. He had a brother elder then he
worthy of that fortune, but that he was more worthy. And Micipsa, after diverse
attempts to take away Jugurtha's life, at last adopts him, quia gloria invidiam
vicit, because his Virtue now in its full splendour shone so bright that Envy
could not dim it. But what worth was there in us below? what spark, what
appearance, what show of desert in us? All in us, not extinct, or in the
embers, but naturally darkness: a night on our understanding, stone at our
hearts, rebellion in our affections; and we dead, and that not in a dream, (as
the Anabaptists foolishly conceive, calling Originial sin the dream of
Augustine) but truly and really. All in the loins of that one Adam, when that
one Adam by his rebellion show us all, and made us all slaves, not worthy to be
Gods hired servants. But see here a (...), God has set forth his love, nay,
the exceeding riches of his grace. Romans 5. 8. Ephesians. 2. 7.
And it is worth our observing that God is not rich as Man is, to his own good
and profit. His Riches serve not himself, but us. And whereas Man gathers not
wealth by giving, God calls himself rich by making us so. Man adopts because he
is rich; but God then terms himself rich when he does adopt. Thus with the eye
of favor he looked upon us when we were deeply plunged in our deserved misery.
And by this favor navigamus spei velo: In this deluge of Sin we hoyse up the
sails of Hope, and make forward for the high prize and price of our calling.
In this great tempest He became our Pilote; majorque dum exacerbatur, erupit,
and even in his anger forgot his anger, slumbered in the tempest, becalmed the
storm; and, when we were in the mouth of Danger, even almost on the rocks of
Despair, the light of his countenance shone round about us, and by that light
we saw the haven where we would be. So that now our Weakness became a strong
argument of Gods Power; and the seed of Corruption in us brought forth in him
the sweet fruit of Forgiveness. None thunderstruck or killed with a curse but
the Serpent, the Devil, who was the procurer of it. Though we were enemies,
though we were darkness, though we were Romans 5. 10. Ephesians. 5. 8. Tit. 3. 3.
disobedient and rebellious in our affections, yet even in this hostility God
became our friend; in this darkness He was our light; in this rebellion He
sealed our pardon; in this poverty He was our true wealth; and of slaves He
made us his children, and brought us into the glorious liberty of the sons of
God. And Sons only we are not but Heirs; Heirs of God, and coheirs, joyntheirs,
Romans 8.
with Christ. As he is Son, so we by his right are sons too. All is ours, Paul
is ours, and Cephas is ours, because we are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. So
that St. John might well usher-in this great advancement which an ECCE, Behold,
what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called
the sons of God. 1 John 3. 1.


But, in the second place, besides this grace of Adoption, we are children too
in a manner by Generation. Of his own will begat he us with the word of truth.
But not so as he begat his only begotten Son, by an eternal geneneration, James
1. 18.
as Fulgentius speaks, but by a voluntary regeneration. In him without any
natural beginning there remained an eternal nativity, but Gods Will preceded
and went before our new birth. And to this end he placed us in gremio matris
Ecclesiae, even in the bosom of the Church our Mother, who conceived us of the
incorruptible seed of Gods word, as St. Peter speaks, the blessed Spirit
quickening this seed, till a new creature be brought forth, not into this
temporary but into the eternal light; which she feeds with the bread of life,
the word of truth; which she nourishes with the milk of faith; which she
strengthens with the bread of affliction, with the blood of Martyrs, till
growing up from strength to strength, from virtue to virtue, it became at last
a perfect man in Christ Jesus. And this may well be called a birth: for indeed
it much resembles our natural birth, but especially in two respects. First,
here are the two terms of Generation, Non-ens tale, and Ens tale; the Matter
out of which it was produced, and the Substance or Entity which it is now;
Terms truly contradictory, as different as Heaven and Hell, as Light and
Darkness: So that here is mira mutatio, the change is wonderful. View Man in
his naturals, as not yet regenerate, and he is as the Apostle says, the child
of wrath: candidatus Diaboli, says Tertullian, one that has abjured Heaven,
and is as it were a competitor, and one that stands for Hell, nay, one that may
be employed as the Devils instrument to bring others thither. As Pliny said of
Regulus, Quicquid a Regulo sit necesse est fieri sicut non oportet, so of him,
Whatsoever he does must needs be done amiss, because he does it. Who would ever
look that a sweet stream should flow from this corrupt Fountain? Who would
expect that this Nehustitan, this rude piece of brass, should ever be polisht?
Or is it possible, so far as in our conceit, that out of this Cockatrice-egge
there should be hatched a Dove? Hence then increase thy gratitude and obedience,
and admire Gods Power. With mere man this is impossible; but with God all
things are possible. And this Change too, as the Introduction of a humane soul,
is instantaneous and in a moment, though the growth be by degrees. Non opus est
mora Spiritui Sancto; The holy Ghost needs not the help of delays. But if even
into this dead and corrupt matter he breathe the breath of spiritual life, it
shall stand up from the dead, and live, and be a new creature: Which is the
terminus ad quem, the second term of this spiritual birth. And here view him,
and he is (...), he is changed, another out of another; a child of light,
candidatus aeternitatis, one that thinks of nothing but Aeternity. Certainly a
blessed birth and happy change. A happy day it was when it might be said that
such a child was conceived, a child of peace, a child of blessings, a child of
God. That day was a day of brightness, a day of rejoicing, a typical day of
that eternal day when time shall be no more.

The second resemblance of our spiritual birth to our natural is in respect of
the difficulty and pains in bringing forth this child. And here it is but a
resemblance: it will not admit a comparison. For though the pains of a woman in
travel are great, so that almost they are become proverbial, yet they are but
light afflictions, scarce worth note or naming, in respect of the sorrow and
pain endured in this delivery, but rods to these scorpions, but as a cramp or
convulsion to this rack, as scratches to these wounds, scarce breaking the
upper skin, as Seneca speaks, whilst these divide asunder the soul and the
spirit, whilst they enter the bowels and the heart; scarce worth the speaking
of in respect of these sighs and groanings* which the Apostle says Romans 8. 26.
are unspeakable. For indeed the grief of the body is but the body of Grief, but
the pain of the soul is the very soul of Pain; and the Soul it is that is
afflicted in this birth; The sighs are hers, and the groans are hers; and all
is to dead in her self the root of Sin; non exercere quod nata est, as St.
Hierome, not to be what she is; to be in the body, and yet out of the body; to
tame the wantonness of the flesh; to empty the whole man of luxury; to prune
the over-spreading passions; all to be delivered, and to bring forth this New
creature. Quantae solicitudines? quantae contritiones? says St. Ambrose; What
solicitude? what anxiety? what contrition? what tie of Continence? what lashes
of Conscience? what bitterness of soul? Qualis adversarius? What an adversary
to cope withal and to remove, that would strangle this Infant in the womb, in
the conception; nay, that would destroy it in semine, in principiis, before it
were an embryon, that would not suffer it to have power to become a child of
God: But yet though there be pain and grief in the travel, there is joy and
comfort after the delivery. Quae parturit, quatitur and compungitur; In the
travel there is a conquassation and compunction as it were: but quae peperit,
exsultat; when the woman is delivered, when the little Infant hangs on the
teat, there is joy and exsultation; and the Mother forgets the pain, because a
child is born into the world. So Christ is our joy, (...)he Child to be formed
in us, as the Apostle speaks, at the first is bitter and distastful to us,
and we are not willing to conceive him in the womb of our soul, because this
new birth cannot be without a funeral. For to be thus born we must dye, we must
dye to our selves, to the world, to the flesh: we must hate that which we most
love; we must renounce all that may hinder this birth. But when Christ is fully
formed in us, the cloud of sorrow is removed, all is serene and bright, and we
forget the pangs and grief and sorrow which before we endured: for the holy
Ghost has come upon the soul, and the most High has over-shadowed it, and now
that holy thing which is born shall be called the Son of God.

And this, Beloved, is the Benefit or Privilege I told you of. A great
privilege: for remittuntur ei peccata cui filii nomen ascribitur; His pardon
is sealed who has this title and name given him to be the Child of God. But as
it is beneficium, so it is officium, it is obligatory, and has a duty annexed
unto it. If we be Children, we must be Obedient. We have now altered our
language. Our dialect was a strange dialect; we spoke words clothed with death:
but now our language and voice is, Abba, Father. And this first cry, these
first words of our nativity, as Cyprian speaks, Our Father, which art in
Heaven, are as witnesses to remember us that we have renounced all carnality,
and, as Children in Christ, know only our Father which is in heaven. Be ye
therefore followers of God, as children; or, because ye are children. For this
very appellation is an admonition; this title is a remembrancer; this honor and
dignity must either instruct us, or it will condemn us. It was a speech worthy
the mouth of an Emperor which Alexander Severus used, Conabor me dignum
praestare nomine Alexandri, I will endeavor to be worthy the name of
Alexander. And it was a speech worthy the mouth of a Christian which Basilides,
a converted Executioner, used to return upon his companions who persuaded him
to swear by the name of Caesar, Non licet jurare, quia sum Christianus, It is
not lawful for me to swear by him, because I am a Christian. Great honors are
contumelies, and upbraid us, if our comportment and behavior be not
answerable. What a ridiculous thing was it to see Nero an Emperor with his
Harp or Fidle; or in his buskins acting on a Stage; to see Domitian catching of
flies, or Hercules at his Distaff? So what an incongruous thing is a Christian
and a Blasphemer, a Disciple and a Traitor; to be in area Ecclesiae, in the
court or floor of the Church, and yet chaff; to be within the pale, and yet a
Devil; to be a child of God with the teeth of a Lion, ravening for the prey,
and ready to devour his brother? If I am a Father, where is my honor? says
God. Where is your Understanding captivated, your stubborn Wills conquered,
your Passions subdued. And if you were Abraham's seed, you would do Abraham's
works, and noth the Devils, says our John 8.
Savior to the Jews. Good God! a wonder it is to see, a world of Sins, a world
of Sinners, and yet all Christians; a deluge of Iniquity, and yet none drowned,
all within the Ark; so many fighting against God, and yet all his Soldiers; so
many abusing his Name for trifles, for nothing, indeed out of mere custom, and
yet this with a Child's mouth; so many Rebels and Traitors, and yet all
Children! But, Beloved, let us not deceive our selves and our own souls. It is
not the name of Children that will entitle us to the Kingdom of Heaven, but the
reality, the being so. Without this our Religion which we profess will accuse,
and the relation which we boast we have to God will condemn us. For reatus
impii, pium nomen, says Salvian; A glorious title does but more lay open our
errors; and it adds to the guilt of a wicked man, that he has his
Christendom, and that his name is amongst the Children of God. But let us walk
worthy of the Gospel of Hebr. 3.
Christ, and as partakers of the heavenly vocation, consider the High Priest of
our profession, Christ Jesus. Let every one that names Christ depart from 2 Timothy 2.
iniquity. Let us walk as children of the light: and be followers of God, as v.
8.
his children.

But here the weak Christian will reply, like the Sluggard in the Proverbs,
that there is a Lion in the way, an impossibility of following God; that the
dignity of the Gospel is so great that neither Man nor Angel are equal to it,
or able to do any thing worthy of it. Indeed a weak Christian, and one that
would be a child still, but, as the Apostle speaks, in understanding. For see:
God desires but a competencie. He likes thee when thou followest him, though it
be with a child's pace, with an Infants strength. So that thou follow him, he
interprets thy endeavors performance. And though like a Giant thou rowse not
thy self up to run the race, yet if with all thy courage thou follow, he calls
thee strong that made thee so, though thou have but the strength of an Infant.
But thou say it is impossible: Why, but that which is impossible may be
necessary. For thou thy self have made it so; The time was in paradise when it
was not impossible. The best use thou can make of it is to do what thou
can, says St. Augustine, and then petere a Deo quod non possis, to entreat
Gods help in that thou can not perform. And thou needst not fear a denial:
for behold, he is thy Father, and thou art his Child, nay (...), his dear
child. Which is the gracious Adjunct, and comes next to be handled.

Incongruous it is, you see, that a Child, so freely adopted from so base an
estate, should prove refractory and disobedient. And pity it were, nay
impossible, filium tot lacrymarum, as Augustines mother spoke of him, that a
child bought and begot with so much grief, with so many tears, should perish at
the last in rebellion. This prerogative was not granted in vain: But see here,
the waters of comfort rise higher, and the privilege is enlarged, and the tie
made stronger. This Child of God, which was Benoni, a Son of sorrow, is now
become Benjamin, a Son of Gods right hand, beloved and dear in his sight. And
he will make him even as Joseph, a Son of increasing, a fruitful bough, even a
fruitful bough by the Well side. And here, Beloved, what wings might I wish for
to fly a pitch proportionable to the height of Gods Love? Or what line might I
use to sound the depth of Gods Mercy? Or with what words shall I express how he
endears himself to his Children? Shall I mention the love of Women? The love of
Jonathan 2 Samuel 1.
to David was greater. Shall I speak of Jonathans love to David? It was great
indeed, but to a friend: But God embraces first, and loves first. We love him,
because he loved us first. He is (...), the 1 John 4. 19.
Father of love; and he is (...), Love it self. And he delights in these titles
and attributes, says Nazianzene, (...), that he may as it were by proclamation
promulge and publish his love. And no carnal friend, though as Chrysostom
says, he be mad in love, can so burn in affection to his friend, as God does
in love to our souls. Now this love of God is first a Preventing Love: It
prevents our slowness and backwardness to entertain it. We sacrificed to the
Queen of Earth, to Fortune, that she would love us; to the World, that it would
favor us; and never thought of Gods Love. 2. It is a Purging Love: It washes
away our corruption and filth, and sets us upon our legs, that we may walk in
love. 3. It is an Overflowing Love, nimia charitas, as the Apostle speaks,
exceeding great, too much Love, larger then our Thoughts, or our Desires,
passing our Understanding. Sermo non valet exprimere: experimento opus est;
Speech cannot reach it: Experience must express it. Feel it we may; discourse
of it we cannot. 4. Lastly, it is a Bountiful Love, and it is Perpetual. With
an everlasting love have I loved thee, says God; and He has loved us, and
Jer. 31. 3.
given us everlasting consolation; and, He has prepared for his children a
crown; ^ Thessalonians. 2. 16:
and they are heads destinated to a diadem, says Tertullian. His common gifts,
his earthly goods, quae nec sola sunt, nec summa sunt, which are neither the
greatest goods, nor yet alone, but have always a mixture and taste of evil, he
gives unto his bastard children, as Abraham gave gifts to the sons of his Genesis
25.
Concubines; but the heritage to Isaac, the Kingdom and the Crown to the
children of promise. Nay further yet; His Love is there greatest, where it
appears least. In our misery and affliction, in the anguish of our soul, when
we think he frowns upon us, and is angry, his love attends and waits upon us,
his wings are over us, we always carry his protection about us. Suppose it be
an Asp, or a Basilisk, we shall walk upon it: a Lion, or a Dragon; we shall
tread it under foot: a Red Sea; it shall divide it self: a hot fiery furnace;
we shall be bathed in it: a Lions den; thou shall be as safe in it as in thy
private Chamber: Suppose it poison; it shall not hurt thee: a Viper; thou shall
fling it off: the wittiest and most exquisite torment, thou shall not feel it.
For martyrs non eripuit; sed nunquam deseruit? he took not the Martyrs from
the stake; but did he forsake them. No; his love was with them at the stake,
and in the fire. And this heat of Love did so inflame them, that the fire burnt
not, the rack tormented not, because the pain was swallowed up in Love. Nay,
all shall work for the best to the children of God. Be they Afflictions? We
miscall them; they are but trials, but lessons and sermons. Be they tears? he
puts them in his bottel. Be they enemies, and that a mighty host? Behold, they
that 2 Kings 6.
be with us are mo then they that be with them. The mountain was full of horses
and chariots of fire round about Elisha. Or, if not, our Patience is revenge;
and our Sufferance heaps coals of fire upon the head of our adversaries. Be it
the World; We so use it, that we may enjoy God, says St. Augustine. Be it the
Flesh; by Gods power we beat it down. Be it the Devil himself; In striving to
take away, he increases our glory. Be it Death; It is but a passage. What
though we be here in disgrace, the very offscouring of the world, the byword
and song of the people, accounted the cause of all evils, as the Christians
were in the primitive times, (no hail, no great thunder, no inundation, but the
Christians were accused for it) what though we be never so vile, never so
contemptible in this world? we are here strangers; the world knows us not,
because it knows not God. No marvel if a 1 John 31.
King unknown in another Country, be coursly or injuriously used, because he is
unknown, and in another Country. Let then the world esteem of Gods children as
it please: They are here in an unknown place, peregrini deorsum, cives sursum;
like mountains or high hills, as Seneca speaks of his Philosopher; Their growth
and tallness appears not to men afar off, but to those who come nigh. At the
Day of Judgment there will another account be made. When God appears, we shall
be like unto him. Then the note will be changed, and the cry altered. We fools
thought their life madness, and their end without honor: but now they are
counted amongst the children of Wisd. 5.
God, and their portion amongst his dear Saints. And are God's children dear
unto him? Sure this benefit has a tie, and this increase of God's love calls
for an increase of gratitude. He expects that he should be dear to us. For
though God's love be not as Man's love, negotiatio, as Seneca speaks, a kind
of a market-love, with which we traffic, and from it expect gain; yet he
expects that we should love him again: Not that our Love can profit him, but
for our own sakes. He will not love at random; he will not cast away his Love,
nor his Mite, but he will have it repayed. But if his ten Talents be laid up in
a Napkin, laid aside as not worth the using, then his anger rises, and his
indignation is high and he will not only take away his Talents, but will bind
thee hand and foot, and cast thee into Prison, and punish thee as an
unprofitable servant. It is so even with us Men. No wound greater to us then
that which Ingratitude gives. If it bad been my enemy, I could have borne it,
says David; but it was my familiar friend, with whom I took sweet counsel,
that did me this wrong. When Cassius and the rest set upon Caesar with their
Poniards in the Senate House, he defended himself with silence: but when Brutus
struck, he covered his face with his robe, with his (...); What thou my son
Brutus? That Brutus stabbed him, this was the Steletto at his heart. It is so
with God. We cannot offend him more then by unthankfulness. Ingratum si
dixeris, omnia dixeris. For in it are all sins. Infidelity begets it: and we
cannot name a greater sinner then an Infidel. A sin this is so hateful and
detestable to God that we find him complaining to the Heavens and to the Earth
of the Jews ingratitude: Hear, O Heavens, and hearken, O Earth: Isa. 1.
for I have nourished rebellious children. And he might well complain: The Jews
were his peculiar people, culled out of the whole world, graced with the Title
of Populus meus. They were his people, his dear people.; like Gideons fleece,
full of the dew of heavenly benediction, when all the earth was dry besides; a
Signet on God's right hand, a Seal on his heart, and as the Apple of his eye;
his Vineyard, which he hedged about, planted with the best plants, built a
Tower in the midst of it, and spared no diligence to better it; a Nation which
he raised and increased and defended with wonders. How can he then now bear
with their ingratitude? How can he be pleased with these wild grapes, of
Disobedience, and Stubborness, and Rebellion? Surely, as he has threatened, he
will pluck off this Signet, he will take away this Hedge, he will dry this
Fleece, he will pull this Eagle out of her nest. Though she make her nest high,
he will pluck her down from Jer. 49. 15, 16.
thence. She shall be small among the heathen. And this Populus meus shall be
populus nullus, this his people shall be no people, but a scattered nation, the
scorn of the world, in quos omnium Caesarum ira detumuit, who have smarted as
slaves under each Emperor; whose very name shall be odious, as it is at this
day.

Beloved, to come home to our selves, and to change Jewry into England; If they
then, surely we now are populus Dei, Gods people, as much endeared, as much
obliged, as ever the Jews were. When the cloud of Superstition darkened England,
God dispersed that cloud, and placed the Candle in the candlestick, the Gospel
in the Church: And this Taper has burnt bright these many years, we may say by
miracle; for our enemies whole industry has been to extinguish it. We have
also seen Gods wonders on the deep: For when we saw no door of hope to pass
through, as the Prophet speaks, when our enemies were ready to devour us, as
with an East Wind God scattered them: And that Navy which his Holiness had
christened, and called Invincible, in a moment was overcome; and a Coin was
stamped with a fitter name, a new inscription, VENIT, IVIT, FUIT, It came, it
went away, it came just to nothing. Nay, when Hell it self fought against us,
and there lacked nothing but the touch of a match to our destruction, God in an
instant blasted and nullified the design of bloody men. They were in travel
with mischief, and were delivered too, but they brought forth a lie. These
loving kindnesses, I know, you all will say deserve to be written in a pillar
of marble, with a pen of iron and the point of a diamond, and to be shown to
all posterity. But, Beloved, it is not verbal thanks alone that God requires:
but we must write these favors in our hearts, and the remembrance of them must
drive us to repentance for that great sin of Ingratitude, it must win us to
obedience, and enforce us to a more Christian conversation, and that cito,
hodie, without delay, this day; lest God remove his Providence from our
Tabernacle; lest he blow out our Taper, and remove our Candlestick; lest he
darken our Sun, and turn our Moon into blood; lest he furbish that sword which
is already drawn against us, to cut us off and destroy us. The Jews were his
children, as dear to him as we are; and now they are cast away, cut off, small
and despised amongst men! Besides this larger Volume of Gods blessing, each
Christian has at least a pocket Manual, in which he may read Gods love unto
himself, and tell what he has done for his soul. If thou be rich, it was God's
love that made thee so; and he looks for some restitution by the hands of the
poor. If thou be full of days, thou had them from Gods right hand; and he
gave them not that thou should still be a child in understanding. If thou be
an Absalom for beauty, God made not so fair a soul for a bad guest, a foul
soul. If thou have a good thought, it was Gods love that wrought it, and thou
must not be so unkind as to stifle it. If thou have a holy intendment, it was
God that raised it, and it is sacrilege to pull it down. If thou have
Perseverance in goodness, it was God that continued it, and thy prayer must be
that he will not depart from thee. And then, if out of all these thou find a
full persuasion that thy sins are forgiven, and that thou art lovely in Gods
sight, thou must also increase thy obedience; and as thou tastest of Gods love
in the highest degree, so thou must wind up this obedience to the highest pin;
thou must be a follower of God, as a child worthy to be beloved, worthy to be
dear. Which is the last step of this Gradation, and comes now to be handled.

A child of God, and a dear child; A great privilege, a great tie. But now not
only to be so, but to be made worthy to be so, not only to be endeared, but to
be filius diligibilis, a child worthy of love, and of a deformed and defaced
person to be made amiable, this is that cord of man, that band of Love that
draws us, this is the covering of that Black which the Sun had looked upon:
this is the work of our Cant. 1.
well-beloved Christ Jesus. And now he calls, Arise, my love, my fair one,
and come away. As when St. Chrysostom makes it an argument of the dignity of
the Soul, that whereas a Body naturally deformed cannot by the most skilful
Artist be brought to an apt and seemly proportion, yet the soul polluted,
crooked and maimed may be cleansed, and set as it were, and made straight
again: So must we here, with the Apostle, make it not only an argument of Gods
Love, but a great motive to our Obedience, That our sins are forgiven us, That
they shall not be imputed unto us, That we shall appear before our Judge not in
our own likeness, but in the likeness of our elder Brother Christ Jesus, who is
truly (...), Gods well-beloved Son, in whom he is well-pleased; When Joseph, a
fair person and well-favoured, was enticed by Potiphars wife to lie with her,
his answer was; My master has made me ruler over his house, and has committed
all into my hand; he has kept nothing from me, but thee: How then shall I do
this great wickedness, and sin against God? Beloved, each Christian should thus
dispute with himself; I was sore wounded, and God has procured a salve for my
sore: and shall I therefore lie still, and bleed my self to death? He has for
my sake humbled his Son, he has multiplied his mercies upon me, and shall I
make his Mercy a cause of my obstinacy in sin? He has kept nothing from me
but his Honor; and shall I strive to diminish that? He has freely forgiven me
my sin; and shall Sin therefore abound? God forbid. God forbid that our
Practice should not as well give Rome the lie as our Doctrine. She imputes it
unto us, that we lull men asleep on the Pillow of Security; that we sing a
Requiem to their souls, when the conscience is most clamorous; that we are mere
Solifidians, leaning upon a Reed, relying only upon an empty and hollow Faith;
that we do per contemplationem volare, says Bellarmine, hover as it were on
the wings of Contemplation; that we hope to go to Heaven with only thinking of
it, and never strive for inherent Righteousness; and that our Assurance that
our sins are forgiven us is praesidium peccati, the Devils fense, and a strong
bullwark, that the kingdom of Sin cannot be demolisht in us. So charitable is
their opinion of us. And although Gods Messengers do lift up their voice like a
trumpet against Sin, and whip the vice of Security out of the Temple, although
our Pulpits ring and sound again with the Doctrine of Good works, and not one
of our Writers that ever I could see (except some few hare-brained Lutherans)
did ever let fall from their quills one word that might prejudice the necessity
thereof, yet they cry out as men at great fires, as yet were the only
incendiaries, and Religion were now a laying on the pile, and the whole
Christian world by us to be set on combustion. It is true, Beloved; we could
pay them with their own coin; we could cast before their eyes their Hay and
their Stubble, stuff fit for the fire, their Indulgences and private Masses,
their Pardons for sins not yet committed, pillows indeed and true dormitories
to lay men asleep on. But Recrimination is no remedy; and Silence is the best
answer to Impudence. Our best way to confute them is by our practice; as
Diogenes confuted Zeno, that believed there was no such thing as Motion, by
walking over the room. So if Christ say unto us, Your sins are forgiven you,
let us then take up our beds, and walk. Let him that lies on the bed of
Security, arise from that bed; on the bed of Idleness, awake from that sleep,
from that slumber, and unfold his hands, and stand up, and walk before God in
the land of the living. For, Beloved, what? are we believers? are we faithful?
Why, then we must, nay, we cannot choose but be, obedient. For Faith and
Assurance of forgiveness is the ground and foundation, not only of Christian
Charity, but also of all other virtues, of all true Obedience; having its
residence not only in the Understanding, but also in the Will; not floating in
the brain, but enflaming the heart, and thereby gaining dominion and a kingdom
over the affections. Hence Faith is called obedience 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. where Paul
says that there is a flaming fire provided for those who obey not the Gospel
of Christ. For as he obeys his Physician, not who believes he is skilful, but
who observes his prescripts, who takes the Recipe, and is careful of his own
health and his Physicians honor; so he is truly faithful that obeys the Gospel
of Christ; who does not only believe that Christ is a most able Physician of
his soul, and that the Gospel is the best Physic, the best Purgation, but he
who takes this Physic, although there be Wormwood or Gall or Aloes in it; who
embraces and receives Christ being offered unto him, although he bring grief
and afflictions along with him; who observes his rules, although he prescribes
Diligence and Industry and Carefulness; who does therefore the more hate Sin
because it is forgiven him; lastly, who does the more love God, because through
Christ he is made a son worthy to be beloved. For, as Seneca says well, Non
est res delicata Vivere, It is nothing of delicacy and delight to Live, but
even in this afflictions and sorrow will make us wish for death: So it is not
all pleasure, all content, to be a Christian. There are thorns as well as
roses; there are the waters of Marah as well as those flowing with milk and
honey; there are sorrows within, and fightings without; there are the marks of
Christ Jesus to be born; there is a book of Lamentations like that of Ezekiels
to be devoured Gal. 6.
and digested too. In thy way to Heaven there lies a sword, says Chrysostom,
and fire, and contumelies, and disgrace: and thou can not go about, but this
Sword must prick thee, this Fire scorch thee, these Disgraces light on thee.
And before thou go thy journey, thy very bosom friends, thy old acquaintance,
thy Sins, are to renounced. I have cast away all worldly desires, says
Nazianzene, (...), since I came to be of the order of Christ, and to rank my
self amongst Christians. And, Pity it is, says Cyprian, that frons cum Dei
signo pura, that forhead which was signed with the sign of the Cross, should
ever be compassed about with the Devils Garland. And, The Apostles of Christ,
says he, were tried by afflictions and torments and the Cross it self, ne de
Christo esset delicata confessio, that the trial might be solid, and the
confession then made, not when there was a calm, when the brim of the water was
smooth and even; not in the sunshine, but in the storm and tempest, when
Persecution raged, and the Sword glittered, and the Enemy was terrible. This
was the true trial of a Christian: And indeed, Beloved, the Gospel (of which
when we hear, we think of mercy, not of grace) is (...), a bitter-sweet; a
potion indeed, and more cordial then we can imagine, but not without its
bitterness. Nay, further yet; the Gospel holds us with a stronger bond then
the Law. For although it add nothing to the Law in respect of innovation, as if
that were defective, yet it does in respect of illustration and interpretation.
Our Savior proposed non nova, sed nove, not new commands, but after a new
manner. It was said of old, Thou shall not steal; but thou may do this by
denying an alms: for that is furtum interpretativum, theft by way of
interpretation, because thou keep that from the poor man which is due unto
him. In the Law it is written, Thou shall not commit adultery: under the Gospel
an Eunuch may commit it: for he may fabulari cum oculis, as St. Augustine
speaks: And he who has looked upon a woman, to lust after her, is guilty of
this sin, says our Savior. The language of the Law was, An eye for an eye,
and a tooth for a tooth: but now it is, Good for evil; Bless for a curse. And
plus lex quam amisit invenit, the Law was a gainer, not a loser, by this
precept of Christ, I say unto you, Love your enemies. Therefore the Schoolmen
well call the Gospel onus allevians, a lightning burden, much like the Wing of
a bird, which makes the bird heavier, but yet it is that it flies with.
Beloved, to shut up all in a word; As he spoke of Victory, It is not gotten
sedendo, and votis, by sitting still, and wishing for it; so our spiritual
Conquest flies not down into our bosom whilst we sit folding of our arms: Nor
will Balam's wish be the chariot to carry us to heaven, Let me dye the death of
the righteous: Neither will the walls of Sin fall down with good desires, with
religious wishes, as the walls of Jericho did with rams horns. No; the World is
deceitful still, and the Devil is a Devil still, and we are yet in the flesh;
and a wonder it were that we alone amongst other Christians should tread the
paths of life, and never sweat in them; that this way should be a way of blood
when the Apostles walked in it, and strowed with roses now for us. Or can we
expect that we should be carried up to heaven in a dream, or that God should
draw us thither whether we will or no; as if he could not reign without us, nor
the blessed Angels be happy but in our company. Good God! what a presumption is
it to think that the name of Child, the mere opinion of Gods Love, and to talk
of forgiveness of sins should help us! that good wishes will promote us! that,
when we have cast our selves headlong into a sea of misery, into a deluge of
sin, it will be enough to say, Master, save us; we perish. Beloved, be not
deceived: God is not mocked. If we will have Christ to be our Priest, to
satisfy for our sins, and to intercede for us, he must be our Prophet too, to
teach us; and our King, to govern and rule us. If we will have the meat that
perishes not, we must labor for it; if eternal life, we must lay hold on it;
if the garland, we must run for it; if we will enjoy the Benefit, we must
perform the Office; if we will be children of God, we must be followers of God;
if we would be endeared to him, he must be dear to us; if we would be lovely,
we must be loving; and if God forgive our sins, we must forsake them; if we
will have the crown of life, we must be faithful unto death; if we will have
the victory, we must Rev. 3. ^1.
fight for it. Vincenti dabitur. To him that overcomes will Christ grant to
sit upon his throne. He has a Crown laid up for his Children, and his Children
shall have their blessing, and shall know that they were dear unto him; They
shall enter into their inheritance, the Kingdom prepared for them. And now not
only Paul is theirs, and Cephas is theirs, but Christ is theirs, and God is
theirs, and the Crown is theirs, and Heaven is theirs; not in hope only, but in
reality; not in apprehension only, but in fruition also; not in right and
title only, but also in possession. Thither the Lord bring us who purchased it
for us with his precious blood.

The Seventh SERMON.
MATTHEW. XVIII. 1. At the same time came the Disciples unto Jesus, saying, Who
is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
HERE is a strange Question put up, and that by Disciples; and as strange an
Answer given, and that by Christ himself. The Question is, Who should be the
greatest in the kingdom of heaven. The Answer is, That in that kingdom a
Child is the greatest. A Question put up by men prepossessed with hopes of
Greatness, ignorant what this Kingdom, and what Greatness was; and an Answer
excellently fitted to that Question, checking at once their ignorance, and
removing it. So that here you see Ambition and Ignorance put up the Question;
and Wisdom it self makes the Answer. Ambition and Ignorance swell our thoughts
into a huge bulk, and make us Giants; but Wisdom abates that tumor, contracts
and shrinks us up into the stature of a Child. Who is the greatest? say the
Disciples: that is the Question. A Child is the greatest? says our Savior,
who was the Wisdom of the Father: That is the Answer.

Indeed a man is known by his speech, and our words commonly are the
evaporations of our Hearts. Out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, says
Matthew. 15. 19.
Christ, and evil questions too. Such as the Heart is, which is the fountain of
life, such are the motions of the parts. Such as the Will is, which is the
beginning of action, such are the motions and operations of the Soul, which
flow from the Will, and are commanded by it. Our Words are the commentaries on
our Will: For when we speak, we make as it were a defection of our own Hearts,
and read an Anatomy-lecture upon our selves. Our wanton talk discovers a stews
in the Heart: When our words are swords, the Heart is a slaughterhouse: When
we bear false witness, that is the Mint: When we worship Mammon, that is his
Temple. The Heart is (...), the shop and workhouse of all evil. In this we set
up idols; in this we work mischief; in this we heap up riches, build up
thrones, raise up Kingdoms. Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? is
the very dialect of Ambition, and shows that the Disciples hearts were so set
on Honor that they could not ask a question right.

We read that they had disputed of this before amongst themselves by the Mark
9. 34.
way: and then they put up this question to Christ, here in this Chapter. And
again, Chap. 20. and again Luke 22. when he had eaten the Passover with them,
when he had foretold his Passion, and preached unto them the doctrine of the
Cross, when his Passion was nigh at hand, even then did these Disciples dream
of honors and greatness and a temporal kingdom, and are not ashamed to tell it
to Christ himself; Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? First they
dispute it among themselves in the way, and then they ask Christ the question.
This is the method of the world at this day; First, to dispute every man in the
way, in via sua, in his own way; the Covetous in the way that leads to wealth,
the Ambitious in the way that leads to honor, the Sacriligeous person in the
way that leads to atheisin and profaneness: and then to ask Christ himself a
question, and hope to strengthen their vain imaginations by Scripture, and to
have an answer which shall fit their humor, and flatter their ungrounded
resolutions, even from the mouth of Christ himself. From him they hear that
they must work with their own hands: he then speaks of Riches and Honor. From
him they hear that Bell boweth down; Dagon must fall, and all Superstition must
be rooted out. Nullum sine auctoramento malum est. We can now be covetous, be
ambitious, be sacrilegious, be what the Flesh and our Lusts will have us, be
any thing, by Scripture. Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? the
Disciples would never have asked the question, had not their thoughts run on
Greatness, had they not thought that Christ had come to this end, to set up a
throne of state for one of them.

I will not make this error of the Disciples greater then it is: and yet I
cannot make it less because Disciples fell into it, and, which the Jesuits, for
St. Peter's sake pronounce it but a small and venial one. St. Chrysostom calls
it (...), a fault. And it concerns us not so much to aggravate as to avoid it.
It is sufficient for us that Christ has resolved this Question, and brought a
little Child upon the stage to teach Disciples, and to teach us to avoid that
rock which the Disciples themselves had dashed upon.

In the words then we will observe, 1. the Occasion of the Question, pointed
out unto us in the first words, At the same time; 2. The Persons that moved the
Question; which are plainly named, The Disciples came unto Jesus, saying; 3.
The Question it self, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? Where we
shall take some pains to discover the true nature of this Kingdom, that so we
may plainly see the Disciples error and mistake, and carefully avoid it. These
are the parts we shall speak of, and out of these draw such inferences as may
be useful for our instruction; that as if by the Disciples doctrine, when they
were inspired by the holy Ghost, so by their error, when they were yet novices
in the School of Christ, we may learn to guide our steps, and walk more
circumspectly in the ways of truth; that by their ill putting up the Question
We may learn to state it right. Of these in their order.

We are first to speak of the Occasion of this Question. And to discover this,
we must look back upon the passage immediately going before, Chapt. 17. and as
it were ushering in my Text. There the Occasion privily lurks, as the Devil did
in the Occasion. And there we find how our Savior in a wonderful manner both
paid and received tribute, received it of the Sea, and paid it unto Caesar; in
the one professing himself to be Caesar's Subject, in the other proving himself
to be Caesar's Lord. You see, Caesar commands him to pay tribute, and Christ
readily obeys; but withal he commands the Sea, and behold the Fishes hasten to
him with tribute in their mouths, Chapt. 17. 27. Now why our Savior did so
strangely mix together his Humility and his Power, in part the reason is given
by himself, Lest we should offend them. For having proved himself free, and
therefore not subject to tribute, (for if the Sons of Kings be free, then the
Son of the King of Heaven must needs be so) yet says he unto Peter, That we
give no offense, cast thy angle into the Sea. He is content to do himself
wrong, and to loose his profit, to gain his peace. And as he did express his
Humility that be might not offend Caesar, so we may be easily persuaded that he
did manifest his Glory that he might not offend his Disciples. For lest his
Disciples peradventure should begin to doubt whether he was, as he pretended,
Lord of heaven and earth, who did so willingly acknowledge a superior, look how
much he seemed to impair his credit by so humbly paying of tribute, so much and
more he repaired it by so gloriously receiving it. Now says the Text, At the
same time, when this wonderful thing was acting, then was this Question
proposed. But now in all this action let us see what occasion was here given to
this Question, what spark to kindle such a thought in the Disciples hearts,
what one circumstance which might raise such an ambitious conceit. They might
indeed have learnt from hence Humility and Obedience to Princes, though
Tyrants, and as Tyrants exacting that which is not due, and a Willingness to
part with their right rather then to offend; That Christ is not offended when
thus parting with our goods we offend our selves to please our Superiors. But
a corrupt Heart poisons the most wholesome, the most didactical, the most
exemplary actions, and then sucks from them that venom which it self first
cast. A sick ill-affected stomach makes food it self the cause of a disease,
and makes an Antidote poison. Prejudice and a prepossessed mind, by a strong
kind of Alchymie, turns every thing into it self, makes Christ's Humility an
occasion of pride, his Submission a footstool to rise up upon, and upon
Subjection it self lays the foundation of a Kingdom.

Some of the Fathers, as Chrysostom, and Hierome, and others, were of opinion
that the Disciples, when they saw Peter joined with Christ in this action, and
from those words of our Saviors, Take, and give them for me and thee, did
nourish a conceit that Peter in this was preferred before the rest, and that
there was some peculiar honor done to him above his fellows: and that this
raised in them a disdain against Peter: and that their disdain moved them to
propose this Question, not particularly, Whether Peter should be, but (...), in
general terms, Who should be, the greatest. And this the Church of Rome lays
hold on; and founding her pretended Supremacy on Peter, wheresoever she finds
but the name of Peter, nay, but the shadow of Peter, she seeks a mystery; and,
if she cannot find one, she will make one. The Cardinal is fond of this
interpretation, and brings it in as a strong proof of that claim the Bishop of
Rome makes of being Prince of all the world. But what is this but
interpretationibus ludere de scripturis? when the Text turns countenance, to
put a face and a fair gloss upon it, and make it smile upon that monstrous
Error which nothing but their Ambition could give birth and life unto? For, to
speak truth, what honor could this be to Peter? To pay tribute is a sign of
subjection, not of honor. And, if we will judge righteous judgment, nay, if we
will judge but according to the appearance, the greatest honor which could here
have accrewed to Peter, had been to have been exempted when all the rest had
paid. To speak truth then, or at least that which is most probably true, not
any honor done to Peter, but the dishonor which was done to Christ himself, may
seem to be the true Occasion of this Question. I shall give you my reason for
it. We see it a common thing in the world that men who dream of Honors, as the
Disciples here did, grow more ambitious by the sense of some disgrace: As in
Winter we see the fountains and hollow caverns of the earth are hottest; and as
the Philosophers will tell us that a quality grows stronger and more intense by
reason of its contrary. Humility may sometimes blow the bladder of Pride;
Disgrace may be as a wind to whet up our ambitious thoughts to a higher pitch.
Or it may be as Water; some drops of it by a kind of moral Antiperistasis may
kindle this fire within us, and enrage it; and that which was applied as a
remedy to allay the tumor, may by our indisposition and infirmity be made an
occasion to increase it. We trusted that this had been he who should have
redeemed Israel, say they Luke 24. 21. Is this he who should come with the
Sword and with Power and with Abundance unto them? that should root up the
Nations before them, and re-instate them in the Land of Canaan? Is this that
Messiah which, after many years victoriously past on earth, should at last
resign up his life, and establish his Kingdom upon his Successors for ever? A
conceit not newly crept in, but which they may seem to have had by a kind of
tradition, as appears by that of our Savior Luke 14. 15. Blessed is he that
shall eat bread in the kingdom of God: and by the mother of Zebedee's
children, who requested that her two sons might sit, one at Christ's Matthew. 20.
21:
right hand, the other at his left in his kingdom. And can Christ do this, and
thus submit himself? Can he be a King that thus pays tribute? Some fit and pang
of this distemper did no doubt trouble the Disciples minds at this time. They
had been often troubled with it, and had sundry times discust amongst
themselves, as we have observed, who should be the greatest. And now upon this
occasion, seeing Christ bowing to Authority, and submitting to them whom they
thought he came to destroy; the fire burned, and they spoke with their tongue.
Seeing the Lord of heaven and earth thus challenged for tribute, and thus
gently yielding to pay it, they lost the sight of his Power in his Humility;
they forgot the miracle of the Money in the fishes mouth, because it was
tribute: And being struck with Admiration, they began to enquire what Honors
and what degrees of Greatness were in his Kingdom, which is his Church; and
observing the King of Heaven himself thus subject to command, instead of
learning Humility, they foment their Pride, they awake their Ambition, and
rowse it up to seek the glory of this world; they are bold to ask him who was
the Master and pattern of Humility, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven? This I take to be the Occasion of this Question. And so I pass from it
to the Persons who moved it; The Disciples came unto Jesus.

And the Disciples, we doubt not, had been well and often instructed that the
Kingdom of Christ was not of this world, but spiritual; yet the prejudicate
conceit they had of the Messiah did shut up their understanding against this
truth; the shape they had drawn in their minds of Christ made Christ less
visible in his own shape. So hard it is homini hominem exuere, for a man to put
off himself; for a man that looks for a Pearl, to interpret it Grace; for a man
that is ambitious of Honor on earth, to look for it in heaven. Such a damp and
darkness does Prejudice cast upon the minds and understandings even of the best
men, even of Disciples of Christ. For the Devil fits himself to the nature and
disposition of every man. What he said of the Jesuit, JESUITA EST OMNIS HOMO,
a Jesuit is every man to every man, can apply himself to all humors, all
dispositions, is most true of our common enemy, Satan. He is in a manner made
all things to all men. If he cannot cast us down into the mire of carnal and
brutish sin, he is very active and cunning to lift us up on the wings of the
wind, and to whiff us about with the desire of honor and priority. Etiam in
sin^ discipulorum ambitio dormit, says Cyprian; Ambition finds a pillow to
sleep on even in the bosom of Disciples themselves. There she lies as in a
shade, lurks as in a bedchamber; and at last she comes forth, and you may
behold her raising of palaces, and measuring out kingdoms; and you may hear
her asking of questions, Who shall be the greatest? Multimoda Satanae ingenia,
says Hierome; the craft of Satan is various, and his wiles and devises
manifold. He knows in what breast to kindle Lust, into which to breathe
Ambition. He knows whom to cast down with Sorrow, whom to deceive with Joy,
whom to shake with Fear, and whom to mislead with Admiration. He searches our
affections, he fans and winnows our hearts, and makes that a bait to catch us
withal which we most love and most look upon. He fights, as the Father speaks,
with our selves against our selves; he makes snares of our own desires, and
binds and fetters us up with our own love. If he overcome us with his more
gross tentations, he insults: but if he fail there, he then comes toward us
with those tentations which are better clothed and better spoken. He makes
curious nets, entangles our fancy, and we strait dream of Kingdoms. If our
weakness overthrow us not, tropheis triumphisque succumbemus, says the Father,
our own tropheys and triumphs shall destroy us. Like a wise Captain, he plants
all his force and artillery at that place which is weakest and most
attemptable. We see the Disciples hearts were here weakest, and here lay most
open: hither therefore the Devil directs his darts, here he places his
engines, to make a breach. So dangerous a vice is Ambition; and so hard a thing
it is even for good men, for mortified persons, for the Disciples of Christ, to
avoid it. Who shall be the greatest? they are not always the worst men that
put up that question. Tully observes of the Philosophers, that though they
wrote books of the Contempt of Glory, yet they would set their names to those
books, and so seek for Glory by oppugning it, and even woo it in the way of a
bold defiance. And Plutarch speaking of the Philosopher whose Dictor it was,
LATENTER VIVENDUM, That a concealed life was best, yet adds withal, (...), That
he would not have it concealed, that this Dictor or speech was his. What speak
we of the Heathen Philosophers? The Philosophers of God, the Prophets of God,
have been much infested herewith. Look upon Baruch; When he thrived not in the
King of Judah's Court, he fell into discontent and repining; so that the
Prophet Jeremy is sent unto him with express message, Seek thou great things
for thy self? seek them not. For I will bring evil upon the whole earth, says
the Lord. Behold Jonah under his gourd; What Jer. 45. 5.
a pett and chafe is he in? How irreverent to his God? How does he tell God
even to his face that he did well to be angry even unto death. And all this
Anger from what fire was it kindled? Certainly from no other then an
overweaning conceit of his own reputation; lest the sparing of Niniveh, against
which he had denounced ruin and destruction, should disparage him with the
people, and lose him the name of a true Prophet.

And this we need not much marvail at if we consider the nature of this vice.
For first of all, it is a choice vice, preserved on purpose by the Devil to
abuse the best: nor will it grow in every soil. (...), Great and Noble natures,
the best capacities, the most able wits, these are the fat soil in which this
weed grows. Base and sordid natures seldom bear it. What cares the Covetous
person for Honor, who will bow to dirt? What cares he for rising in repute, who
has buried himself alive in the earth? What cares he for a name, that had
rather see other men's names in his parchments then his own in the Book of Life?
What cares the Wanton for renown, who had rather be crowned with roses then
with a Diadem? or will he desire to rise higher, whose highest step is up to
the bed of Lust and the embraces of a Strumpet? These Swine love not such water
as this, nor such an ointment, as a Good name, but will wallow still in their
own mire. And therefore you may observe it Matthew. 4. that the Devil sets not
upon our Savior with Lust, or Luxury, or Covetousness, or any such vulgar and
inferior vice, but carries him to an exceeding high mountain, and from thence
shows him the kingdom of the world, to see whether he will stoop at the prey.

Secondly, It is a vice to which the world is much beholding, and therefore
finds more countenance then any. Look upon the works of men's wits, their Books
and Writings; look upon the works of men's hands, their Charity and Alms-deeds
and Hospitality; and we shall quickly discover that Honor and Desire to
transmit their names to posterity have been in many (for to say, in all, were
the greatest uncharitableness in the world; but in many they have been) the
chiefest fires to set these alembicks a work. We will not now dispute the truth
of that which the Schools teach, That Evil could not subsist if it were not
founded in Good; but we may be bold to say that this evil of Ambition could
hardly subsist if it were not maintained and rooted in Virtue. Other weeds will
grow of themselves, finding matter within us to feed and nourish them. Murder
is but the ebullition of our Choler; Luxury; a very exhalation of our Flesh;
Lust boyles in our very blood: But this vice, like unto Ivy or Woodbind; will
hardly grow unless it fix it self upon the Oak, upon some strong and profitable
matter. If you see Absalom in Hebron paying his vow, it is to gain a kingdom.
If 2 Samuel 15. 7.
the Pharisee fast and pray, it is to be called Rabbi; if he gives alms, it is
with a trumpet? If Simon Magus desire to turn Apostle, it is to be some great
one. If Diotrephes be of the Church, it is to have the praeeminence.

Last of all, it is a vice which amongst many men has gained the reputation of
Virtue. And, if it be not a virtue, says the Orator, yet it is many times the
cause of it. Ambition and Aemulation have ever been accounted the nurses of
wit, the kindlers of industry, the life of studies, and the mothers of all
famous actions. And this is it which has raised their price and estimation.
But it here falls out as it does with bodies which are nourisht with unwholesome
meats; They are in a short time corrupted with diseases, and dye by those meats
they lived on. Wit and Industry, which are maintained by these vices, do at
last run to ruin by those vices which maintein them. How many an alms is blown
away with the breath of the Trumpet? How many a Prayer is the shorter for its
length, is not heard for its noise, and is lost in the open streets? How many a
Fast is buried in a disfigured face? How many a Good deed had been registered in
heaven, if it had not been first written on the walls? But, as we read in the
Historian, that Thievery and Piracy were so commonly practiced amongst the
Grecians that men made public profession of them, neither were they taken to
be vices; so we find it by daily experience that Ambition is so like to Virtue
that the world has even taken her to be one, and made much of her, and
extolled her, because she is so common. Disciples themselves will be talking of
Kingdoms and Greatness, will be asking the question, Who is the greatest in
the kingdom of heaven? And yet it is as impertinent a question as could have
been put to Christ. And of this we are to speak in the next place; But first we
will draw such inferences out of that which has been spoken as may be useful
for our instruction.

And first, if we look back upon the Disciples, we cannot but look into our
selves; and seeing what it was that kept them so long from the true knowledge
of the Messiah, who had been so long with them, with whom they ate and drank
and conversed, and whose miracles they were eyewitnesses of, we cannot but
search and ransack our inward man, empty it of all extravagant and
heterogeneous matter, dispossess it of every evil spirit, of every carnal
conceit, which may shut out Christ, sweep and garnish it, that the Truth may
enter and dwell there. Prejudice puts ^ut the eye of our Judgment. (...),
Opinion is a great retarder of proficiency; it being common to men to be
jealous of every word that breaths in opposition to what they have already
received, as of an enemy; and, though it be truth, to suspect it, because it
breaths from a contrary coast. Moab is settled on his lees, has not been
emptied from vessel to vessel; therefore his Jer. 48. 11.
taste remained in him, and his sent is not changed. He has ever the same
taste and the same sent: and this makes every thing, promises and threatenings,
judgments and blessings, doctrines and miracles, relish and taste and sent as
he does. He is the same under the rod and the same under blessings, the same in
a calm and the same when it thunders. He is settled on his lees, and no change
can change him. It is a world to see what power Prejudice has to change the
face and countenance of objects, and shape them like unto it self. It makes a
shadow a man, and a man a hobgoblin; it mistakes a friend for an enemy. It puts
horror upon Virtue, and makes Vice it self of a ruddy countenance. It makes God
the Author of sin, and the Devil a worker of miracles. It makes the Prince of
peace a man of war; beholds a poor Christ, and makes him a King; receives him
in the form of a servant, and builds him a Throne; dreams of Kingdoms in the
house of mourning, and of triumph in persecution; makes Christ's Humility an
occasion of pride; makes a new Religion, a new Christ, a new Gospel; and thus
gropes at noonday; is deaf to thunder, is surly against good counsel, and
thrusts him away that gives it; is an enemy to a friend; is a fiery furnace to
devour those that minister unto it. When God opens the gates of heaven, this
shuts them; when he displayes his rays of mercy, this puts them by; when he
would enter, this shuts the door; when he is ready to let fall his dew, this
will not suffer him to be good unto us, will not suffer him to bless, will not
suffer him to teach, will not suffer him to save us. This killed the Prophets,
and stoned them that were sent; This whipped, and spet upon, and crucified the
Lord of Life himself. For all mistakes is from the Eye, all error from the
Mind, not from the Object. If the Eye be goggle, or mis-set; if the Mind be
dimmed with Malice or Ambition and Prejudice, it puts upon things what shape it
pleases, receives not the true and natural species they present, but views
them at home in it self, as in a false glass, which renders them back again as
it were by reflection; which is most deceitful. This makes Gods and sets up
Idols in it self, and then worships them. And this is the reason why Christ is
so much mistaken, why the Gospel of Christ receives such different
entertainment. Every man lays hold on it, wrests it to his own purpose, works
it on his own anvil, and shapes it to his own fancy and affections; as out of
the same mass Phidias made a Goddess, and Hysippus a Satyr.

Oh beloved! how many lie buried under Prejudice, corrupt and putrefied and
even stinking in the nostrils of God and man, not to be awaked till the last
Trump! All exhortations, all reproofs, all admonitions, all reason, all truth
is to them but as a mess of pottage set upon a dead man's grave; the tongue of
Men and Angels but as sounding brass. How do they rejoice in iniquity, triumph
in evil, confirm themselves in wicked practices! What a paradise to they plant
in Tophet! what a Heaven do they make in Hell it self! How busy are they to
sanctify and glorify their error! What shift do they make to make themselves
the Devils Children seven times more then they are! How do they argue and
dispute themselves into hell! That which is a reason against them is made a
reason for them; that which strikes at their error is made to uphold it; that
which checketh them spurs them; that which binds them sets them loose; that
which bids them, Touch not, Taste not, is to them as the voice to Peter, Acts
10. Rise, kill, and eat. Where Prejudice bears rule, every thing must bow;
every sheaf, every occasion, every occurrence must fall down before it. If it
be adversity, it is an argument; if good success, it is an argument. What shall
I say? In the next world it is Holiness, but in this it is Prejudice, it is
Covetousness, it is Ambition, that makes Saints. So dangerous was Prejudice and
Prae-conceit to the Disciples that no words, no miracles of Christ could root
it out, but it grew up in them, and spread it self into Thoughts and Questions,
which are as the boughs of it, till a sound from heaven; till a mighty rushing
wind, till fiery tongues beat it down and consumed it. So dangerous was it to
the Jews, that it had been better for them to have been utterly ignorant of
their Messiah. For this gross Praeconceit of their Messiah was yet the main
reason that they entertained him not when he came, because he came in a posture
so contrary to their expectation, so unlike that Christ which they had set up
already in their minds. So dangerous a thing is a Prepossessed mind to it self.

And therefore it well concerns us, as Chrysostom speaks, (...), to quiet and
slumber these imaginations, these absurd reasonings and dialogues which we make
within our selves. For why should such thoughts arise in our hearts, such
thoughts as will shut out better, such thoughts of a temporal as will deprive
us of an eternal Kingdom, such thoughts of goodness as will make us worse then
the beasts that perish. And it well concerns us to be jealous and suspicious of
our selves. For Jealousy and Suspicion, though in other matters it be a
disease that no Physician can cure, yet in respect of our Souls is a seasonable
medicine, full of efficacy and virtue. We cannot be too jealous of our own
salvation. My jealousy of my Honor may draw on destruction, my jealousy of my
Money may invite a thief, my jealousy of my wife may provoke her to folly; but
my jealousy of my Soul does enoble and enrich it, and present it a pure Virgin
unto Christ. Let us then be afraid of our own thoughts, and take heed of all
prejudicate conceits.

In the second place, since the Devil made use of this error of the Disciples,
and attempted them there where they were most open to him, let us, as wise
Captains use to do, double our watch, and be careful to strengthen that part
which is weakest and most assaylable; as Galen counsels, where the Affections
are contrary, first wrestle with that which is most prevalent, and overcome it,
that we may find our work the easier and less trouble to bring the rest in
subjection. For, Beloved, as tentations work by the Sensitive part upon the
Rational, so they have a diverse operation according to men's several
constitutions and complexions. Every man is not equally prone to every sin.
This ravisheth the eye of one which another will not look on: This man likes
that which another abhors. He that made the Devil fly at the first
encounter, may embrace him at the next. He that stood out with him in Lust, may
yield to him in Anger: He that defied his Mammon, may stoop at his Kingdoms:
He that would none of his Bread, may feed himself with his Air: He that feared
not the roaring of the Lion, may be overcome with the subtilty of the Serpent.
A man of a heavy and sluggish disposition is seldom ambitious; a man of lively
and nimble spirits is seldom idle. As hard a matter it is for some men to
commit some sin as it is for others to avoid it; as hard for the Fool in the
Gospel to have spent his estate as for the Prodigal to have kept it. We see
this man wondering at his brother that he should fall into such or such a sin,
and the other wondering as much at him how he should fall into the contrary.
Therefore the Devil, who observes how we are elemented and composed, has his
(...), says Macarius, his diverse back-doors, out of which he may slip and
return at pleasure; and, if his first bait be distastful, come again and
present another which will fit our taste and palate. If the Disciples leave
all, and follow Christ, he will try them with Honor, and teach them to dream of
a Kingdom even in the School of their Master. It will concern us then to take
pains, and go down and meet him at this door, at that door, which he is most
likely to enter. If it be the Eye, shut it up by covenant: If it be the Ear,
stop it, and be those Addars which will not hear his charms: If it be our
Taste, deny it: If it be our Appetite, be harsh to it: If it be our Fancy,
watch it, and bind it up. For if this was done to the green tree, the Disciples
of Christ; if they were endangered where they were weakest; what may not be
done to the dry, which is ready to catch and take fire at every spark of a
tentation? Let us then be ready and prepared, and stand in our complete armor
at that door which the Enemy is most like to attempt. Let us put on the whole
armor of God, that we may be able to stand against every wile of the Devil,
especially against that wile which may soonest Ephesians. 6. 11.
ensnare us.

Let me give you one Use more, and so conclude this point. Let us not seek the
World in the Church, nor Honors and Preferments in the Kingdom of Christ. Let
us not fit Religion to our carnal desires, but lay them down at the foot of
Religion. Make not Christianity to lacquey it after the World, but let
Christianity swallow up the World in victory. Let us clip the wing of our
Ambition, and the more beware of it because it carries with it the shape and
show of Virtue. For as we are told in Philosophy, In habentibus symbolum
facilior transmutatio, amongst the Elements those two which have a quality
common to both, are easiliest changed one into the other; so above all Vices we
are most apt to fall into those which have some symbolizing quality, some face
and countenance of Goodness, which are better dressed and better clothed, and
bespeak us in the name of Virtue it self, like a strumpet in a matrons stool.
Let us shun this as a most dangerous rock, against which many a vessel of
burden after a prosperous voyage has dashed and sunk. By Desire of honor and
vain glory it comes to pass that many goodly and specious monuments which were
dedicated rather to Honor then to God, have destroyed and ruined their
Founders, who, like unfortunate mothers, have brought forth beautiful issues,
but themselves have dyed in the birth of them. They have proved but like the
ropes of silk and daggers of gold which Heliogabalus prepared to stab and
strangle himself withal, adding, pretiosiorem mortem suam esse debere, that
his death ought to be more costly then other men's; and they have served to no
other end but this, ut carius pereant, that the workers of them might dye with
greater state then other men, and might fall to the lowest pit, as the
sword-players did in the Theater, with noise and applause. I have spoken of the
Occasion of the Question, and of the Persons who put it. Come we now, in the
last place, to the Question it self, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of
heaven?

The Disciples here were mistaken in terminis, in the very terms of their
Question. For neither is Greatness that which they supposed, nor the Kingdom
of heaven of that nature as to admit of that Greatness which their fancy had
set up. For by the Kingdom of heaven is meant in Scripture not the Kingdom of
Glory, but the Kingdom of Grace, by which Christ sits and rules in the hearts
of his Saints. When John the Baptist preached Repentance, he told the Jews that
the Kingdom of heaven is at hand. When our Savior tells us that it is like
seed sown in good ground, like a net cast into the sea, like a pearl, like a
treasure hid in the field, what else can he mean but his Kingdom of Grace on
earth? not his Kingdom of Glory in heaven. So that for the Disciples to ask,
Who is greatest in this kingdom? was to shape out the Church of God by the
World; Much like to that which we read in Lucian of Priams young son, who being
taken up into heaven, is brought-in calling for milk and cheese and such
country cates as were his wonted food on earth. For in the Kingdom of Grace,
that is in the Congregation of Gods Saints and the elect Members of Christ,
there is no such difference of degrees as Ambition taught the Disciples to
imagine. Not that we deny Order and Government in the Church of God. No;
without these his Church could not subsist, but would be like Aristotle's army
without discipline, (...), an unprofitable rout. To this end Christ gave
Apostles and Teachers and Pastors, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the
work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ. His Teachers call
us, his Governors direct us to this Kingdom. But the Disciples, being brought
up in the world, thought of that Greatness which they saw did bear the sway
amongst men; Much like the (...), who thought that God bare the shape of a Man,
because they read in Scripture of his Feet, and Hands, and Eyes, and the like.
But that it was not so in Christ's Kingdom, may appear by our Savior's Answer
to the Question. For he takes a Child, and tells them that if they will be of
his Kingdom, they must be like unto it. By which he choaks and kills in them
all conceit of Ambition and Greatness. For, as Plato most truly said, that
those that dye do find a state of things beyond all expectation, diverse from
that which they left behind, so when we are dead to the World, and true
Citizens of the Kingdom of Christ, we shall find there is neither Jew nor
Greek, neither bond nor free, neither male nor female; but all are one in
Christ Gal. 3. 28.
Jesus. God looks not what blood runs in thy veins, he observes not thy
Heraldry. If Greatness could have purchased heaven, Lazarus had been in hell,
and Dives in Abraham's bosom. Earl, and Knight and Peasant are terms of
distinction on earth: in the Kingdom of heaven there is no such distinction.
Faith makes us all one in Christ; and the Crown of glory shall be set upon the
head of him that grindeth at the mill as well as upon his that sits on the
throne. Christ requires (...), the nobility of the Soul: and he is the greatest
in his Kingdom who has the true and inward worth of Honesty and Sanctity of
life, though in this world he lie buried in obscurity and silence. Here Lazarus
may be richer then Dives, the beggar higher then the King, and a Child, the
least, is greatest in this Kingdom.

A main difference we may see between this Kingdom and the Kingdoms of the
world, if we compare them. First, the Subjects of this Kingdom are unknown to
any but to God himself. The foundation of the Lord stands sure, says the
Apostle 2 Timothy 2. 19. having this seal, The Lord knows who are his. And if
they be unknown, who then can range them into orders and degrees. Secondly, of
this Kingdom there is no end. Thirdly, the seat of this Kingdom is the hearts
of the faithful. Cathedram habet in Coelo qui domat corda; His chair is in
heaven that rules the hearts of the sons of men here on earth. This earth, that
is, this body of clay, has God given to the sons of men, to the Princes of the
earth, under whose government we live; But our Heaven, our better part, our
inward and spiritual man, he reserves to himself. Kings and Princes can
restrain the outward man and moderate our outward actions by their laws and
edicts. Illa se jactat in aula Aeolus: Thus far can they go; They can tie our
Hands and Tongues; and they can go no further. For to set up an imperial throne
in our Understandings and our Wills, belongs to Christ alone. He teaches the
lame to go, and the blind to see, and recovers the dry hand; He makes us active
in this Kingdom of Grace. Lastly, as their Subjects and Seat are different, so
are their Laws; In the Commonwealth of Rome the Laws were the works of many
hands. Some of them were Plebiscita, the acts of the people; others Senatus
Consulta, the decrees of the Senate; others, edicta Praetorum, the verdicts of
their Judges; others, Responsa prudentum, the opinions of Wise men in cases of
doubt; others, rescripta Imperatorum, the rescripts and answers of their
Emperors when they were consulted with. Christiani habent regulam, says
Tertullian; Christians have one certain immovable rule, the Word of God, to
guide and rule them in their life and actions. Besides, the Laws of the
Kingdom of Christ are eternal, substantial, indispensable: But the laws made
by humane authority are many of them light and superficial, all of them
temporary and mutable. For all the humane authority in the world can never enact
one eternal or fundamental law. Read the Laws that men have made, and lay them
together, and we shall observe that they were made upon occasion and
circumstance either of Time, or Place, or Persons; and therefore either by
discontinuance have fallen of themselves, or by reason of some urgent occasion
have been necessarily revoked: But the Laws of our Great King are like himself,
everlasting, never to be revoked or cancelled, but every (...) and tittle of
them to stand fast, though heaven and earth pass away.

Thus you see the Kingdom of Christ and the Kingdoms of this world have not
the same face and countenance; the Subjects of the one being discernable, of
the other unknown; their seat and place and laws are different. So that our
Savior, as he answered the sons of Zebedee, Ye know not what ye ask, so he
might have replied to his Disciples here, Ye know not what ye speak. My
kingdom is not of this world. The kingdom of heaven is within you. Why ask
you then, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven? That you commit no
more such soloecisms, behold here a little child; let him teach you how to
speak; and become like him, and you shall be great in the kingdom of heaven.

We see then that the Disciples of Christ were much mistaken in this question
of greatness. And a common error it is amongst men to judge of spiritual things
by carnal, of eternal by temporary. When our Savior preached to Nicodemus the
Doctrine of Regeneration and New life, what a gross conceit did he harp upon,
of a Re-entry to be made into his mothers womb? When he told the Samaritane of
the water of life, her thoughts ran on her pitcher and on Jacob's well. When
Simon Magus saw that by laying on of hands the Apostles gave the holy Ghost, he
hopes by money to purchase the like power. For seeing what a kingdom Money had
amongst men, he straight conceived Coelum venale, Deumque, that God and Heaven
might be bought with a price. Thus wheresoever we walk, our own shadow goes
before us, and we use the language and dialect of the World in the School of
Christ: we talk of Superiority and Power and Dominion in that Kingdom wherein
we must be Priests and Kings too, but by being good, not great.

The sense which the Disciples through error meant, was this, Who should be
greatest, Who should have most outward pomp and glory, Who should have
precedence above others: But the sense which, as appears by our Saviors
answer, they should have meant, was, Who is the greatest? that is, Who is of
the truest and reallest worth in the kingdom of heaven? This had showed them
Disciples indeed, whose eyes should be the rather on the Duty then on the
Reward, and who can have no greater honor then this, that they deserve it.
Though there be places of outward government, of praeeminence and dignity in
the Church, yet it ill becomes the mouth of a Disciple to ask such a Question.
For though they all jointly ask Who is the greatest? yet it appears by the very
question that every one of them did wish himself the man. An evil of old very
dangerous in the Church of Christ, but not purged out in after ages. Per quot
pericula, sath St. Augustine, pervenitur ad grandius periculum? Through how
many dangers and difficulties do we strive forward to Honor, which is the
greatest danger of all? Ut dominemur aliis, prius servimus, says St. Ambrose;
To gain Dominion over others we become the greatest slaves in the world. What
an inundation had this desire of Greatness made in the Church! how was it ready
to overwhelm all Religion and Piety, had there not been banks set up against it
to confute it, and Decrees made to restrain it! The Deacon would have the honor
of the Priest; the Priest, the Consistory of the Bishop. The Bishops seat was
not high enough, but he would be a Metropolitan, and to that end procured
Letters from the Emperors, which the Greeks called (...), by which they
obtained that, where there was formerly but one, there might now be two
Metropolitanes. And all these no doubt were Disciples of Christ, if for no
other reason, yet for this QUIS EST MAXIMUS? for their affectation of
Greatness. And now what followed? As one well observes, Ex religione ars facta;
Religion was made a trade and an art to live by. Till at last it was cried down
in diverse Councels, at Chalcedon, at Trullum in Constantinople, and others: And
in the Council of Sandis a Bishop is forbidden to leave the government of a
small City for a greater. Of all men Ambition least becomes a Disciple of
Christ: And therefore Christian Emperors did after count him unworthy of any
great place in the Church who did affect it. Quaeratur cogendus, rogatus
recedat, invitatus effugiat; Being sought for, let him be compelled; being
asked, let him withdraw himself; being invited, let him refuse. Sola illi
suffragetur necessitas recusandi; Let this be the only suffrage to enthrone
him, that he refused it. Maxim ambiendus, qui non est ambitiosus; For it is
fit that he that does not seek for should be sought for by preferment. And to
this purpose it was that our Savior answers the Disciples, not to what they
meant, but to what they should have meant, to divert them from all thought of
dominion. And withal he implies that that is not Greatness which they imagined,
but that Humility and Integrity of life was the truest Greatness and greatest
Honor in his Kingdom.

And, to speak the truth, this only deserves the name of Greatness. (...). For
Goodness is not placed in Greatness, but Greatness in Goodness. To go in costly
apparel, to fare deliciously, to have a troup to follow us, perhaps wiser then
our selves, this we may call what we please, but Greatness it cannot be. We
read in Seneca the Orator of one Senecio an Orator, who affected much grandia
dicere, to speak in a lofty style and great words. Which affectation in his art
after turned to a disease, so that he would have nothing in his house but what
was great, great Servants, and great Vessels of Silver, calceos etiam majores,
Shoes also too great for him. And from this fantastic humor he took his name,
and was called SENECIO GRANDIO, Senecio the Great. Yet for all this he added
not one hairs breadth unto his stature. Beloved, if we would measure our selves
aright, we should find that that is not Greatness which the World calls by that
name, outward state and pomp and stateliness to cast men on their knees with a
frown, or to raise an army with a stamp of the foot. We are the less for these:
and to think our selves greater for these, is to run upon the same error which
Senecio Grandio did.

Again, it is but a fancy, and a vain one, to think there is most ease and
most content in worldly greatness, or that we sleep best when our pillow is
highest. Alas, when our affrighted thoughts shall awake each other, and our
conscience put forth her sting: when those sins shall rise up against us by
which we have climbed to this pitch, all the honor of the World will not give
us ease. Will a leg or a cap, think you, still this noise: Will the obsequious
cringe and loud applause of the multitude drown the clamor of our Conscience,
which like an awaked Lion will roar loud against us? No, Beloved: not all the
pomp, not all the pleasure of the world, not the merry Harp and the Lute and
the Timbrel, no not a triumph, will be able to slumber the tempest within us,
no more then the distressed weather-beaten Mariner can becalm a boisterous Sea
with his whistle or a wish. We read of a Soldier who being to sleep upon a
hollow piece of steel, complained his pillow was hard, but stuffing it with
chaff he thought it much the lighter. Just so it fares with ambitious men: When
they have run on in the ways of Honor, when they have attained their ends,
they shall find that their pillow is steel still; only they filled it with more
chaff then other men. Besides, Honor does not make him greater that has it,
but him that gives it. For if it proceed from virtue, bonum nostrum non est,
sed alienum, it is not our virtue, but his that honors us; (...), a sign, says
the Philosopher, of another man's good esteem and opinion; which opinion is
raised not from the person, but his virtue. And therefore the Apostles counsel
is, In giving honor go one before another; as if he were truly honorable, not
who receives honor, but who gives it, and all precedence were in this. And
indeed Honor is, if not a virtue, yet a strong argument of it, in him who bows
himself in a just veneration of Goodness. Scias ipsum abundare virtutibus, qui
alienas sic amat, says Pliny; You may be sure he is full of virtue himself,
who loves to see the splendour of it in other men. Lastly, Greatness and Honor
adds nothing to Virtue. Nothing accrews to a Good man when he rises and comes
on in the world; nothing is defaulked from him when he falls and decays. The
Steed is not the better for his strappings; nor does the Instrument yield
sweeter music for its carved head, or for the ribbon which is tied unto it.
(...), Virtue in the open air, naked, destitute and afflicted, is of as fair a
presence as when she sits under a canopy of state; David in the wilderness as
honorable as on his throne, Job on the dunghill as in all his wealth, and Joseph
in the stocks as when he was a father to Pharaoh and Lord of all his house.
When God speaks by his Prophet, he tells us that his ways are not our ways,
nor our ways his; and here, where Christ speaks to his Disciples, by his
answer it appears that his judgment and theirs were not the same. When God sent
Samuel to anoint David, Jesse brought forth Elias, and Samuel said, Surely this
is the Lords anointed. But God corrected his error, and bade him not look upon
his countenance, nor the height of his stature: for God sees not as man sees.
Beloved, if with the Disciples here we have a thought that Christ's Kingdom is
a temporal Kingdom, God has not chosen that thought. If we look upon the
countenance of men, and think them the greatest who are of highest stature, and
in honor and dignities are taller then their fellows by the head and shoulders,
we are deceived, and the God of this world has blinded our eyes, that this
Pygmay in Christ's Kingdom appears to us as big as a Colossus. But there is a
little one, a child, behind, an humble and low Convert: And whosoever shall
humble himself as this little child, the same shall be the greatest in the
kingdom of heaven.

To conclude all; Let us seek for Honor; but seek for it in its own coasts. On
earth it is nothing, or it signifies nothing; and most commonly it is given to
them who signify as little. Therefore let us look up to the highest Heavens,
where the seat of Honor is. Let him who put us into the Vineyard give us our
wages; and let the King of glory bestow honor upon us. Let us make him alone
our Spectator, him alone our Judge; and He will render to every man according
to his deeds; to them who by patient continuance in welldoing Romans 2. 6, 7.
seek for glory and honor and immortality, eternal life. Which God grant us all
through Christ our Savior.

The Eighth SERMON.
1 COR. XIII. 7. -- hops all things.
AT the very reading of this Chapter the true Christian cannot but think
himself in a kind of Paradise, and conceive he sees Charity growing up like a
tree of Life, spreading its branches, full and hanging down the head, inviting
him to gather such fruit from every one of them as may be pleasant to his
taste, and abound to his account. At this time I have laid hold but on one of
them, but such an one as will give you a taste of all the rest. For in true
Hope there is Long-suffering and Kindness, there is Patience and Meekness;
there is no Envy, no Malice, no Pride, no Suspicion. And if we take down this,
and digest it, the rest will be sweet unto our taste, and pleasant as honey to
our mouth. The tree is a tree of Life, and every branch of it is beautiful and
glorious, and the fruit thereof excellent and comely to them that Isa. 4. 2.
are escaped of Israel. It is truly said that Charity does virtually contein
within her self all other Graces. St. Paul calls it the greatest virtue, and
the complement and fulfilling of the Law. If there be Liberality, Charity in
largeth the heart; if Temperance, she binds the appetite; if Chastity, she
makes the Eunuch for the kingdom of heaven: if Patience, she works it; if
Resolution, she makes us valiant. Charity, says one, is as the Philosophers
stone, that turns all into Gold. It makes suffering Patience, it makes giving
Liberality; it puts value upon a Mite, or a cup of cold water. Charity
baptizeth all the other virtues, and makes them Christian. She stands as a
Queen among the Virtues, encircled and compassed about as with a crown.
Patience waits on her; Bounty is as the breath of her nostrils; Long-suffering
is her very spirit. In a word, Faith is the foundation; Charity the building,
which reaches as high as heaven; and Hope the pillar or buttress to uphold it.

We shall now find our way easier, and the task not hard, to bring Charity and
Hope together. For if Charity comprehend all virtues, I am sure Hope is one. I
know that the essences of these virtues are distinct, and their offices diverse.
Distinct habits have their distinct acts. The act of Faith is to believe; of
Charity, to love and embrace: of Hope, to expect: But yet though their acts and
offices be diverse and distinct, they may all meet in the same subject. They are
distinct, but not separate. Nay, to speak truth, they are inseparable. Faith
may be said to love, and Hope to believe, and Charity to hope. For he that does
truly believe, does love; and he that does truly hope, does believe; and he
that loves, does hope: and yet neither is Faith Hope, nor Hope Charity. The
abstract does here stand for the concrete, Charity for the Christian man endued
with charity. And the sense is, Charity is the sourse, the original, the
immediate cause of Hope, that which alone produces it. In subjecto, in
supposito, in the same subject, in the same person two virtues may meet which
notwithstanding in themselves are most distinct.

Besides, in this union of Virtues there is observable (...), a kind of
communication of idiomes. As it is true to say of Christ, that he who is God is
Man, and he who is Man is God, but blasphemy to say that his Deity is Humanity,
or his Humanity Deity; so he errs not who affirms aut sperantem credere, aut
amantem sperare, that he who hopes believes, or that he who loves hopes, but he
were strangely deceived who should say that either Hope is Faith, or Faith is
Charity.

Certainly when our Apostle says that Charity hops, (...), he commits no
soloecisme, he speaks no absurdity, nothing which becomes not an Apostle. The
most fearful and horrid Soloecisme is in our life and conversation, when we
hope in God whom we do not love, and when we expect a reward from him who
deserve a stripe. Sperare in Deum propter meipsum, and non amare Deum propter
seipsum, To hope in God for my own good and for my self, and not to love him
for himself is a dangerous mistake. To divide and separate Hope from Love is as
bad as to separate Love from Faith. The Apostle in the next verse tells us that
Charity (...) never falls away. He implies a falling away of Faith and Hope
in the last verse of the former Chapter, (...), Now, says he, here in this
world, abide Faith, Hope, and Charity, so knit and united and coupled that no
divorce shall make a separation. If the hand of Charity wither, my Hope is
dead. If I reach not forth drink to the thirsty, and meat to the hungry, and
garments to the naked; if I be so palsie-strucken that I cannot give a cup of
cold water, my Hope is sick and feeble and languishing, spes informis, a Hope
without shape or form, as withered and hanging down as my Charity, as
palsie-strucken as she, not able to reach to a reward, or lay hold on a
blessing.

Now we cannot in strictness attribute Hope to the Saints departed; whose
Charity notwithstanding is now perfected. For what should they hope for?
Heaven? They already reign there. The robe of glory? They have put it on. The
penny? They have received it. He who was their hope, is now their joy and
crown. They are extra statum merendi aut demerendi; They can neither merit nor
offend. They are in termino quiescentiae, in that rest which remains to the
Saints of God. That which is perfect is come, and that which was in part is
taken away. Those (...) and (...) of the ancient Church, their Prayers and
Panegyricks and Oblations for the dead did rather testify their own hope then
persuade theirs. Expect they did the full complement of their bliss and
beatitude, (...), dancing and triumphing before him who taught them to conquer.
And being crowned with victory, what should they hope for? Spes, quasi pes
animae, says Isidore; Hope is the foot of the soul. And to move the foot, this
progressive motion, this striving forward, belongs to him who is going on his
way. Spes absentis est we hope for that we see not: the Saints rest in God.
Spes itinerantis est; Hope is my companion in my journey: at my journeys end
Hope leaves me. Where there is Hope, there is motion, and with that motion she
ends. In the Saints departed there is Charity, but Hope there is not. And
indeed the Charity the Apostle here speaks of is not charit as patriae, but
viae. This Charity that has Hope to wait on her, this expecting Charity, is
Charity that has a hand to give, and a body to suffer, and a tongue to speak;
is the Charity of him who can bestow his goods on the poor, and give his body
to be burned, v. 3. is proper to him who walks and rejoices and labors in
hope, as the Apostle speaks. Well then, we may settle it as an undeniable
conclusion, that Charity may be without Hope; but, in the next place, it is as
true, that Hope cannot be without Charity. In heaven there is no room for Hope,
where notwithstanding Charity is; nor shall there be in hell, where Charity is
not; Infinite joy there, infinite horror here. No addition to that which is
infinite, no succession to Aeternity. Here our Arithmetic fails us: we
cannot add one cubit or inch to infinitude; we cannot multiply Aeternity, nor
add one day to Immortality: and can we hope? The blessed Saints departed rest
in God, who is the end of their Hope, do not hope: The Devils and damned
reprobates hate God, and cannot hope, non ostiolum spei, not the least wicket,
not a crany of Hope is left to them. Behold, the bridegroom is come, and is
entered, and the door is shut. Origin, whom Matthew. 25.
some have placed with a picklock in his hand to open these everlasting doors,
and after the revolution of some thousands of years to empty hell, and break
the chains of everlasting darkness, has this censure in Photius, to have
delivered (...), many absurd positions and full of impiety. If Charity could be
found in hell, I would perhaps look for hope there. But to place Hope there
without Charity, is to turn darkness into light, Judas into Peter, Satan into
an Angel of light, and Hell it self into Paradise. But I mistake the Father.
For the Cardinal will tell us he meant not Hell, but Purgatory, where there is
perfect Charity, as intentively hot as the fire there. What? Charity there, and
perfect? We infer then, No Hope there. For perfect Love, as it casts out
Fear, so it casts out Hope too; Which ebbs and flows, increases and
decreaseth, waxes and waneth with Charity, and when it either fails, or has
its perfection, it ends. We sow in hope; but when the harvest, the time of
gathering and separation comes, Hope vanishes. For my Charity raises my Hope
by the same degrees she receives. But in culmine virtutis she swalloweth it up
in victory. On the hills there is salvation, but in the bottom, in the valley
of death there is omnimoda desolatio, a strange kind of desolation, not only of
the Soul, but of all her comforts, even that last comfort, Hope. She is dead,
say they in the Gospel; (...); Why troublest thou the master any further?

We find, you see, this Hope neither in heaven, nor in hell: Neither in
Abraham's bosom; there Lazarus is so sure that he may not carry a drop of water
to cool a flaming tongue; nor in the place of torments; Dives's care, we read,
is not for himself, but his brethren. In Hell there is no fire but that
sulfureous tormenting fire; and in Heaven the fire of Charity is in intensis
gradibus, clear, and bright, and resined, like the elementary fire, pure and
invisible, wheeling and rolling about in an eternal gyre and circle. We must
then descend unto earth; where Charity is visible, where this fire, like to the
fire there, is of a grosser and more sensible temper, and, with that too,
flameth upward, till it be refined and exalted to a caelestial heat, till its
motion be heightened into perfection, and with it our Hope turned into
possession.

By this fire we must sit down, nay, we must carry these coals in our bosom,
if we will spem accendere, kindle Hope. If this fire be extinguished, if this
heat perish, my Hope will either freeze and congeal and petrifie into a
stubborn Despair, or else by a kind of Antiperistasis, being encompassed by
excess of cold, beaten upon by the violence of a contrary quality, it will
break forth into an unruly flame, and raise it self to a saucy Presumption. But
here it is, and here we find it, even spem in charitate, Hope in Charity. For
in amore haec insunt omnia, In Love are all these things which with the eye of
Hope we look upon, or with the hand of Hope we lay hold on. First, the Object
is the same. For Love is an affection joining and uniting us to God, Love could
not walk in that circle of blessings, both spiritual and temporal, if God were
not in the midst. Draw what lines you please; propose either Competencie of
means, or Quiet of Conscience, or the Joys of Heaven, Hope will faint and
languish if God be not the center wherein these lines meet. Secondly, the
character and mark whereby we may know them both is the same. Love is bold. We
commonly say, We will build upon a friend. Put what objections and what
scruples you please, of Inopportunity, Inconveniency, Improbability, that he
cannot now, that he wants leisure and a convenient time to do me good, Love
answers all: And so does Hope: Place Tribulation, Persecution, Death it self in
the way, yet she presses forward. Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him,
says Job. Thirdly, Love is jealous; it carries and conveyeth the soul to the
object not enjoyed. Ubi amor, ibi animus; Where my love is, there is my mind;
Where my treasure is, there is my soul. Ubi sum, ibi non sum, says the old
Lover in Plautus; where I am not, there I am; and where I am, there I am not. I
am sure, ubi spes, ibi est animus; Where my Hope is, there my Soul is; my
Understanding, to apprehend it; my Care, to procure it. Spe jam sumus in caelo.
We aim at heaven; and Hope puts us there already. And this earnest inclination
to the object begets a Jealousy. To Love a glance is a frown, and a frown
anger, and anger death; and yet it is Love still: And Hope has these
abatements, and fits, and shiverings; and yet it is Hope still. Lastly, Love is
querulous and full of complaints; Why does he pursue me? says Job: Why do
thou set me as a mark? And, Why art thou angry with thine inheritance? says
David. How long, Lord? how long? Hopes own dialect. For there is a kind of
thirst in Hope, more then that of a chased Heart. Festina Charitas, and festina
spes; Love is on the wing and in haste; and so is Hope. Spes quae differtur
affligit; Hope knows no affliction but delay. While she is, she is in trouble,
in pangs, like a man fastened to a cross, who desires nothing more then to
expire. The life of Hope is exspectation: answer that, and Hope is not.

And in this Relation stand Hope and Charity: Like Hippocrates's Twins, they
are born and grow up together. Their operations, their postures, their
gestures, are not unlike. Sic oculos, sic ille manus. As a well made, and well
placed picture looks upon him that looks upon it, so does my Charity eye my
Hope, and my Hope looks back upon my Charity. Nay, my Hope is the picture of my
Charity, and my Charity is the lively representation of my Hope. Would you see
the pourtraiture, and lively view of my Hope? then behold my Charity. Would you
take the lineaments and proportion of my Charity? look upon my Hope. Charity is
a commentary upon my Hope; and my Hope is an interpretation of my Charity. To
love God, and to hope in God, are terms reciprocal. He that loves him, hopes in
him, and he that hopes in him loves him. So that take charitatem in via,
Charity upon earth, and charitas sperat, is not only (...), but (...), a
universal proposition, and the terms are aequalis ambitus, of equal latitude.
Where Hope is, there is Charity; and where Charity is there is Hope.

Thus the terms naturally stand; and yet a strange paradox is maintained in the
world, That Hope may thrive well enough without the warmth and fomentation of
Charity. We deny Hope to men already damned in hell: but candidatis diaboli, to
men who are confederate with Hell, who call it unto them both with works and
words; to men who are judged already, and Wisd. 1. 16.
whose damnation sleeps not, but is awake and in agitation, we deny it not:
They who treasure up wrath against the day of wrath, who know nothing of Faith,
Hope and Charity, but their naked names, a faithless generation, without Love
in this world, and quite destitute of Hope, desperate sinners, yet
notwithstanding hope. After their rebellion for a reward, after their treason
for a crown, after all the injuries and slights and denyals and repulses given
to the holy Ghost for his loving and familiar parleys, for his kisses and
embraces, post laesum Patrem, after they have renounced their Father which is
in heaven, and sold their birthright, they howl after the blessing, and cry out
with Esau, Bless me, even me also, my Father.

But this is not (...), to walk in the right way. This is a most methodical
impiety. Insanit spes nostra, Our hope is mad and distracted. Nay, it is (...),
an expectation without an hope, a maimed, bruised, lame Hope, spes exspes, a
hopeless Hope, a Hope without a foot. Good God! should a Traitor on the Gibbet,
now ready to be thrown down and quartered, expect to be honored with rewards?
Should a Ravilliac look to be made one of the Privy Counsel? Should Catiline
demand a civil garland? or Cethegus, now to be strangled, ask what triumphant
arches and statues are set up to honor him? Thou son of perdition, do thou
expect salvation? Thou son of Belial, do thou hope for a crown? Thou have
flung a stone at Christ; and do thou ask him bread? Thou have given him a
serpent, thy fraud and deceit, thy hypocrisy, thy windings and turnings in the
Religion thou professest; and do thou crave a fish? Can thou hope to be
saved by that Gospel thou despisest, and to be washed with that blood thou
tramplest under thy feet? Filius non es, and ibis ad patrem? Thou art no son,
and do thou go to the Father? Thou have no Charity, and do thou nourish
Hope? Indeed some comfort it is to a condemned person, when the Sentence is
past, to hope for a reprieve. Errare aliquando in via profuit; We wander
sometimes with delight, and our error pleases us well, because we hope it is
not an error. But when that day of revelation and manifestation, (...), that
general day of visitation, shall come, when all things shall be (...),
anatomized and naked, like a beast for sacrifice, cut down the back, whose very
entrails are seen; When both shall meet, on the offenders part Desperation, and
on the Judges Desertion; cum judex ostendet suam sententiam, and reus suam
conscientiam, when the Judge shall read his sentence, and the Offender open the
book of his conscience; then shall he who welcomed and entertained Hope, and
yet shut Charity out of doors, confess not only (...), his want of method, but
also (...), his dullness and stupidity. He shall then be too sensible what an
absurdity and soloecisme it was to make his Hope his familiar and his
domestic, and yet turn the key against Charity. Tuas tibi res habe, from Hope
to Charity, is a dangerous form, a bill of divorce and separation of the soul
from God. There is no way then but to unite and join them together. Let Charity
and Hope meet, and then that will follow, Righteousness and Peace, and a myriad
of blessings, will kiss each other.

We have now made good this proposition, and showed in what relation the terms
stand. Quod speret, That Charity hops, we have already proved. Our next task
will be to give an answer to the Quid sperat, and point out to the Object of
this Hope. And here we find it to be of very large compass, even (...), all
things. And if I may hope all things, then is there nothing excepted, a NON
LIGET no where engraven to fright away my Hope. I may yield up my Hope to my
Ambition, I may prostitute her to Pleasure, I may sell her to Mammon, I may
betray her to Revenge, and lend her to my Malice. Quid non speremus? What is
there that comes not within the compass of this omnia? What is there we may not
hope for?

But we must here take in that rule in Divinity, Verba non sono sapiunt, sed
sensu; nec auribus audienda, sed mentibus: We must not take the sound of the
words, but the sense; and they are presented rather to our understanding then
our ears! St. Paul's Expedit and Licet must come in, all things which are
lawful, all things which are expedient. We must tie our hope to Gods promise,
and limit one duly by another, our Hope by our Prayers. What God commands me to
pray for, what he has promised to give, may raise my Hope. Some things there
are which are not inter omnia, not to be numbered amongst this ALL. Some things
are nullius numeri, as good as nothing; and my estate may be bettered in being
without them. Some things are worse then nothing; and my estate will be far
worse if I have them. Some things are (...), indifferent, in their own nature
neither good nor evil; and a naked circumstance, a condition, a bare If, may
make it either good or evil to hope for them. Some things there be which are
evil (...), says Basil, simply and in their own nature evil, as Sin, and the
Occasions of sin, and the Impunity of sin: and a great sin it is to hope for
these. Some things are evil (...), which appear so to us, sensible evils, such
indeed as we are most sensible of; Affliction, and Poverty, and Sorrow, and
Disgrace; and these I am so far from hoping for that as I may pray against
them. A Libera nos, Domine, is set upon them. At the very naming of them we all
cry out, Good Lord deliver us. I fear, I avoid, I run away from these. Spero
meliora, I hope for better things.

We will then bound and limit this our Hope, and draw those lines which must
fill up the circumference; And thus they lie. Charity hops all things; First,
omnia bona, all Good things. For to wait for the twilight with the Adulterer;
to catch at all opportunities which may be as steps to bring to the pinnacle of
honor; to have pervigiles occulos, our eyes still watching upon the prey, is
not Hope, but Lust, or Ambition, or Covetousness. Etiam speravit, you know was
spoken of Faelix Acts 24. 26. He hoped also that money should be given him of
Paul; and what was this Hope but Covetousness. 2. Bona absentia, future, absent
goods; goods at a distance. For when the object is present, Hope is no more.
The Apostle before said that Charity is patient, (...), elongat animum, draws
in its breath as it were, and stays, and defers, and prolongs it self. If we
hope, we expect in patience, says the Apostle Romans 8. 15. Spes omnes res
spissas habet, says he in the Comedy; All things to Hope are hard and massive,
and must be beat out with the hammer. 3. Ardua, matters of difficulty. For Hope
loves to struggle with its object, and sometimes is increased by opposition,
and made bolder by being frighted. But if the object be ad manum and parabile,
at hand and cheap, my Hope is lazy and asleep; it moves not, it stirs not.
(...), Hope above hope, Hope against hope, that is Hope indeed. For, as
Tertullian, asking the question, Why Christ after his resurrection did not
manifest and publish himself to the whole world, and so put it out of all
question that he was risen indeed, answers well, That this he did not, ut
fides, cui magna merces debetur, non nisi difficultate constaret, That our
Faith, which has the promise of a great reward, might be commended by that
difficulty which stood in its way; So may we say of Hope, (...), The way of
Hope is hard and rugged. She passes by the pomp of the world, and she treads
dangerous paths; If a Serpent be in the way, she fears not; if a Flower, some
pleasing object, she gazeth not, but presses on forward; over Riches and
Poverty, over Honor and Disgrace, super culcatum patrem, over all relations and
dependencies, and in this habit and attire, ruspata sanguine, as Tertullian
speaks, torn and weather-beaten, and in her own gore, she striveth forward to
her object. Though I see it not, yet I hope: Though it be in heaven, yet I
hope: Though I am in chains, even fettered retinaculis spei, with those stays
and hindrances of Hope which the World or the Devil cast about me, yet I hope
still 4. Lastly, Possibilia; Good things, though hard to obtain, yet possible.
For Charity nihil perperam agit, is not foolish and indiscreet; It plows not
the air, nor sows upon the rocks. What is easy and at hand, cannot raise a
Hope; and what is impossible, overwhelms and swallows it. What is ready to fall
into my bosom, I need not hope for: and what I cannot have, nec spes, nec
votum est, does scarce produce a wish, much less beget a hope.

These are the bounds, and these make up the object of my Hope, and as Lines
drawn to the Circumference, fill up this OMNIA, this all-things, in the Text.
Now, St. Basil's rule is most safe, (...), Not to remove these bounds, nor
alter these everlasting limits. We must not take the Compass, and draw new
lines, and put out God, and place Our selves in centro, in the midst. We must
not build our Hope upon dust and rubbish, upon our own weak and rotten
foundation. But we must keep our Hope close to Charity, which looks upon the
right object. For Hope, as Fear, is measured by its object. Fear is a base and
graveling, a cowardly passion, if either an Enemy or Disgrace or Danger beget
it: But pone Deum, place God there, make him the object of thy Fear, and then
that of Synesius is most true, (...), To faint and be daunted here does
strengthen us, and our greatest security is to fear. And my Hope is as its
object is; If it be placed on Princes or in any Son of man, it is as frail and
mortal as they are, and departs with their breath; It is chased away with a
frown, it is blown out of their nostrils, and perishes as soon as a thought.
If I lay it on my own Strength or Wit or Policy; alas, I have set up a
Paper-wall; nay, I have built my Fort in the air. And you need not plant a
Canon against it to make a battery; it will down of it self, and overthrow and
ruin the builder, and leave a mark, an ECCE, upon him, Behold, the man that
made the arm of flesh his strength, and put his confidence in himself! But make
God its object, and Hope is a rock, a castle, an impregnable citadel,
canon-proof, as we say; no assault, no battery shall force it. For the Lord,
says the Prophet Nahum, is good, a strong hold in the day of trouble; and he
knows them that trust in him.

And indeed Charity keeps Hope where God would have it placed, at its right
object. She is a perfect methodist. She guides hope, and leads her on orderly,
draws every line to its true proper center; they turn it from the creature, and
levels it on God. The order of Charity is the order of Unity. The Devil is a
great disturber, the author of confusion. Whereas God has placed Contempt upon
the World, Love upon Goodness, and Shame upon Sin, (...), the Devil has
inverted this order, says Chrysostom, and has placed Shame upon Repentance,
and Security upon Sin; Distrust upon Gods Providence, and Hope upon the World;
He has placed Hope upon Fear, and Fear upon Hope, (...), the most fearful and
terrible things in the world, if we rightly understood them, those we hope for;
and (...), the most desirable, the most conducible to our eternal happiness,
those we fear. Now the office and work of Charity is (...), even an act of
Justice, to make every wheel move in its own place, to give every action, every
affection, its proper end and work, to place my Hatred on the World, my Love on
God; my Anger on Sin, my Delight on Goodness; my Fear on God, and my Hope on
God. Put CHARITAS to SPERAT, join Charity and Hope, and OMNIA, all things, will
follow: we cannot hope amiss. Thus does Charity edify, even build us up as
high as heaven; and Hope being the supporter, and bringing in with it (...),
all things, does establish and strengthen the building.

But, in the last place, as we build up our selves, so must we edify others
also in our most holy faith: and as we hope for all things for our selves, so
must we reserve a Hope for those also who are tied in the same link and bond of
Love. When we see a house tottering, we must not make our censure a wind to
blow it down, but hope that even a broken beam, a loose rafter, nay the very
rubbage it self, may in time be made a sound part of the building. When I see
my brother fall, I must lend him my Hand to help him up. If my Hand will not
help him, I must lend him my Pity and Compassion and Prayer. And when all the
rest fail, I must give him my Hope. Charity has an eye abroad as well as at
home; nor does she nurse up Hope for her self alone, but makes it as catholic
as the Church, nay, as the World. Aegrotis dum anima est, spes esse dicitur,
says Tully; Hope lasts as long as life lasts, nor can it expire but with
the soul: And how desperately soever we see our brother plunged in sin, yet we
must hope well, that his sickness is not unto death. How did the Church of
Christ frown upon the Novatians, who denied hope of pardon to those who fell
away in time of persecution. St. Cyprian calls them pietatis paternae
adversarios, enemies to the grace of God. Isidore tells them, they were proud
and foolish boasters; and Nazianzene, that their religion was (...), more in
their tongue then in their heart. They would be styled (...), the purest
Christians, craftily making, as he after observes, the elegancy and beauty of
that name a bait to catch the ignorant and unwary multitude. This spiritual
pride, says the Schools, and contempt of our brother springs from that
conceit, that self-flattery we nourish in our breasts, that we have stood
strong against the violence of temptations. And then with us he is scare a
Christian who is tempted. And so having no leisure to bring our own hypocrisy
to the balance, we begin to look bigg and call it Zeal that swells us. We walk
upon the pavement of heaven, and from thence behold our poor brother on the
ground: and then how vile does he seem in our eyes, a woman, a wretch, a son of
perdition! Then we can thunder, when God is silent; we snatch the sword out of
his hand, and latch it in his side who does but shrink at an invasion: Whereas
those Christians whom a frequent visitation of their own hearts has taught to
make a virtuous use of their brothers sin, would not only after a fainting, but
after a fall; not only after a fall, but after a bruise; not only after seven
falls, but after seventy times seven falls, at least hope well, reach out the
hand of mercy to him, and rather show him comfort in the Creed than denounce
judgment against him out of the Decalogue. This is truly to be followers of him
who who will not break a bruised reed. Greatness of authority may make us to be
feared, and depth of learning to be admired; abundance of wealth or honor may
gain us a knee or an hat: but that which makes one man a God unto another is
Charity; which, when she has spent the whole box, does yet anoint her brother
with her Hope, and where she cannot help, yet will hope the best. Therefore
Tertullian tells us that anciently among the Heathen the professors of
Christianity were called not Christiani, but Chrestiani, from a word signifying
sweetness and meekness and benignity of disposition. I cannot but conceive that
this was the reason why the ancients, many of them, conversed even with the
heathen themselves. No doubt they did it out of hope of their recovery. We find
in our Books that they held a friendly intercourse of Epistles; St. Basil with
Libanius the Sophister, Nazianzene and Augustine with others. And Antiquity
has either left us true or forged us false Epistles between St. Paul himself
and Seneca the Philosopher, as we find them copied out by Sixtus Senensis.

And indeed why should we not hope well of every man, suppose he were a Judas,
and by our Christian industry strive to recover his drooping soul, and to
revive the flame of Charity in his breast, which may warm him into a temperate
Hope? How know we but that the word of God through our ministry may of this
stone raise up a child unto Abraham? Debilem facito manu, debilem pede: vita
dum superest, been est, as Maecenas sometimes basely spoke in another case: But
let our weak brother be lame hand and foot, sick in head and heart, yet as long
as there is life in him, our Charity must visit him, and our Hope makes us
active to his recovery: Otherwise, like unskilful Physicians, we shall suffer
him to dye under our hands, and then pretend his Disease was incurable. The
Priest and the Levite, who saw the man wounded on the way, and passed by on the
other side, are Luke 10.
not proposed as paterns of our imitation, but the Samaritane who came near to
the place, and came and looked on him, and no doubt hoped well: for he bound up
his wounds, and poured in wine and oil; and brought him to an Inn, and made
provision for him. The reason why we reach not out the hand of help unto others
is, because we hope well of none but our selves. Nay, we make it a great part
of our Christian zeal, to challenge an assurance to our selves, and to entitle
our brother to despair; and so we forfeit our Hope for want of Charity. But our
Apostle here brings in Charity in another dress, hoping all things of all men.
And indeed this is a kind of privilege that Charity has in respect of Faith.
To Faith the number of the Elect appears but small; but to Charity the Church
is large and copious. Faith makes up a Church as Gideon did his army, who took
not up all he met, but out of a many thousands elected a band of three hundred
and no more: But Charity sees not any of that great company which she will
dismiss, but thinks that all may fight and conquer. You will say perhaps that
this is an error of my Charity. I confess it is, but it is a very necessary
error. For it is my Charity thus to err; and it is not a lie, but a virtue in
me, in my brothers case to hope for that good which he shall never enjoy. The
holy mistakes of Charity shall never be imputed, nor be numbered amongst my sins
of ignorance. Nay, he that errs not thus, he that hopes not the best he can of
all he sees, wants something, and comes yet short of a good Christian.
Christianum est errare; It is the part of every Christian thus to err. And
there is good reason for it: For we see not where nor how the grace of God may
work. How sinful soever a man be, yet if he come behind, and but touch the hemn
of Christ's garment, the grace of God may cure him. Nay, were he dead in sin,
who knows what God may do? Forsitan and mihi in sepulcro scelerum jacenti
dicat, Hieronyme, veni for as, says St. Hierome; Peradventure God may call unto
him lying yet stinking in his sin, as in a grave, Lazarus, come forth. The
Proverb in nature is, Ex quolibet ligno non fit Mercurius, Every crooked piece
of timber is not fit to make a God of. For Nature cannot make what she pleases
of what she list. But God finds no subject unfit for his skill: but out of the
most rotten and crooked piece can make an image and erect a statue of himself.
And therefore Charity, because she may, nay because she must, be deceived, is
at SPERAT in the thickest cloud, and hopes for daybreak in the darkest and
longest night. Our Apostle tells us, SPERAT OMNIA, she hops all things; she
friendly extends and communicates her Hope to every man.

For conclusion, and to apply all; Let us lay hold on Charity, and then Hope
will follow; for they are linked together. But if we let Charity loose, Hope
will take wing, and leave us nothing but a false persuasion, which Hypocrites
call by that name, when it is nothing like it, nothing but a mere thought. And
a thought will not give legs to the lame, nor crown a beggar, nor write his
name in the Book of Life who has made himself to every good work reprobate. It
is not a feeble thought, it is an active Charity, that is the foundation of
Hope. Run to and fro through Jerusalem, go about the streets thereof, muster up
together all that name the Lord Jesus, and you shall find every man is full of
Hope; and then you may conclude that every man is charitable. Whatsoever the
premises be, whatsoever the actions of our life be, most men make this the
conclusion, and dye in hope, assure themselves of happiness, by no better
experience then that which Flesh and Blood and the Love of our selves are ready
to bring in. They fill themselves with Hope, when they are full of nothing but
Malice and Envy and Uncleanness; of which we are told, that they which do such
things shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. And what Hope, what assurance
is this? An assurance without a warrant; an Hope which only we our selves have
subscribed to with hands full of blood; a Hope which is no hope, but a cheat, a
delusion, presenting us nothing but heaven, when we are condemned already. It
is true that Hope is a fair tie and pledge of what we shall enjoy hereafter,
but it is not then the work of the Fancy, but of the Heart; to be wrought out
with fear and trembling, and not to be taken up as a thing granted, as the
(...), we cannot set up a pillar of Hope where there is no basis, no foundation
for it, but a weak and feeble thought. I know it is put up by some as a
question, Whether we ought to be assured of our salvation; but it is but an
impertinent question, and not well put up. For will any man ask Whether we
ought to be in health, and not rather, Whether we ought to feed on wholesome
meats, and keep a temperate diet? Beloved, let us have Charity, and Hope will
as certainly follow and as naturally as Growth and Health do a moderate diet.
Otherwise to hope is a sin, it is not Hope, but Presumption. For what Hope is
that which looks toward Liberty, and leaves us in chains? that which promises
life, when we are children appointed to dye? Let us then possess our hearts
with Charity, and Hope will soon enter in; for they love to dwell and breathe
together. But it will not enter a froward and perverse heart; for that will not
receive it: nor the heart of a Nabal; for that is stone, and will beat it back:
nor a heart that is fat as grease; for it slips through it: nor a Pharisee's
heart; for that is hollow and does nothing but sound; every thought is a knell,
and proclaims the fall of some in Israel. None have less hope of others then
they who presume for themselves. None condemn more to hell then they whose feet
are swift to shed blood, and who delight in those ways which lead unto death.
Their very mercies are cruelty. To put on the New man with them is to put off
all bowels. Every word they speak is clothed with Death. And if Malice and
Deceit and Uncharitableness lead not thither, I may be bold to say, There is no
Hell at all. They who make God as cruel as themselves, do destiny men to
destruction only because he will, and to build up men on purpose to ruin them
for ever, that make the Wickedness of men depend on the antecedent will of God
absolutely and irresistibly efficacious; (They are their own words) that say
that God does work all things in all men, even in the reprobate; that the
Induration and Incredulity of men is from the Praedestination of God, as the
effect from the cause; that God calls men to salvation who are condemned
already; that though the elect (which are themselves) fall into adultery,
murder, treason, and other crying sins, yet they fall not from grace, but still
remain men after Gods own heart, when they do the works of their father the
Devil. These are they whose words are as sharp swords to cut off their brethren
from the land of the living. These men breathe forth nothing but hailstones and
coals of fire, but death and destruction. These make a bridge for themselves to
Happiness, but pluck it up to their brethren. These are in heaven already, and
shut it up, that none else may enter. Certainly a new way to heaven, never yet
discovered by the King of Heaven, who has put the keys into the hand of
Charity, who may boldly enter her self, and who also is very willing to let in
others; who brings forth a Hope, a Hope for our selves, and a Hope for others.
Whosoever makes haste to perfection, is very willing to forward others in the way:
he calls upon them, he waits on them, he expects when they will move forwards;
and though they move not, yet he hopes still. Charity, which brought down
Christ from heaven, lifts us up unto that holy place; and we are never carried
with more delight, then when we go with most company, there to join with the
quire of Angels, and to sing praises to the God of Love for evermore. We love
God, because he loved us first; and for his loves sake we love every man. And
now what is our Hope, but that together with others we may have our perfect
consummation and bliss both in body and soul, in his eternal and everlasting
glory?

The Ninth SERMON.
PSALM LI. 12. Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation.
IN these words we have 1. an Act, Restore; 2. an Agent, God, Restore thou; 3.
the Person suing, David, unto me; 4. the blessing sued for, the joy of God's
salvation: Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation. David (as the Title
shows us) being awakened by Nathan out of the slumber wherein he had long
layn after his foul fact with Bathsheba, penned this Psalm, and published it; a
truly Penitential Psalm, full of humble and hearty acknowledgments of sin, and
of earnest petitions for mercy and for assurance of God's favor. His great
fall had so bruised him that he felt no ease or comfort, all was discomposed
and out of tune, his soul cast down and disquieted within him, his heart
broken, his spirit wounded. And a wounded spirit who can bear? Hence it is that
he prays with such vehemence Prove. 18. 14.
and fervencie that God would be pleased in great merey to blot out all his
transgressions, and to wash and cleanse him from his sins and iniquities; that
he would not cast him away from his presence, nor take his holy spirit from
him; and, here in my Text, that he would restore unto him the joy of his
salvation. But however these last expressions may seem to be the breathings of
a disconsolate spirit, and of one even out of hope, yet we must not think that
this man after God's own heart, this great Saint; though grievously fallen, was
quite fallen from grace, and that his faith had now utterly failed and was
extinguished. No; Faith can never be lost. Or rather, if it be lost, it never
was true Faith; as St. Hierome speaks of Charity.

Tell me not of Readiness anointing, of Judas's Apostleship, of Balaam's
prophetic spirit: Tell me not of those who are in the Church, but not of the
Church; who, like the Pharisees, have the Law written on their freinges,
Religion on the outside, when the Devil is in their heart. For Judas was but a
traitor lurking under the title of a Disciple. Sub alterius habitu alteri
militavit: He wore Christ's livery, but was the Devils servant. Saul was amongst
the Prophets, but never received a Prophets reward. And Balaam blessed the
people from God, but he died not the death of the righteous. There may be some
gifts of the Spirit where the Spirit never truly was. There may be a beam of
grace, a show of godliness, where the power thereof is denied. And Faith in him
may seem to be dead where it never had true life or being. So Nazianzene
speaking of those who forsook the colors under which they had formerly fought,
says they were (...), men which negligently and for fashions sake handled
matters of Religion; having an Hosanna in their mouth when a Crucifige was in
their heart; like Meteors, which either being drawn up by the heat of the Sun,
or lifted up by some puff of wind into the air, there for a while they remain,
and draw men's eyes to behold them, till at last they go out, and infect it: But
true Faith is like the Sun, which is not therefore not at all because a cloud
has overcast it: or like the Moon, it waxes and waneth, but still receives
some light from the Sun. The Papists and Arminians in this point, as Augustine
spoke of Heretics of the same stamp, should have rather our prayers then our
dispute, and will sooner be recalled by our devotion then yield to the strength
of our reason. But if there be any infant in religion, which is not yet grown
up to this truth, whose earthly thoughts cannot reach to the height of this
heavenly mystery, if he will not believe God in the book of his Words, he may
see and read a resemblance of it in the book of his Works. Come, Christian;
look upon the Tree. In the winter it is stripped of its fruit and leaves,
nipped by the frost, covered with snow, so that it seems to be withered and
dead, and fit only to be cast into the fire. Say then; May not Faith be where
Sin and the filth of the Flesh has oppressed it? Can a winter of affliction
dead it? Or shall we think that man whose Works always speak not his Faith,
whose light sometimes shines dimly before men, to be in the shadow of death,
and only fit fuel for hellfire? No: this were to wrong our Charity as well as
our Faith, to make the way to hell broader then it is, to enlarge the kingdom
of Satan, to undervalue the gift of Grace, to mistrust the promise of God, and
to make him a liar like unto our selves. What if we be weak and feeble? What if
the arm of flesh cannot uphold us? Yet God directs us in our paths; and is as
tenderhearted to us as a nurse to her child when she teaches it to go,
sometimes leading and guiding us by his mercy, sometimes catching if we slip,
and, if we fall, hastily pulling us up again, and snatching us to his embraces.

Hear this, and leap for joy, you who are members of Christ's mystical body. You
may fall, but you shall rise again. Your names are written in the Book of Life;
and neither the malice nor the policy of Satan can blot them out. God has made
a league with you; and you may be sure he will be as good as his word. He has
married himself to you for ever; and then you need not fear a divorce. He has
written his law in the midst of your heart; and the Devil shall never raze it
out. He has put his fear into you, and such, and so great a fear, as St.
Augustine speaks, that you shall always adhere unto him, that shall make you
fly Sin as a Serpent; and, if it chance to bite and sting you, shall make you
look up to that brazen Serpent lifted up, and you shall be healed. If you be
tempted, he will give the issue: Only thou must so be confident that you
presume not; 1 Cor. 10.
so fear, that you despair not. Faith and Fear together make a blessed mixture;
Fear being as the lungs, and Faith as the heart, which will get an heat, and
over-heat, as one speaks, if by Fear, as by cool air, it be not tempered. If
then Faith uphold thy Fear, and Fear temper thy Faith, though thou take many a
fall by the way, yet at last thou shall come to thy journeys end. Though the
Devil shake thy Faith, yet God will protect it: Though he for a while steal
away this precious Jewel, the joy of thy salvation, yet God will restore it.
Which is my second part, the Person whose act it is; Restore thou.

It is not the tongue of an Angel can comfort David. The Prophet might awake
him, but raise him up he could not. Nathans Parable had been but as a Proverb
of the dust, and his Thou art the man had sooner forced a frown then a tear
from a King, had not Gods Spirit fitted his heart, had not the holy Ghost been
the Interpreter. For it is not so with the Heart as it is with the Eye. The Eye
indeed cannot make light nor colors, yet it can open it self, and receive
them, but the Heart neither can produce this Joy, neither can it open it self
to receive it: But God must pulsare, and aperire; knock, and open; take away
the bars, and open the doors of it, and purge and cleanse it. He must write in
it the forgiveness of sins, and shine upon it with the light of his
countenance, or else the weight of Sin will still oppress it. This Joy arises
out of the forgiveness of our sins: Now such is the nature of Sin, that though
actus transit, yet reatus manet, as Lombard speaks. Sin no longer is, then it
is a committing; but the guilt of Sin still remains; like a blazing star,
which, though it self be extinct, yet leaves its infection behind it. For to
rise from sin is not only to cease from the act of sinning, but to repair our
former estate; not only to be rid of the disease, but to enjoy our former
health. Now in sin, as Aquinas says, there are two things, peccati macula, and
poenae reatus; the Blot and Stain of sin, which does darken the luster of
Grace. And we, who made this stain, can blot it out again. It is lost labor to
wash our selves. Can we Leopards lick out our own spots? Can we purge our
selves with hyssope, and be clean? Can we wash our black and polluted souls,
and make them whiter than snow? And for the Guilt and Punishment due to sin, we
all stand quaking at God's Tribunal, we look toward the mercy-seat: and if God
extremely mark what is done amiss, whose joints of his loins are not loosed?
whose knees smite not one against another? who is there able to abide it? God
is our Judge, and he alone must quit us. He is offended, and he must forgive
us. Come, and let us return unto him: for he has suffered us to be spoiled,
and he will heal us; to be wounded, and he will bind us up. After two days he
will revive us, and the third he will raise us up. He is our Creditour, and
has taught us to pray unto him to forgive us our debts. Every sin properly is
against him; either immediately, when we sin against the first Table; or
mediately, when we sin against the second, when we strike God through our
neighbor's side, and so by breaking the Law wrong the Lawgiver. And therefore
he only can forgive our sins, against whom our sins are most properly
committed. Nathan indeed pronounced David's pardon, Deus transtulit peccatum,
and so may be said to remit his sin ministerialiter, by way of office and
ministry; but God did it autoritative, by way of power, right and authority.
Nathan had his commission from God: and if comfort had not shined from thence,
David had still lain in sorrow, and as yet remained in the dust of Death. Ten
months were now passed since his sin was committed, and yet we read of no
compunction. He lay stupefied in sin, and was like a man sleeping in the midst
of his enemies. Oh then whose heart can conceive those thoughts which possessed
him when he awaked? His river of tears could not now express his grief. He saw
God, who was wont to guide him in his paths and direct him in his ways, now
withdrawing himself, hiding his face from him, and leaving him under the burden
of his sin. And high time it was to call him back again, to seek him by
importunity of prayer; to send after him sighs and groans; to sow in tears,
that he might reap in joy.

Look now upon David, whosoever thou art that carriest Man and Frailty about
thee. Behold him lying on the ground, see him pressed down with the burden of
his sin; and then think his case thine. Think the time may come when thou
may have no feeling of Christ at all, and thy poor soul may be as a man
desolate in the night, without comfort; that it may be beaten down to the dust,
and thy belly cleave unto the earth. Tell me, whom then will thou fly unto for
succor? what balm will thou search out to refresh thee? The Pope may be
liberal, and open his treasuries, and let fly an Indulgence: But it is not a
Pardon from him can help thee. Alas! miserable comfort is this. A merry tale
well told is far better. Yet it may be thou hopest to make the law of
Unrighteousness thy strength, to drown thy sorrows in a cup of wine; to leave
them behind thee, and lose them amongst merry company. In this thou do but
like the Dog, break the chain, and draw a great part of it after thee: O then,
if thou fall with David, with David trust in the Lord. What if his Jealousy
burn like fire? let thy tears quench it. Let thy prayers like pillars of smoke
mount upwards, and pierce the clouds, and offer an holy violence to God. Then
when Hope is almost changed into Despair, thou shall find Christ, and feel him
coming again; then Faith shall revive, and lay faster hold on him; then shall
the joy of thy salvation be restored. And when thy soul is heavy, and thy heart
is disquieted, and thy bowels vexed within thee, then will he look upon thy
misery, and cause his face to shine; and the peace of conscience, like a sweet
sleep, shall fall upon thee.

I come now, in the third place, to speak of the Person, King David: Restore to
me. And who can look upon him but thorough tears: Who can behold him, and not
look down unto his own steps? Whose pride can lift him up so high as to make
him think the Devil cannot reach him, and pull him down? Or is not David sent
to us as Nathan was to him, to tell us by his example that, unless God put
under his hand, he that stands surest may take a fall, and that he who thinks
himself like mount Sion may be moved? Surely if there be such Perfectionists,
such proud Pharisees, that dare fling a stone at an adultress, and proclaim
themselves without sin; if there be any whose Purity dare stand out with God,
and answer him more then for one of a thousand; they might well take leave to
demand that privilege which that cursed Sect in Saxony bragged of, of whom
Sleidan reports: Who boasted that they had private conference with God, and a
command from him to kill all the wicked of the earth, and so to make a new
world, whose purity should plead for it self, and not need the help of a
Mediator. But these men were possessed with more then a Novation spirit, and
in their adventure to hell out-bid the (...), Which the manners of many
turbulent spirits in our Church have long since Englished; Whose Religion, as
Nazianzene speaks, was (...), whose piety was boasting, whose purity was
impure; We craftily made, as he after observes, the elegancy of the name a bait
to catch the ignorant and unwary multitude. Cursed and cruel men, who have not
so much pity in them as the Levite in the Gospel! He saw the man wounded,
vouchsafed him a look, and then passed by: These by a witty and new kind of
cruelty, as Cyprian calls it, till him that is already wounded, take away even
the hope of recovery, and oppose the thunder of an excommunication even to the
least noise of sin, refusing the penitency and contrition of their brother, and
denying the mercy of their Father which is in heaven; justly deserving a hell,
because they threaten it; and the surest heirs of damnation, because they make
all others so. But what? is this the state of Mankind, that we must either be
viler then the worms of the earth, only fuel for hellfire, or else stand out
with God, and contend for purity with the Most High? No, foolish Sectary, we
have better learned Christ. Each Christian, if he look upon David, will quickly
see upon what ground he stands; and that if every fall after Baptism were as
far as hell, Gods promise would be suspected, and Repentance, which is offered
to the greatest sinner, would be proposed to mock, not to comfort us; like a
staff held out to look on, not to help us; or like a mess of meat upon a dead
man's grave, for which we should be never awhit the better. We behold the Saints
throwing down their crowns before the Throne, and can we either, with the
Anabaptist, think we can attain to a perfect Rev. 4.
degree of regeneration, or, with the supererogating Papist, rob God of his
honor, pull heaven unto us, and make it not Gods gift but our own conquest?
What suckling in Religion knows not to distinguish between perfection of Parts
and perfection of Degrees? We know our Sanctification is universal, not total;
in every part, but in part. Our Understanding is enlightened, yet there remains
some darkness; our Will rectified, yet some perverseness; our Affections ordered
and subdued, yet prone to disobedience; our whole man sanctified, but not
wholly. We propose to our selves not this or that, but every commandment, to
observe. We compose and order our life to the rule, and shun whatsoever is
repugnant to it; but we do but begin, not finish. We make Perfection our
prayer, not our boast; and expect it not here, but in heaven. One while we have
need of the cords of love to lead us, another while of the thunderbolts of Gods
judgments to terrify us: One while the thought of hell must beat us from sin,
another while the love of heaven must lead us in the paths of righteousness:
Now his promises, now his threatenings must excite us. Let Fulgentius conclude
this point; Perfecti sumus spe futurae glorificationis, imperfectionere
corruptionis: It is in his Book ad Monimum: We are perfect in respect of the
hope of future Glory; imperfect, if we consider this body of death, this burden
of corruption: perfect in expectation of the reward, the crown of glory;
imperfect, as we are in the battle, in the race, fighting and running to obtain
this Crown. And this was St. Paul's Perfection, Let as many as be perfect, that
is, in some degree, and Phil. 3. 15.
in respect of others. For v. 12. he accounts not himself to have obtained, or
to be already perfect. And v. 13. he professes, Brethren, I account not my
self that I have attained: one thing I do; I forget that which is behind, and
endeavor my self to that which is before. Now then let not Frailty and
Infirmity dispute with its Creator. He that once was taken up into the third
heaven, had so much earth about him as to feel the combat between the Flesh and
the Spirit. He that was a chosen vessel had some cracks in him, and had fallen
to pieces, and lost that heavenly treasure, had not God preserved it. Job's
answer best fits a Christian's mouth, Behold, I am vile: what shall I answer
thee? Job 40. 4.
I will lay my hand upon my mouth. Yet look up too. Let not Desperation keep
thee down; but let the power of godly Sorrow lift thee up again. Know that to
confess thy sin and to repent, is as it were to make the Angels a banquet, and
to send more joy to heaven. Let Repentance reconcile thee with God: then though
the Devil strive to cover thee over in the grave of sin, yet thou shall come
forth: though thy bones be broken, yet they shall rejoice; and to thee now, as
to David then, the joy of thy salvation shall be restored; The last part, the
Object, Restore unto me the joy of thy salvation.

David's request is for Peace of conscience, the joy of Gods salvation; that
which St. Paul calls joy in the holy Ghost. The Septuagint render it by the
Romans 14. 17.
Greek word (...), which signifies more then joy, even exultation, and
rejoicing, and triumphing for joy; like that of the Church Psalm. 126. When the
Lord brought again the captivity of Sion, we were like them that dream. Then
was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy. It is the highest
degree, almost excess and surfeit, of Joy. God may let me feel it, but express
it I never can. Tell me, Christian, (or indeed can thou tell me?) what joy
thou conceivest at this spiritual banquet. Does doubt arise within thee because
Christ is not present? See, here he has left a pledge and pawn behind him, his
blessed Sacrament; Take, eat; this is his body: Thou shall never hunger. Take,
drink; this is his blood: Thou shall never thirst. Do thou believe? Believe
then, he is nearer to thee in these outward elements then the Papists would
make him; beyond the fiction of Transubstantiation. When the Priest delivers to
thee the sanctified Bread, let thy meditation lead thy Savior from his Cradle
to his Cross. His whole life was to lead thy captivity captive. And now with
the eyes of faith behold him stretched out upon the Cross, and think thy self
unburdened, and that heavy weight laid upon thy Saviors shoulders, and then
thou can not choose but suppose thou heardst him groan; It was a heavy burden
that fetched that groan from him. A strange thing! thy sins, which were not yet
committed, pierced him. Yet let not despair take thee. Anon thou shall hear
that triumphant and victorious noise, It is finished; A voice which rent the
vail of the Temple in twain, clove the stones, made the earth to quake, and was
able to have changed not that place alone (to what once it was, if we may
believe some Geographers) but the whole world into a Paradise. When the Priest
offers thee the Cup, think then thou see Christ bleeding, and pouring out non
guttam sed undam sanguinis, not drops but streams of blood. Think thou see
per vulnera viscera, through his wounded side the bowels of Compassion. And
then think thou art partaker of his promise already, and that now thou drinkest
with him in his Fathers kingdom. Tell me now: Where art thou? Is not this to
be rapt into the third heaven; Now thou can call God Father; now thou art
sure of thy perseverance; now thou can think of hell without fear and horror.
Thou can make thy bed of sickness look sorrowful only to thy friends: and,
whilst they stand weeping and howling by thy bed side; thou shall have no other
cause of lamentation but that they lament thee. And then in the midst of
shreeks and outcryes, when with trembling hands they close up thy eyes as if
they close up their hopes, thy soul shall pass away, and settle it self in
Abraham's bosom. If this be not joy indeed, and exultation and triumphing for
joy, if this be not above an (...), tell me, What Paradise shall we search for
it? where shall we find it? When my cogitations settle upon this blessed
object, methinks I see a Christian in his white and triumphant robes, walking
upon the pavement of heaven, laughing at and scorning the vanities of the
world, looking upon them as an aged man would on childrens toys, beginning,
with Nazianzene, (...), to be a fellow-citizen with the Angels, and, with
Cyprian, miserere saeculi; to look down upon the world with pity and
compassion; being even now a type of a glorified Saint, and the resemblance of
an Angel. I could loose my self in this Paradise; I could build a Tabernacle
upon this Mount Tabor: for even but to speak of it is delight. My Conclusion
shall be in Prayer.

O thou who art the Father of this joy, and God of all consolation, whose
kingdom consists not in meats and drinks, but in joy unspeakable, even the joy
of the holy Ghost; prevent us with thy mercy, that we fall not. But if, with
David, we fall, in mercy restore us. Seal unto us the forgiveness of our sins,
and fill our hearts with this joy!

The Tenth SERMON.
2 COR. VI. 1. We then as workers together with him, [or as helpers] beseech
you also, that you receive not the grace of God in vain.
WE begin as the Church begins. And we cannot begin better, nor choose a more
exact method then that we find in domo doctrinae (as the Chaldee Paraphrase
calls the Church, upon the first of the Canticles) in the house of wisdom and
learning. No method to the method of the Church, nor any language so delightful
to the child as the language of the Mother. We need say no more. The authority
of the Church makes good the choice of my Text. But yet we cannot but observe
the wisdom of the Church in fitting the Text to the Time. For as it is one
commendation of an Orator apta dicere, to fit his speech to the matter he
speaks of, so is it also opportuna dicere, to level and apply it to the time.
The Orator will tell us, Non idem signorum concentus procedente ad praelium
exercitu, idem receptui carmen, An alarm and a retreat have different notes;
nor is the sound of the Trumpet the same when we bid battle as when we leave
it. This time of Lent, these thirty six days, which is Quadrage sima proprie
dieta, as Bellarmine speaks, the whole time of our clean Lent, the Church of
Christ has culled out and set apart as the tith of our days, says St.
Bernard, as the tith of the year, says Aquinas, as the tith of our life, says
Gerson; wherein she calls upon her children in a more especial manner not only
(...), as Julian speaks, to wage war with their belly and appetite, by fasting
and abstinence, but to fight against themselves, their irregular desires and
inordinate lusts, to make a retreat from Sin, and to fight the battles of the
Lord of hosts. I confess, as Clemens speaks of a Christian man's life, (...),
the whole term of it should be a feast, a holy day unto the Lord, wherein he
should continually offer up the sweet smelling sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving: so the Lent of a Christian man should take up not forty days
only but all the days and hours of a Christian man. But since we are so
willing to forget our selves, and suffer our souls to gather rust; since few
men would fast at any time if there were not statum jejunium, an allotted time
of fasting; the Church calls upon us in the words of the Apostle, (...),
Behold, now is the accepted time, now an occasion worth the laying hold of,
(...), now is the day of salvation, a time of fasting, to prepare our selves for
the great Feast; a time of Lent, to prepare us for Easter. And as it is
prescribed the Jews Deuteronomy. 20. 2. that when they were come near unto the battle,
the Priest should come forth to encourage the people: And in all ages Captains
have had their Orations to their Soldiers, quibus animos addant, to make them
bold and stout in the battle: So does the Church bring in St. Paul, (...), as
Nazianzene speaks, the Captain and Champion of all the faithful Soldiers of
Christ Jesus, bespeaking the Corinthians, and in them the whole Christian world
throughout all Generations, now at this time to put on the armor of light; and,
as they have given up their names unto Christ, so to receive regium
characterem, the Imperial mark and character of Christ; to engrave it not on
their arm, but on their heart; non desinere esse quod esse dicuntur, as the
Imperial laws require of Governors and Guardians of Cities, not to leave off to
be what they are said to be; to please him who has chosen them to be 2 Timothy 2.
4.
Soldiers, to labor, but as good Soldiers; and in the words of my Text, To
receive the grace of God; but that is not all; so to receive it, that they
receive it not in vain.

I know this Text by Bellarmine and others is applied to this time of Lent: And
so it may very well. For by this we are taught the right use of Fasting, and
how to improve this time, this short time, this fleeting time, these forty
days to Aeternity it self. But being unwilling to draw the words from their
native and primitive sense, and intending to make that the subject and work of
the next day, and now only to glance at it by the way; I will take the words
(...), as they ly in St. Paul, and in that sense which he first intended. And
then I may call my Text St. Paul's fidei-commissum, his Legacy, which he leaves
as a feoffment in trust to all posterity; Breviarium totius Evangelii, a
Breviary of the whole Gospel; a short Catechism for Christians, which whosoever
learns by heart is a true Gospeller indeed. Not to receive the grace of God in
vain, is signaculum super brachium, a signet upon the arm, and signaculum super
cor, a seal upon the heart, the true seal and character of a Christian. Ecce
panem; parate fauces, as St. Bernard says, Behold, here is the bread of life!
Take it down by attention, and digest it by meditation and practice: And with
me consider first the Duty proposed by way of negation, shall I say? or
caution, Receive not the grace of God in vain. For the Civilians will tell us,
Vetita quadam exceptione corrigunt quae jubentur; A negative precept by a kind
of cautelous exception does restrain and correct a positive. To receive the
grace of God is a Christians best Recipe: for with it he receives all things.
It is his Wealth, to supply his poverty; his Strength, to establish his
weakness; his Happiness, to sweaten all the misery of the world. It is (...); a
catholic remedy against all evil. But not to receive it in vain, is a
restriction, a direction how we should receive it. It is not in the gift, but
in the hand; not in the meat, but in the stomach; not in the physic, but in
the Recipiatis; not in the grace, but in the receiving of it. Volenti est
salus, nolenti supplicium, says St. Augustine, As I receive it, it may be my
physic; and as I receive it, it may be my poison. Great care then to be had to
the Recipiatis, how we receive it. But then, in the second place, consider St.
Paul's Motive or Insinuation. He draws his argument ab officio, from his high
calling and dignity; (...), We as fellow-workers together with God exhort and
beseech you; We who have obtained a dignity above the very Angels themselves,
(...), working together with God, as God by us, we from God, and God by us,
beseech you. For this end we received our Commission, that you might not
receive the grace of God in vain. So the Ne recipiatis is both an Exhortation
and a Command. Potestas, cum rogat, jubet; The Insinuations of Authority are
Commands; their Entreaties, Precepts. But this circumstance perhaps will be
neither seasonable, nor welcome. The dignity and high calling of a Priest is no
argument now-adayes, but only then when Malice can draw it close to meet with
our infirmities. We are never so high as Angels till we are lower than Men,
even like to the Beasts that perish. Then argumentum a persona, an argument
from our person, from our office and dignity, is readily taken up; and we are
very skillful in these Topics. Humanum aliquid patimur? Do we betray our
selves to be men of the like passions and infirmities with you? Do we fall like
other men? then, and then only, we are Angels. Then Lucifer is fallen from
heaven, the worker has forgot his rule, and the helper is in the ditch. When
we sow our spiritual things, we are not helpers: When we should reap your
temporal things, we are not helpers: When we do not help our selves, then we
are, and we hear it loud enough. When our mouth is open unto you, and our
affections vehement and vocal, then our mouths are open against us, and our
titles of honor accuse us: A main reason, I persuade my self, that the Ne
recipiatis finds so hard an entrance into your hearts, and that so many receive
the grace of God in vain.

But I will wave this circumstance, and in this spare you. And indeed the Duty
here, the Ne recipiatis, is of such consequence that it commends its self
without a Preface: Nor needs there any motive where the prescript is Salvation.
Maltum valet oration remedio intenta, says Seneea; That speech is powerful
which is fixed and intentive and levelled on the good of the hearer. It is easy,
one would think, to persuade a sick man to be well, a poor man to be rich, and
a wretched man to be happy. Not to receive a gift in vain, what need there any
art to commend it? We will therefore fix our meditations here, and carry them
along by these steps or degrees. We will show you 1. What this Grace of God is;
2. That received it must be. And these two will serve for an introduction to
the last, and bring in the Caution, Ne recipiatis, which casts a kindly
reflection on, and sweetens and seasons both the other; For what is Grace, if it
be not received? and what is the recipiatis, if it be in vain? Of these in
their order.

There is nothing more talked of then Grace, nothing less understood, nothing
more abused. Every man fills his mouth with it, justus ad aequitatem, perjurus
ad fraudem; the upright man for honesty, the perjured man for deceit, the
humble for piety, the proud for aemulation, Ebrius ad phialam, mendicus ad
januam, the Drunkard at his cups, the Beggar at the gate. The Tradesman in his
shop. The Schools are intricate, and the Fathers profuse in this argument.
Totius mundi una vox Gratia est, Men mention nothing oftener; as if they had
studied nothing else. By Grace we are good, by Grace we are rich, and by Grace
we are honorable: and if we be evil, it is for want of Grace. But bring the
greatest sort of men to a trial, and we shall find them no better proficients
in the study of Grace then Boethias's Scholar in Poetry, who having a long time
studied Virgil asked at length whether Aeneas was a man or woman. Not to trouble
you with curious speculations, which commonly make things more obscure by
interpretation, and the Commentary harder then the Text; the Grace of God is
(...), has diverse significations. It is taken for the favor of God, inherent
in God himself; and it is taken for sanctifying Grace, inherent in the
regenerate person, a gift flowing from the former: It is taken for Habitual
Grace, and it is taken for Inherent Grace. In the language of the Schools it is
auxilium speciale, that special and immediate furtherance by which God moves us
to will and to do; a supernatural quality, which sweetly and readily directs us
in our way unto the end, by illuminating our mind, by enflaming our love, by
strengthening our hand, that we see how to work, and are willing and able to
work; the three necessary requisites to the performance of every good action.
It works in us, without us; and it works in us, with us; It prevents, and it
follows us. By it we begin, and by it we persevere, and by it we are brought
unto glory. By it, says St. Augustine, we are healed, and by it we are made
active, by it we are called, and by it we are crowned. And this is that which
St. Paul mentions 1 Cor. 15. 10. By the grace of God I am that I am; and his
grace was not in vain. For see the blessed and fruitful effects it wrought, in
the next words, I labored more abundantly then they all. Yet startling as it
were, and afraid of the very mention of himself, he corrects himself, yet not
I, but the grace of God which was with me. Would you know what materials Grace
had to work upon? He tells you ver. 9. that he was a persecutor of the Church
of Christ. Strange materials to square an Apostle out of, and a statue of
Christ. Primus pietatis aries Evangelii retusus est mucro, says St. Hierome;
He who was as a battering Ram or Engine to shake the Gospel, by the grace of
God had his edge taken off and his force abated, and was made a pillar of that
Truth which he sought to ruin. Thus can the Spirit of God work miraculously
where it pleases, and, to sow the seed of grace, alter the complexion and
nature of the soil. Though the heart be as hard as flint, and barren as the
sand, he can make it as soft as wax, and as fertile as Canaan or the Paradise
of God. Indeed no man can deny the operation of Grace but he that feels it not:
and such a man's denial can be no argument that there is no Grace: for his very
want of Grace confutes it. Noctua non praejudicat aquilae, The Batt does not
prejudice the light which the Eagle sees: Nor would we credit a blind man that
should tell us there were no Sun.

This Grace then we must acknowledge: But this is not the Grace meant in the
Text; nor indeed (as we are made believe by some) can it be. For this Grace,
say they, ideo datur ut non recipiatur in vanum, is therefore given that it may
not be received in vain. When it is offered, it is received; and when it is
received, it is received to that end and purpose for which it was offered. No
heart is stone enough to beat it back, no soul so stubborn as to resist it:
neither height, nor depth, nor the Devil, nor Sin it self can evacuate it. The
Recipiatis is unavoidable, and the in vanum impossible. And every man is a St.
Paul, a privileged person, not sweetly watered with abundance, but violently
driven on with a torrent and inundation of Grace. We must therefore find out
another sense of the word: Although, for ought that can be said, the
Exhortation may concern us in this sense also, and teach us to hear when God
speaks, to open when he knocks, not to be deaf to his thunder, nor to hide our
selves from his lightning, nor to quench the spirit, nor (...), to resist and
fall cross with Acts 7. 51.
the holy Ghost. But in the Scripture two words we find by which the Graces of
God are expressed. There is (...), here in the Text; and (...), spiritual
gifts. Plainly, there are more common and necessary Graces, which 1 Cor. 12.
concur to sanctification of life, to uprightness and common honesty: And there
are peculiar graces, as Quickness of Will, Depth of Understanding, Skill in
languages; or supernatural, as gifts of Tongues, gifts of Healing, of Miracles,
of Prophecy, and the like. These are not (...), but (...), rather gifts then
graces, and are distributed but to certain persons in such measure as seems
best to Gods Wisdom. Why men are not as strong as Samson, or as learned as
Solomon, why they prophecy not as Jeremy, and work not miracles as Paul, all
this is from God. But why men are not righteous as Noah, devout as David,
zealous as Elias, we must find the cause in our selves, and not lay the defect
on God. Now the Grace in the Text is none of all these, but is that gratia
Evangelii, the Grace of reconciliation by Christ, the Doctrine of the Gospel,
which Christ commanded to be preached to all Nations. And in this sense it is
most frequently used in holy Scripture, in the Epistles of St. Paul, where we
so often find it placed in opposition to the Works of the Law. This is it which
he so often commends unto us: This is it which he here exhorts us to receive.
This is it for the propagation of which he was in afflictions, necessities,
distresses, in stripes, in prisons, in labors, in tumults; which are a part of
the catalogue of his sufferings in this Chapter. And this is not only (...),
but (...), a grace, and a gift too, without which all other gifts and graces,
aut nihil sunt, aut nihil prosunt, deserve not that name: Strength is but
weakness, Learning is but folly, Prophesies are but dreams, Miracles are
sluggish, all are not worth the receiving, or are received (...), in vain.
Shall I say it is a greater gift then that robe of Righteousness with which God
clothed Adam in Paradise? It so far exceeds it that we dare not compare them.
There is a MULTO MAGIS set upon it by St. Paul Romans 5. 15. and a NON SIC, Not
as the offense, so is the free gift; The Loss not so great as the Recovery.
Nay, cui Angelorum? What speak we of Adam? To whom of the Angels did God give
such a gift? What a glory would we count it out of Nothing to be made an Angel,
a Seraphim? By this gift, by the Grace of Christ, we are raised from Sin, above
the perfection and beauty of any created substance whatsoever, above the
Hierarchy of Angels and Archangels. A Christian, as he is united to Christ, is
above the Seraphims. For take the substance of a Seraphim by it self, and
compare it to a Man reconciled to God by this Grace, and the difference will be
as great as between a Picture and a Man. An Artificer may draw his own Picture:
but he can only express his likeness, his color, his lineaments; he cannot
represent his better part, his Soul, which constitutes and makes him what he
is: Take all the creatures of the Universe, and they are but weak and faint
shadows and adumbrations of Divine perfection. God is not so expressed by an
Angel as by a Christian, who is his lively image, as the Son is the image of
his Father, by a kind of fellowship and communication of nature. The Creature
represents God as a Statue does the Emperor; but a Christian, as the Son his
Father, between whom there is not only likeness, but identity, and a
participation of the same nature. For by this gift, by these promises, we are
made partakers of the Divine nature, says St. Peter. ^ Pet. 1. 4.
And as a Father takes more delight to look upon his Son then upon his Picture
and Figure, so God looks more graciously upon a Christian then upon any created
essence, then upon the nature of Angels. He that gave the Gift, he that was the
Gift, pray for us John 17. 21, 22. that we may be all one; and as his Father is
in him, and he in his Father, so we may be one in them, as they are one. This
is the Gift by which God did (...), says the Apostle, gather together and
re-establish the decayed nature of Man; (...), says St. Chrysostom, knit and
join together, Heaven and Earth. And as Christ spoke of John Baptist Matthew. 11.
14. Hic est Elias, si vultis recipere; He shall be Elias to you, if you will
receive him; so, Haec est gratia Dei; The Gospel, the Reconciliation made by
Christ, is the Grace of God, if we will receive it. Which is my next part.

And what is a Gift if it be not received? Like a mess of pottage on a dead
man's grave, like Light to the blind, like music to the deaf. The dead man
feeds not, the blind man sees not, the deaf man hears not. What were all the
beauty of the Firmament, if there were no eye to descry it? What is the Grace
of God without Faith? The Receiving of it is it which makes it a Grace indeed,
which makes it Gospel. If it be not received, it is (...), in vain. An
unbelieving heart turns this bread into gravel, this honey into gall; and, as
much as in him lies, does not only crucify but annihilate the Lord of Life. We
usually compare Faith to a Hand, which is reached forth to receive this Gift.
Without a Hand a Jewel is a trifle, and the treasure of both the Indies is
nothing: and without Faith the Gospel is but Christus cum sua fabula, as the
Heathen spoke in reproach, but a fable or relation. And therefore an absolute
necessity there is that we receive it. For without this receipt all other
receipts are not worth the casting up. Our Understanding receives light, to
mislead her; our Will power, to overthrow her; our Afflictions which are (...),
incorporeal hands, receive nothing but vanity. Our moral goodness makes us not
good: our Philosophy is deceit. Our acquisite Habits lift us no further then
the place where they grow, that is, Earth and Nature. But with this gift we
receive all things; we receive the favor and gracious countenance of our
Creator; who in Christ is well pleased, and in him looks upon us as the Emperor
did behold wars and slaughter and ruin and desolation in a large Emerald,
whose color tempered the object, and made it appear less horrible then it was.
Unum est donum, and unius sunt omnia dona; It is but one gift, but it turns all
things into it self, and makes them a gift. All the works of Nature, all the
wonders of Grace, all the Saints are shut up in this Receipt. All happiness, all
misery, that which we long for, that which we run from, that which we roar
under, with this Grace is a gift. Nay, our very Sins are made useful and
beneficial to us by the light of the Gospel; as Light cast upon a dark body,
which it cannot illuminate, is doubled by reflection. And therefore every man in
respect of Grace should be ad instar materiae, like as the Matter is to the
Form, which Plato calls (...), which comes from the word (...) in the Text, the
receptacle of the Form, should be so inclinable to receive it as if it could
have no exsistence without it; should even labor and travel, as the Apostle
speaks, till Christ be fully formed Gal. 4. 19.
in him. For what though we receive the good things of this world? There is a
Nuno autem follows them, Now art thou tormented in the end of that receipt.
What if we receive Honor? Shame follows at the very heels of it. What if we
receive those ornaments of the mind which Philosophy calls Virtues? They are
but splendida peccata, but glorious sins, like Gloworms, which in the night
cast some brightness, but will not warm us. Tell we receive this grace, we are
nothing; we are worse then nothing, but Nehustitan, a lump of brass, tell by
this Grace we are reformed and transfigured into a statue of Christ. I need not
stand longer on this point; and I intended it but as an introduction. For I am
sure all here have received this Grace, at least profess they have. And there
is as great danger in receiving it as in unbelief. For the Philosopher will
tell us, Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis: All is not in the
gift; the greatest matter is in the manner of receiving it. The Gospel is grace
indeed; but it will not save a Devil, nor an obstinate offender. Stomachus
vitiatus, says Seneca, alimentum in causam doloris trahit, A foul stomach
corrupts all that it receives, and turns that meat, which should nourish the
body into a disease: and a corrupt heart poisons the very water of life, ut
evangelium Christi sit evangelium hominis, says St. Augustine, it alters the
very nature of the Gospel, and makes it not the Gospel of Christ but of Man.
Judas receives a sop, and with it the Devil. The grand mistake of the world is
in the manner of receiving Christ. For as in the dogmatical part of
Christianity we find that in former times they could not agree in the manner of
receiving Christ, (...), but some would receive him after this manner, some
after another, they knew not how themselves; some a created Christ, others a
half-Christ, some through a conduit-Pipe, others less visible then in a type,
in an aereal fantastical body, a Christ, and not a Christ; a Christ divided,
and a Christ contracted; and (...), says Nazianzene, many Christ's, indeed as
good none at all: So in the practical part we often err, and dangerously, in
our receiving him. We say Anathema to the Arians, and Manichees, and
Anabaptists: and let them pass with the censure of the Church upon them: But
how do we receive him? Our own conscience will tell us; with his curled locks
and spicy cheeks, with his flagons and his apples; to save sinners, not to
instruct them; with grace as much as he will, but with no command or law; a
Physician, that should heal us, without a prescript; a King, without a Scepter;
a Son, that would be kistt, (we like that well) but not be angry. Nor can we
now impute this to the Gospel and the Grace of God: for that is (...), of but
one shape and hiew, and presents salvation to every receiver. The fault is not
in the Grace, but in our receiving it: As we do not blame the Table for a rude
piece that is drawn upon it, but the Painter, who forgot his art. The Stoics
conceive that every thing has two handles, and as men take hold either of one
or other, so they prove either delightful or irksome. The truth is, the Gospel
has not two handles; but we rather have two hands, diverse manners of
receiving it. To one it is the savor of life unto life; and to others, the
savor of death unto death. Great care then must be taken how we receive it,
that we may not receive it in vain. We must receive 2 Cor. ^. 16.
this grace of God to that end it was given. I know you will quickly say, that
was to save us. For this end Christ came into the world: we have Scripture for
it. The grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all 2 Tit 2. 11.
men. But does it not follow; teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly
lusts? and that is Scripture too. We must receive it as Law as well as Physic.
His, Do, ut des; and facio, ut facias: God gives us this gift, that we may give
him our obedience; and he has done this for us, that we may do something, even
work out our salvation with fear and trembling; This Grace then we must receive
both to save us and instruct us; as a royal Pardon, Jam. 2. 8.
and as a royal Law; To interline the Pardon, and despise the Law, makes a
nullity: and this is (...), to receive in vain.

And in the first place, a Pardon we must not interline. For to mix and blend
it with the law of Works, or our own Merits, is to disannul and make it void,
and, in St. Paul's phrase, (...), to cast away the grace of God. By Gal. 2. 21.
grace you are saved, and not by works, says the Apostle. Works, though they
be conditio justificandi, a condition required of a justified person, yet
Ephesians. 2. 8, 9.
are not pars justificationis, cannot be brought in as a part or helping cause
of our Justification. Satisfaction and Merits are but false interlineary
glosses, and corrupt the Text: and to receive the grace of God with this
mixture is in Tertullians phrase Galaticare, to be as foolish as the Galatians.
For indeed a great folly it is, when God has plainly revealed his will, when
he has concluded all under sin, and St. Paul proves both against Jew and
Gentile that all have sinned; when God is pleased to justify us freely by his
Grace, then to bring in our inherent Righteousness to join with Grace, as Romans
3. 24.
if we were unwilling to be too far engaged to God's Mercy. It is true indeed,
every good act does justify a man so far as it is good, and God so far esteems
them holy and good. He takes notice of his own graces in his children: He
registers the Patience of Job, the Zeal of Phinehas, the Devotion of David. A
Cup of cold water, a Mite flung into his treasury shall have its reward. But
yet all the good works of all the Saints in the world cannot satisfy for the
breach of the Law, no more then a Traitor can redeem his Treason against the
King by giving an alms, or, which is more, by dying for his Country. The point
is plain and easy, delivered in terminis in Scripture, urged, proved, and
strongly confirmed by St. Paul almost in every Epistle, that all is from Grace:
Et cum de voluntate Dei constat, omnis de merito quaestio vana est; When we
know Gods will, what dispute we any longer of Merit? But such is our
ingratitude and curiosity that we will not take Gods Grace as we find it: we
will not take Gods gifts in the building, but we beat and work them out into
what form we please: we come and stamp them; and be the piece what metal it
will, we set our image and superscription upon it. God in Scripture sets these
two terms, Grace and Works, at extreme opposition; but by a trick of wit we
have learnt to work them into one piece, making a good work meritorious because
it is of Grace; as Pelagius of old confounded Nature and Grace, because even
Nature it self is a Grace: A flat contradiction. For if it be of grace, how
does it merit? unless we will say that the Gift deserves something of the
Giver, or that a charitable man is indebted to a beggar for the penny and alms
which he gave him. I have said enough to clear the point, which has been too
much obscured with needless disputes. I will not say with Calvine Diabolica
illa ars quae Scholasticae nomen obtinet, that devilish art of wrangling, which
we call School Divinity, has put out the light of this truth; nor with Martin
Luther, Theologia Scholastica est matter ignorantiae, that Scholastical
disputations are the mother of ignorance: but, as Pliny spoke of the Graecians,
Cum gens ista literas suis dedisset, omnia corrupit, they have corrupted the
Truth, and put her in such a dress, that we cannot know her: they have shut up
this doctrine in perplexed obscurity, which before was plain and easy to the
understanding. For what has been observed of the study of Philosophy, is true
also in the pursuit of Divine knowledge; When men made Wisdom the only aim and
end of their studies, then was Philosophy referred to its proper end: but when
they used it only to fill up their time, or satisfy their ambition, or delight
their will, then Philosophy lost her complexion and strength, and degenerated
into folly: then Diogenes got him a tub, and Epicurus a swarm of Atoms: then
the Stoics brought in their Decrees and Paradoxes: then were there mill
familiarum nomina and discrimina, so many sects that it is not easy to name
them: and some there were who did show the diversity of their opinions by
outward signs alone, by Weeping and Laughing. So in Divinity we find it, that
Truth never suffered tell she was made a matter of wit and ambition, tell out
of private respects Policy was made a moderator and stater of questions; then
for one Justification we had two, nay three: then meritum de condigno, and de
congruo, Merits of Condignity and Congruity, of Worthiness and Fitness, were
brought in to help at a dead lift: And, that they may appear more glorious,
tinguntur sanguine Christi, pains have been taken to dye them over with the
blood of Christ: and in these red colors they are presented, which they
borrowed from art, and not from Scripture. Sure I am, in St. Paul's phrase this
is to cast away the grace of God, and to evacuate the death of Christ; this is
against the nature of Grace, which blended with humane Satisfaction and Merit
is no more Grace, this is against the evidence of the Prophet Habakkuk often
repeated by St. Paul, The Just shall live by faith, or, as some render it, The
Just by faith, shall live. And if their Divinity on their deathbed be not
better then that in their Schools, I fear me, there will be a Frustra. For thus
to receive the grace of God, is to deny it, or rather to despise it: and to
despise it, I think I may boldly say, is to receive it in vain. Beloved, if it
were but for this alone, for this derogation from the Grace of God, yet even
for this alone might we justify our separation from the Church of Rome, and
send home the loud imputations of Heresy and Schism to her own gates, where
first they were conceived. For where false conclusions are obtruded for truths,
or truths corrupted with false additions there to consent were conspiracy; and
open contestation is not faction or schism, but Christian animosity. They
rather are guilty of the schism who made it necessary: It was a weak and
foolish speech of Bosius in Tully, who professed that, if his friend Gracchus
would bid, he would set fire on the Capitol. Christianity admits no such
friendship. If that Church will commend to us works of piety, we will hear with
reverence; if enjoin us to fast on Friday, or observe Lent-fast, we condemn it
not; we will fast with her, we will pray with her, we will be reverent in Gods
house with her: but if she bid us set fire on the Capitol, on this main and
capital point of Religion, (for so I may call it, arcem and Capitolium
religionis) here to obey were to be a Schismatic, to separate our selves from
the truth and comforts of the Gospel, and from Christ himself. Non tanti est,
tibi ut placeam, perire. Better it is that our opposers should be angry then we
perish.

But we leave this vain receiving, and proceed to the other no less dangerous
then this, when we receive the grace of God only as a Pardon, and not as a Law.
For who is not willing to be justified by Christ? To be freed from the Law, to
be delivered from the Law, to be dead to the Law, it is music to every ear,
and a continual feast. Evangelical righteousness we are glad to hear of; and we
could wish perhaps that there were no other mentioned. Lex ligat; Enact a law,
and we are in fetters. Nay, lex occidit; The Law is a killing letter in this
sense also. Who would look to find the Law in the Gospel? But we must remember
that there is Lex evangelica, an evangelical Law; that the grace of God, as it
excludes the Law sub ratione foederis, as it is a covenant, so admits it sub
ratione regulae, as it is a rule. The rigor of the covenant is abolisht, but
the equity of the rule is as everlasting as the Lawgiver? It is our happiness
by Grace to be freed from the covenant and curse of the Law; but it is our
duty, and a great part of our Christianity, to square our lives by the rule of
the Law. Therefore Religion was called in her purer times Christiana lex, the
Christian Law; and the Bishops, Episcopi Christianae legis, Bishops of the
Christian Law. Evangelium commentum Divinitatis, says Tertullian: The Gospel
was the invention of the Deity. And God did not set up the Gospel to destroy,
but to reform the Law. No, says Nazianzene, (...), The Gospel of Christ is
more laborious then the Law. Pythagoras is reported to have commanded his
Scholars, when they saw a man burdened, not to go about to ease him, but add
rather unto his load: So our Savior was so far from easing our burden, that he
seems rather to add weight, and make it much heavier then it was before. For
whether he did advance and increase the strictness of the Law, as the Ancients
did conceive, or whether he did but only clear the Law from those corrupt
glosses with which the Jewish Doctors had infected it, certainly in show and
appearance he leaves it much heavier then it had formerly been understood by
the Jew. Innocence and obedience to the Law has always been the badge of a
Christian. Look into our Prisons, says Tertullian, you find no Christian
there. If you find a Christian there, the fault that laid him there is but
this, That he is a Christian. We sail with you, we traffic with you, we go to
war with you. Plus nostra misericordia insumit vicatim quam religio vestra
templario; Our Charity spends more on the poor in our streets then your
Superstition on your Gods in your Temples! Nihil Christiano foelicius, nihil
laboriosius; Nothing is more happy then a Christian, nothing more painful. Thus
the grace of God presents us with two things quite contrary, with Comfort and
Labor; that Comfort might not puff us up, nor abundance of pain deject and
throw us down. For the Grace of God appeared not to enfeeble our hands; or,
with a dispensation from the works of Piety; nor to make us more indulgent to
our selves; but that we might abound more and more in virtuous actions. I will
not say with Socinus, that upon the very receiving of this Grace we receive
also afflatum quendum Divinum, a kind of Divine inspiration, which touches the
heart, and raises our hope, and warmeth our affections, and sets our hands
to work. For every one that receives this grace does not work. Nor can I think
that all the world is damned for infidelity. But a strange thing it may seem,
that after we have given up our names unto Christ, after this certainty of
knowledge and conscience of the truth, our ingratitude should kick with the
heel, and despise these promises though an Angel from heaven should persuade
them. It is a good saying of St. Augustine's, Nemo sibi permittat quod non
permittit Evangelium; Let no man make the promise larger then the Gospel has
made it, nor presume too much on the Grace of God. For such is the nature of
Grace that it will not be fashioned to our actions, but we must proportion our
actions to it. It is not (...), a buskin, to be indifferently drawn on upon any
design. It will not fit my Ambition in the eager pursuit of honor, nor my
Covetousness in the grasping of wealth, nor my Luxury in doting on pleasures:
But if I shape my actions to it, it is my honor, my wealth, my pleasure, my
ALL. We are told by those who have written in the praise of Music, that it
holds great sympathy with the nature of Man; that it applies it self to all
occasions, of Mirth, of Sorrow, of Company, of Solitude, of Sports, of
Devotion. And such is the wonderful harmony of Grace that it fits it self to
all estates, all degrees, all sexes, all ages, all actions whatsoever. It will
labor with thee at the Plow, trade with thee in the Shop, study with thee in
thy closet, fight with thee in the Field: and it keeps every man within the
bounds of his calling and honesty. But if I make it a pandar to my Pleasure, a
stirrup to my Ambition, a steward to my unbounded Avarice; if I make it my
Parasite to flatter me, and not my Counselor to lead and direct me, I am
injurious to that Grace for the publication of which the Lord of life was
crucified, I receive this grace, but in vain, and by my ungrateful receiving
turn my antidote into poison.

We cannot better conclude then with that of St. Hierome in his Epistle to that
noble Matron Celantia, Illi terrena sapiant qui coelestia promissa non habent;
Let them grovel on the earth who have not received these exceeding great and
precious promises. Let the Epicure be wanton, and the Atheist profane, 2 Pet.
1. 4.
and the Philosopher vain glorious. Let them perish to whom the Gospel is hid.
But let Christians imitate their Lord and Savior Christ Jesus; and as he was
crucified for us, so let us crucify our selves, even our lusts and affections,
that we may receive him, and not receive him in vain; but as we receive him
here, and with him his Grace, his Gospel, his glorious Promises, so we may
receive him at the last day, when he shall come to judge the quick and the dead
according to this Gospel, and with him glory, immortality, and eternal life.

The Eleventh SERMON.
LUKE XXI. 28. And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up, and
lift up your heads; for your redemption draws nigh.
IT was my labor the last day to arm you against the glittering sword and
terrors of Persecution; and I have now thought it fit to lead you further in
these ways of Horror, and to raise and build up in you a holy constancy and
resolution against those fearful signs and affrightments which shall usher in
the end of the world. Then I strengthen and establish you against the Sons of
men who are set on mischief, and whose right hand is full of blood: Now I am to
prepare you against the coming of the Son of Man and Son of God to judge both
the quick and the dead, to plead the cause of the innocent, but to punish the
hypocrite and oppressor with unquenchable fire; that is, to set the world at
rights again, and to bring every man to his own place.

Our Savior in this Chapter foretells the dreadful signs and apparitions
that shall go before his second coming, to the end that when they come we may
not be dismayed and affrighted at the sight, but may entertain them as Angels
which bring us good tidings of good things; that we may look upon them as
Objects of joy, rather then of amazement; that they may not dead our spirits,
or change our countenances, or trouble our joints, or make us hold down our
heads like a bullrush, but rowse up our hearts, and fill us with joy, and make
us to say, This is the day which the Lord has made, a day of exaltation and
redemption, a day of jubilee and triumph, and so look up, and lift up our heads.

And here, methinks, I see in my Text a strange conjunction, of Night and Day,
of Brightness and Darkness, of Terror and Joy; or a chain made up as it were of
these three links, Terror, Exultation, and Redemption. Yet they will well hang
together, if Redemption be the middle link: For in this they meet and are
friends: Redemption being that which turns the Night into Day, makes
affliction joyful, and puts a bright and lovely color upon Horror it self.
When these things come to pass. Why? these things are terrible. It is true; yet
lift up your heads. But how can we lift up our heads in this day of terror, in
this day of vengeance, in this day of gloominess and darkness? Can we behold
this sight, and live? Yes; we may. The next words are quick and operative, of
power to lift up our heads, and to exalt our horn and strength as the horn of
an Unicorne, and make us stand strong against all these terrors; Look up, lift
up your heads; for your redemption draws nigh. Not to detein you longer by
way of Preface; Four things there are which in these words that I have read are
most remarkable. 1. The Persons unto whom these words are uttered, in the
particle Your; Lift up your heads. 2. What things they are of which our Savior
here speaks, in the first words of the Text; Now when these things begin to
come to pass. 3. The Behavior which our Savior commends unto us, in these
words, Look up, lift up your heads. 4. Last of all, the Reason or
Encouragement, words of life and power to raise us from all faintness of heart
and dullness of spirit; For your redemption draws nigh.

I have formerly upon another Text spoken of the two first points, the Persons
to whom, and the Things whereof our Savior here speaks. Before I come to the
third point, the Behavior prescribed to be observed by them who see the signs
foretold in this Chapter come to pass, it will not be amiss a little to
consider whence it comes to pass that in the late declining age of the world so
great disorder, distemper and confusion have their place: And it shall yield us
some lessons for our instruction.

And first of all it may seem to be Natural, and that it cannot be otherwise.
For our common experience tells us that all things are apt to breed somewhat by
which themselves are ruined. How many Plants do we see which breed that worm
which eats out their very heart? We see the body of Man, let it be never so
carefully, so precisely ordered, yet at length it grows foul, and every day
gathers matter of weakness and disease, which at first occasioning a general
disproportion in the parts, must at the last of necessity draw after it the
ruin and dissolution of the whole. It may then seem to fall out in this great
body of the World as it does in this lesser body of ours; By its own distemper
it is the cause of its own ruin. For the things here mentioned by our Savior
are nothing else but the diseases of the old decaying World. The failing of
light in the Sun and Moon, what is it but the blindness of the World? an
imperfection very incident to Age. Tumults in the Sea and Waters, what are they
but the distemper of superfluous humors, which abound in Age? Wars and rumors
of wars are but the falling out of the prime qualities, in the union and
harmony of which the very being of the creature did consist. It is observed by
the Wise, Libidinosa and intemperans adolescentia effoetum corpus tradit
senectuti; Youth riotously and luxuriously and lewdly spent delivers up to old
age an exhaust and juyceless and diseased body. Do we not every day see many
strong and able young men fade away upon the sudden, even in the flower of
their age, and soon become subject to impotency and diseases and untimely
death? These commonly are the issues of riot, luxury and intemperance: Nor can
it be otherwise. Therefore we cannot but expect that the World should be
exceedingly diseased in its old decaying age, whose youthful days, and not
only those, but all other parts of its age, have been spent in so much
intemperance and disorder. Scarcely had the World come to any growth and
ripeness, but that it grew to that height of distemper that there was no way to
purge it but by a general Flood, purgati baptisma mundi, as St. Hierome calls
it, in which, as it were in the Baptism, its former sins were done away. And
after that, scarcely had three hundred years past, but a general disease of
Idolatry overspread and seized on all well-near, Abraham and his Family
excepted. Yet after this once more it pleased God to take the cure into his
hands, by sending his Son our Savior Jesus Christ, the great Physician and
Bishop of our souls. But what of all this? After all this was done tantorum
impensis operum, by so much cost and so much care, his Physic did not work as
it should, and little in comparison was gained upon the World. For the Many of
us, we are still the sons of our fathers. Therefore we have just cause of fear
that God will not make many more trials upon us, or bestow his pains so often in
vain. Christ is the last Priest and the last Physician that did stand upon the
earth; and if we will not hear him, what remains there, or what can remain, but
a fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour
the world: Ephraim is turned unto Idols; let him alone. I will spend no more
labor in Hos. 4.
vain upon him. Thus as Physicians, when they find the disease incurable, let
the diseased go on unto his end, so God having now as it were tried his skill
in vain; having invited all, and seeing so few come; having spoken to all, and
so few hear; having poured out his Sons blood to purge the World, and seeing so
few cleansed; for ought we know, and it is very probable, has now resolved the
World shall go unto its end; which in so great a body cannot be without the
disorder and confusion our blessed Savior here speaks of.

But you may peradventure take this for a speculation, and no more; and I have
urged it no further then as a probable conjecture. And therefore I will give
you a second reason. Besides this natural Inclination, God himself has a
further purpose in it. He that observes the ways of God as far as he has
expressed himself, shall find that he has a delight to show unto the world those
that are his, to lift them up on high, and mark and character them out by some
notable trial and temptation. Thus he made trial of Abraham's Faith by such a
command as struck at the very foundation of his faith. In Isaac shall thy seed
be blessed: and yet, Take thy son, thy only son, thy son Isaac, in whom alone
all the Promises made to Abraham were to be made good. Ill signs for Abraham to
look upon, signs that with him the world would soon be at an end; yet God set
them up before him to look upon; but by looking upon them he became the Father
of the faithful. Thus God made trial of Job, by putting all that he had into
the power of Satan, who presently sent Sabaeans to fall upon his servants and
oxen; Fire, upon his sheep; Chaldeans, upon his camels; and a great wind, to
beat down the house upon his sonns: ^ll signs for Job to look upon: but by
looking upon them he became operarius victoriae Dei, as Tertullian speaks,
Gods workman, hired as it were and pressed by God, to gain a conquest for him,
and in him to triumph, and erect a trophee over Satan. To draw this down to our
present purpose; To try the Strength, the Faith, the Love, the Perseverance of
those who are his, God is pleased to give way to this tumult and danger in the
last days. And as the Eagle brings out her young, and then counts them hers,
if she can make them look up against the Sun; so Christ here in my Text brings
forth those who are his, and proposes before them the dreadful spectacles here
mentioned, to try whether they can (...), as the Text speaks, whether they can
out-look them, and lift up their heads when all the world does hang down
theirs. Or he deals with his as the Jesuits are said to deal with their
Novices. They are wont to try of what courage and heart they are by frighting
them with feigned apparitions of Hobs and Bug-bears in the night: And if they
find them stout and fearless, they entertain them as fit for their use; if
otherwise they dismiss them as not for their turn and purpose. Even thus may
God seem to deal with them whom he means to make his, of the order and general
assembly and church of the firstborn, who are written in heaven, whom he means
to place amongst the great and few examples of eternal happiness: he scareth
them with dreams, and terrifieth them with visions. He sets before us these
terrors and affrightments, to see whether we fear any thing more then him, or
whether any thing can shake the alliance and trust which we repose in him;
whether our Faith will be strong when the World is weak; whether our Light will
shine when the Sun is darkened; whether we can establish our selves in the power
of Gods Spirit when the powers of heaven are shaken. And indeed what are all
these signs here mentioned but Mormos, mere toys to fright children with, if
we could truly consider that, if the world should sink, and fall upon our
heads, it cannot hurt a soul, nor yet so grind the body into dust that God
cannot raise it up again? Can the Heavens, with all their blackness and
darkness, have any operation upon a Soul, which is of a more noble essence than
they? Can the Waters drown, or the Plague devour, or Famine starve, or Fire
consume and waste a Soul? Can an immortal Soul be lost in the noise and tumults
of the people? For all these signs and apparitions, if we know whom we have
believed, or believe what we have read in St. Paul; neither life nor death, nor
angels, nor Romans 8. 38, 39
principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height
nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.

Now, in the third place, I will add one reason more, and so make an end of
this point. If Fear will give us leave to consult with our Reason and with
Scripture, we shall find that all this army of dismal events are nothing else
but the effects of that Love which God bears to the World, especially to Man,
the creature which he made after his own image, and therefore cannot hate him
because he so made him. As men are wont to say of sick persons, that so long as
there is breath, be they never so sick, there is hope of their recovery; for
our hope expires not but with our soul: so though we be far gone, though we be
dead in sin, though we be sick of a Consumption of grace, yet God lays not down
the expectation of our recovery so long as there is breath in us. Many examples
we have of Gods long-sufferance in Scripture. Betwixt Niniveh and final
Desolation there stood but forty days, or, as the Septuagint render it, but
three: for whereas we read it, forty days, they render it (...), Yet three
days, and Niniveh shall be destroyed: Yet God sent his Prophet unto them, and
upon their repentance turned away those evils which he had denounced against
them, and which were now in their approach, even at their very doors. Many
messages had God sent unto King Ahab to reclaim him; yet amongst them all none
was more signal then that which was sent him immediately before his fall. It
should seem that God had already determined with himself the destruction of
Ahab, and that he should fight and fall at Ramoth-Gilead; yet notwithstanding
Micaiah the Son of Imlah, a Prophet of God, even against the Kings will, is
brought before him, and tells him to his head that he should go and fall at
Ramoth-Gilead: Nor can we now think that this was done by chance: For
notwithstanding four hundred Prophets of his own had smoothed and flattered him
with hopes of good success, yet Micaiah, one whom the King hated, against the
Kings will, is constrained to come; and when he seemed at first either to mock
or fail in the delivery of his message, he is deeply adjured to deliver the
truth; How many times, says the 1 Kings 22. 16.
King, shall I adjure thee, that thou tell me nothing but that which is true in
the name of the Lord? Now from whence did all this come but even from this,
that God had not laid down the care of Ahabs conversion, but truly desired that
he would return and live?

To apply now all this to our present purpose. From hence, even from Gods love
it is, that the last and worst age of the World is attended upon with dreadful
signs and wonders. For God, who delights to be called a Preserver of men, will
never forsake his creature whilst there is any hope of return. O Ephraim, what
shall I do unto thee: O Judah, what shall I do Hos. 6. 4.
unto thee? Can thou find out any thing? Alas! what can thou find out, who
art as a silly dove, without heart? But whatsoever my Wisdom, my infinite Hos.
7. 11.
Wisdom, can find out, whatsoever may forward thy conversion, whatsoever may
be done, I will do it. And therefore as Sin and Iniquity have increased, so
have the Means to reclaim it. As Wickedness has broken in as a flood, so has
Judgment been poured forth, and does swell, wave upon wave, line upon line,
judgment upon judgment, to meet it, and purge it, and carry it away with it
self, and so run out both together into the boundless ocean of Gods Mercy. This
is Gods method; who knows whereof we are made, and therefore must needs know
what is fittest to cure us. For as when our bodies having been long acquainted
with some gentle kind of Physic, and the disease at last grows too strong for
it, it commends the art of the good Physician to add strength to his potion,
that so at last he may conquer the malady: So Man's sinful disease in the last
age of the World being much increased, it pleases God to use stronger means to
cure it. If his little army of Caterpillars, if common calamities, will not
purge us, he brings in Sword, and Famine, and Pestilence to make the potion
stronger. If the enemies Sword cannot lance our ulcers, he will make us do it
with our own. If fightings without cannot move us, he will raise terrors
within. He will pour down hailstones and coals of fire, that we may thirst for
his dew and gentle rain. He will set us at variance with one another, that we
may long to be reconciled to him, and by the troubles of one Kingdom learn to
pray, and pray heartily, for that other which is to come; That so, if possible,
he may save some, and pull them as brands out of the fire, singed and scorcht,
but not consumed; That if men will repent them of their evil ways, he may
repent him of the evil he imagined against them, as he sometimes told his
people by the mouth of his Prophet Ezekiel.

Our third general part was the consideration of the Behavior which our
Savior commends unto us in these words, (...), Look up, and lift up your
heads; words borrowed from the behavior which men use when all things go as
they would have them. When we have what we desire, when success has filled our
hopes, and crowned our expectation, then we look up, and lift up our heads. As
Herbs, when the Sun comes near them, peep out of the earth, or as Summer-Birds
begin to sing when the Spring is entered, so ought it to be with us when these
things come to pass. This Winter should make us a Spring; this noise and tumult
should make us sing. Wars, Famines, Plagues, Inundations, Tumults, Confusion of
the world, these bring in the Spring of all true Christians; and by these, as
by the coming of Summer-Birds, we are forewarned that our Sun of Righteousness
draws near. Indeed unto Nature and the eye of the World such are sad and
uncouth spectacles, sights far from yielding comfort, or being taken for
authors of welcome news: and therefore our Savior pointing out to the
behavior, which in this case the world does use, tells us in the words
foregoing my Text, (...), men should be ready to sound for fear, ARESCENTIBUS
HOMINIBUS, says the Vulgar, men should dry and wither away for fear; as Leaves
smitten with mildew or blasting, or fading away with unreasonable heat. Lest
therefore our hearts should fail us upon the sight of these signs, our Savior
forewarns us that all these ostenta, these apparitions, bode us no harm, nor
can bring any evil with them but what we our selves will put upon them; that
for all these signs in the heaven, for all this tumult and confusion upon
earth, even then when the foundations are shaken, and the world is ready to
sink, we may lift up our heads: When you see these things come to pass, look
up, lift up your heads. Let us a little weigh these words. For they are full
and expressive, talent-weight. They are a prediction, and they are an
admonition: which is, says Clemens, as the diet of the soul, to keep it in an
equal temper and a settled constitution, against those evils and distempers of
the mind which, as Tully speaks, do tumultuantem de gradu dejicere, cast it
down with some kind of disorder and confusion from that (...), that quietness
and silence which is the best state and condition of the soul; as Fear and
Sorrow, the unhappy parents of Murmuring and Repining; which press down the
soul (...), into the gross and brutish part, which they call (...), the fall
of the Soul, the symptoms and indications whereof are a cast-down Look, and a
Head bowed down like a bull-rush. For 1. Fear is a burden that makes us not
able to look upwards, toward that which might rid and ease us of it, but
toward something that may hide and cover us. When Adam had sinned, God comes
toward him in the cool of the day, in a wind, as it is rendered by some, and as
the word signifies, in such a sound as he never heard before; and he presently
runs into the thicket, hides himself amongst the trees of the garden. If the
King of Jericho pursues Joshua's spies, they run under the stalks of flax; and
if Saul pursues David, he betakes himself to some cave. Fear may make us look
distractedly about, with a wandering, inconstant, unsettled eye; but not to look
up: it may make us hide our heads, but not lift them up. If an Evil bite, Fear
is the tooth; and if it press down, Fear is the weight. Behold, here this tooth
is broken, and this weight is taken away by Wisdom it self, in these words,
Look up, lift up your heads. 2. Grief is another weight, that presses down.
Why art thou cast down, O my Soul? says David. And, Psalm. 42.
Heaviness in the heart of man makes it stoop, says Solomon. Sorrow Prove. 12.
2^.
kept Aaron from eating the sin-offring, cast Job on the ground, and David on
the ground, and Ahab on his bed. An evil disease it is under the Sun: but here
you have a medicine for it, a medicine to make a merry heart; Look up, lift up
your heads. 3. These two, Fear and Sorrow, are the mother and the nurse, the
beginners and fomenters, of all Murmuring and Repining. For as Fear so Sorrow
is nothing else but a kind of distaste and grudge of the mind. Imperari dolori
silentium non potest; The Murmurer cannot be silent: He will complain to any
man, to any thing; to the Night, to the Day; to the Sun, to the Moon, as he in
the Comedy. He will reproach his Head, his Belly, his Stomach, any part that
causes grief: as Tragaedians use to chide their Eyes, as if they heard; as the
Poet brings in Ulysses in a dialogue and contention with his own Heart. When he
is fed with Manna, he will ask for Garlic and Onyons. When he is in the way to
a land flowing with milk and honey, he will return to sit by fleshpots: he
will chide with Moses, and chide with God, and prefer a Calf to them both. He
will have this to day, and will not have it to morrow. He will have night when
it is day, and day when it is night. He will have miracles, and slight them;
signs, and run from them. He does palos terminales Deo figere, as Tertullian
speaks, bound and circumscribe God, limitate the Holy one of Israel, set up a
stake and landmark to which God must come, and yet not know where to place it.
He loathes the meat should feed him, and the physic which should work his
health. In a word, Murmuring and Repining is a monster that, as the Proverb is,
is never well neither full nor fasting. I call it a Monster: For it is the
issue of diverse passions, Fear and Sorrow, which meeting in the heart, engender
and bring it forth, to quarrel with the Wisdom and question the Providence of
God, to censure his counsels, and to condemn his proceedings; to approve of
that which he complains of, and complain of that which he dispenses for our
Good. Why was I not made impeccable? says one: why was not I so made up that I
might not sin? Why do I feel this fight and contention between the Spirit and
the Flesh? Why was I made weak, and commanded to be strong? Why was I born in
these times of hurry and noise, says another, and not in these halcyon-dayes
of peace and plenty? Why was I reserved to these last days, to hear of wars
and rumors of wars, of earthquakes, and famine, and plague? to see the Church
broken into Sects, and crumbling away into Conventicles? to see the world
return into a worse Chaos and confusion then that out of which it was made?
that is, Why am I a man? The language of the Murmurer is, Why have thou made me
thus? The Power of God, the Wisdom of God, the Goodness and Mercy of God
cannot quiet and silence him, who wavering and double-minded, resting only on
his own fickle, flitting, abortive thoughts, is never at rest. For he that does
do nothing but what he list, will do nothing what he should. He that will be
nothing but what he please, is his own idol, and so is Nothing in this world.
Now these words here of our Savior are like that pitch and fat and hair which
Daniel did sees together: and if we can put them into this Monsters mouth, it
will soon burst asunder. If we can take them down and digest them, they will
remove our Fear, dry up our Sorrow, and stop the mouth of the Murmurer for
ever. For when Christ bids us look up, and lift up our heads, his meaning is,
that we should so fit and prepare our selves that we may look up, and lift them
up. He would not bid the Covetous man, who is buried alive in the earth, look
up: He would not bid the Wanton, who is drowned in lust, look up: He would not
bid him who is dead in sin, look up: Or, if he did, his meaning would be, First
learn to hate the world, to fight against thy lusts, to arise from the dead;
and then Christ shall give thee light and strength, that thou may look up,
and lift up thy head. Then thou art his Servant; and when he says, Go, thou
must go, though it be upon the point of the sword; or else thou art not his
servant: Then thou art his Merchant; and when he holds forth his rich pearl,
thou must buy it, though it be with thy blood; or else thou art not his
Merchant: then thou art his Soldier; and thou must fight when and where he
places thee, against all terrors whatsoever; or else thou art not his
Soldier. Lo, I have told you before, says our Savior; see that you be not
troubled. If you be not wanting to your Captain, your Captain will not be
wanting unto us, he will neither leave us nor forsake us. In this one Look
there is more then a look; there is Charity laboring, Faith quickening, Hope
reaching forth her hand. These three will lift up our heads above these
terrors, into the highest heavens. We read in the book of Judges, that when
Gideon set upon the Midianites, his army had nothing but empty pitchers and
trumpets and lamps in their hands, yet was this enough to put to rout the whole
army of the Midianites. Even thus does our Captain Jesus Christ. For this army
of Signs in heaven, in the sea, in the earth, Famine, Plague, Persecution, and
the like, what are they but trumpets and empty pitchers to them that know them?
And if we fear them, and disorder and rout our selves, and run away, we are not
of the army of God and of Gideon; we are but Midianites.

I know these things may seem somewhat hard, nay peradventure utterly
impossible, with men who are but dust and ashes. And I may be thought to speak
tanquam in republica Platonis, non tanquam in face Romuli; as if I were in a
congregation of Saints, and not in an assembly of men subject to passions and
so to sin; ready to fear where no fear is, to grieve, for that which is
pleasant and behoofful, to murmr where there is no cause, to hang down their
heads like a bullrush when they should lift them up. Is my strength the
strength of stones, or is my flesh of brass. Illi ferrum and aes triplex Job 6.
12.
circa pectus. Is it possible we should see the world fall down about our ears,
and not fear? And in Famine, to hear our children calling for bread, when there
is none to give them, and not be disconsolate. In time of Plague, to see our
selves forsaken of all, and constrained perhaps to breathe out our last upon no
better pillow then a stone or a turf, under no better canopy then the cold air,
and be content? Can we hear the noise of the whip, and the jumping of the
chariots, and the prancing of the horses, nay the noise and groans of dying
men, who would but cannot dye, and be unmoved? Can we see the tears of widows
drilling down their cheeks, behold little orphans made miserable before they
know what misery is, and deprived of their fathers before they could call them
so; can we see rivers of blood, and have dry eyes? Shall a whole Nation totter,
and we stand fast? Shall we have no safe place for our heads, and yet lift them
up? I know Compassion is a virtue; and to weep with them that weep is a virtue:
but then even when we weep, we must also rejoice in tribulation. Nature may
draw tears, but Grace must dry them. And can we do all this? If we be truly
Christians, we can, yea, in all these things (...), be more then conquerers;
not only be undaunted, but even joy in them; as if now, and never till now, the
world went as we would have it. What manner of men, think you, must they be who
do thus? Do not put on wonder: let not your hearts be troubled. For Truth it
self will tell you that, if you be the men whose name you bear, if your eyes,
your ends, your hopes, be fixed upon Christ alone, then are you all such
persons as I have now described. Tantum distat a Christiano: Look how much
every man is defective and wants in this kind of constancy and resolution, and
so much he comes short and wants of his Christianity. What are all the
pleasures, what are all the terrors of the world to him that is made one with
Christ, who conquered also? That therefore this doctrine may pass the better,
which at first sight is but harsh and rugged, we will show you, 1. That it is
possible to arm our selves with such courage and resolution in common
calamities; 2. That it is great folly not to do so; 3. What impediments and
hindrances they be which overthrow our courage, and take our hearts from us;
when such things as these come to pass. And first of the Possibility of this
doctrine.

And, if we look a little upon the manners of men, we shall find them very apt
and ready to plead impossibilities and difficulties where their own practice
confutes them. One says he has bought five yoke of Oxen, and Luke 14.
must go to try them; another says he has married a wife, and therefore he
cannot, that is, he will not, come. Haec omnia dura invitis, says Hierome; All
things seem hard and difficult to them who have no heart, which easily persuade
themselves that cannot be done which they will not do. Go to a Rich man, and
require him to lay down his wealth at the feet of the poor, or otherwise to
sacrifice it to the service of Christ; how hard a lesson is it? how ill
sounding? how ridiculous and absurd a proposal? What a fool will he soon
conclude you be, and how prodigal of your good counsel, when you advise him to
be wise? But yet let some flattering Pleasure come in the way, or some spleen
against his neighbor, or some suit of Law, or the like, or something that may
forfeit his soul, and how easily shall all go to the final hazard and undoing
of him and his posterity? I see, he can do that for his spleen, his humor, his
strumpet, which when he is to do for his God, he startles at as a thing
impossible. In the one is his desire, in the other death. To gain the earth
with him is to enter Paradise: but to knock and strive to enter into heaven is
as terrible as hell it self. Go to one of our painted Gallants, and require him
to do but what an ethnic man can do by no better help then the light of
Nature, even rather to lay down his life then to do any thing that common
Reason checketh at, and which a good man thinks a shame to speak of; rather to
leave off to be a man then in that shape and likeness to become a beast; (...),
how great a request do you move? Yet how prodigal will he be of his life when
his lust or some drunken quarrel shall call for it? To fetch home a fancy, a
fashion, a toy, we will go as far as France, or to the Indies, for a clod of
earth, or a piece of glass; but to visit the fatherless and widows, a
Sabbath Days journey is too far. Every thing that may make us happy is hard;
but we never boggle at that which leads to destruction. Heaven with all its
allurements, with all its beauty and glory, with all its everlastingness cannot
win us to that which the glistering of a diamond, which the shadow of a trifle,
which the dream of a shadow will do. God with all his beseeching and entreaties
and rich promises shall not move us, when the cringe of a flatterer, the only
tongue of a parasite, the smile of a courtesan shall carry us about the world.
Nor is Glory so eloquent to prevail with us for it self as Shame and Dishonor
is to our confusion. Nemo non in causa sua potest, quod in causam Dei dubitat;
Every man can do that in his own cause which he cannot in Christ's; can do that
for the Devil which he cannot for himself. So that the reason, why many suppose
this behavior here required by our Savior to be a matter so hard and
difficult, is from the same error. Now to manifest the possibility of this, I
think I cannot do it better then by an ensample: and I will give you one, and
that too of an Ethnic man, that knew not Christ, nor his rich promises, nor
ever heard of the Glory of the Gospel. There is a Hill in Italy, Vesuvius they
call it, which is wont sometimes to break out in flames of fire to the terror
and amazement of all that dwell nigh unto it. The first time, that in the
memory of man it fired, was in the days of Vespasian the Emperor; at which
time it break forth with that horrible noise and cry, with that concussion and
shaking of the earth near about it, with that darkness and stench, that all
within the compass thought of nothing now but aeternam illam and novissimam
mundo noctem, that Time was ended, and the World drawing to its dissolution.
Pliny the great Philosopher, and the Author of the famous History of Nature,
lay then at Misenum, not far off: and out of a desire he had to inform himself,
he drew near to the place where he thought the fire begun. And in the midst of
that horror and confusion so undaunted and fearless was he that he studied, and
wrote, and eat, and slept, and omitted nothing of his usual Course. His Nephew,
a great man afterward with Trajane the Emperor, out of whom I take this
history, reports of himself, that being there at that time, notwithstanding all
the terrors and affrightments, yet he called for his books, he read, he noted,
as if he had not been near the Mountain Vesuvius, but in his study and closet:
and yet was at that time but eighteen years of age. I have been somewhat the
more large, besides my custom, in opening the particulars of this story,
because it is the very emblem, the very picture of the Worlds dissolution, and
of the behavior which is here enjoined Christians when that time shall come.
All these fearful signs which here our Savior reckons up, if we but follow the
ensamples which I have now proposed, ought not so much prevail with us as once
to make us break our sleep; much less to torment and amaze us; much less to
take off our chariot-wheels, to retard and cripple us in the ways of
righteousness, and in that course which leads to bliss; much less to drive us
out of the way. What though there be signs in the Sun and Moon and Stars? must
my light therefore be turned into darkness? must my Sun set at noon, and my
Stars, those virtues which should shine in my soul, fall out of their sphere
and firmament? What though the Seas roar and make a noise? shall my impatience
be as loud? And if they break their bounds, must I forget mine? What though
there be a Famine in the land? must I make my Soul like unto the season, lean
and miserable: What though there be wars and rumors of wars? must I be at
variance with my self, and bid defiance to the Lord of hosts? What though my
friends betray me? must I deceive my self? And if the World be ready to sink,
must I fall into Hell? Nay rather, when we see these things come to pass, when
these signs come to pass, let it be that we do as occasion serves us: for God
is with us in these signs: Let 1 Samuel 10. 7.
them be as Signs to us, persuading signs: Let them have the commanding
eloquence of Signs. Let them not be as Shadows, which pass by us, and we regard
them not: but let them be signa significantia, signs that signify something,
signs to represent something to our Understanding, and so make an impression on
our Wills. Let them be as the Voice of God calling us out of Egypt into a land
flowing with milk and honey. Let them be as the Finger of God, and let us
follow in that way the line is drawn. Let them be as a Hand of God, and let us
humble our selves under his mighty hand. Let them be the great Power of God,
and let us fall down and worship; that so we may in his signis signari, with
these signs be signed and sealed up to the day of our redemption. When the Sun
is darkened, think it is to upbraid thy ignorance, and learn to learn to abound
more in knowledge and all Phil. 1. 9.
judgment. When the Moon shall be turned into blood, think it is to chide thy
Cruelty, and put on the bowels of mercy and loving kindness. When the Col. 3.
12.
Stars fall from heaven, the professors of truth speak lies, do thou stand fast
in the faith. When the powers of heaven are shaken, when there be many sects
and divisions, do thou keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace,
Ephesians. 4. 3.
every man's brother, if he will; and if he will not, every man's brother. If the
Plague break in, do thou purge the plague of thine own heart, and keep thy self
unspotted of the world. If there be a Famine in the land, do thou fill thy self
with the bread of life as with marrow and fatness. If Banners be displaid as
signs, as the Psalmist speaks, let them be as signs to thee to fight against
thy lusts. When Parents and Brethren and Kinsfolk are false, do thou look up to
thy Father in heaven, who is truth it self. When the World is ready to sink, do
thou raise thy self with expectation of eternal glory. This constancy, this
resolution, this behavior Christ requires at our hands: and it will be in vain
to plead impossibilities. For could these men under Nature go so far? and
cannot we, who are under Grace, do so much? Could they think that nothing
without them could hurt them? and shall fear nothing more then that which is
without? Good God! how comes it to pass that Nature should bear more sway in a
Pagan, then the Grace of the Gospel in a Christian? Or have we disputed and
trifled Grace out of its power? or has our abuse of Grace swallowed even
Nature and Reason it self up in victory? Tanti vitrum, quanti margaritum? Were
these men so rich that they could bestow so much upon a trifle, upon a toy of
glass? and cannot we, who are under Grace, give the same price for a rich
Jewel. When Themistocles was leading forth his army, by chance he past by where
Cocks were fighting, and showing them to his Soldiers, Lo, says he, these
have neither altars, nor temples, nor children to fight for; and you see how
stoutly they fight for no other end but who shall be the conqueror. And to this
end have I shown unto you the examples of these Heathen men, as Themistocles
did the Cocks to his Army. For these men nec aras habebant, neque focos. They
were without Christ in the world, received not the promises, neither saw they
them so much as afar off; saw not so much as a glimering of that Light which
lightneth every man that comes into the world. Of immortality and eternal
life they knew little: What was their hopes? what was their end? As for Heaven
and Hell, their knowledge of them was small. Yet their stomach and courage was
such that we, who are Christians, hear it only as a tale, and can scarcely
believe it. Beloved, I speak this to our shame. For a great shame it is that
Nature, defamed Nature, should more prevail with them then God and Grace with
us; that they by the power of their Reason should stand the strongest assault
and shock of misery, and we run away affrighted from the very fancy and
shadow of it. For to whom more is given, of them more shall be required. And if
we Christians cannot look undauntedly when we see these things come to pass,
how shall we behold the Heavens gathered together as a Scrowl, the Elements
melted, and the Earth burnt up? how shall we be able to hear the trump and the
voice of the Archangel? If we cannot look up, and lift up our heads when we
see these things, with what face shall we meet our Savior in the clouds?
Therefore as our Savior in this Chapter exhorts, v. 19. let us possess our
souls with patience: Let us withdraw our souls from our bodies, our minds from
our sensual parts; that what is terrible to the eye may have no such aspect on
the mind, and what is dreadful to the ear may be as music to the spirit, and
what wounds and torments the body may not touch the soul; that so we may be
what we should be, our selves, our own Lords, in our own possession; that
Christ at his coming may find us not let out to Pleasure, not sold to this
Vanity, nor in fetters under that fear, nor swallowed up in that Calamity, nor
buried in the apprehension of those evils which shall come upon this
generation; but free in Christ, alive in Christ, active, making these our
adversaries friends, these terrors blessings, these signs miracles; by Christ's
power working light out of darkness, plenty out of famine, peace out of these
wars; that at his second coming he may find us looking up upon him, and lifting
up our heads, waiting for the adoption, to wit, the redemption of our body,
that so we may be caught up together in the clouds, and be for ever with the
Lord in his everlasting Habitations.

I have done with the first Point, the Possibility of the Doctrine, That we
must arm our selves with courage and resolution against common calamities. I
proceed now to the second, That it is an argument of great folly not to do so.
What is Folly but a mistake of things, a mistake of their nature, and of their
end? Not only a privative ignorance, which may be in children and simple men;
but, as the Hebrew Doctors call it, a possessive ignorance, possessing us with
false opinions of things; making us run counter to that light which Wisdom
holds forth; placing pleasure upon that which brings no delight, and horror
upon that which rightly considered has no terror at all; transforming a Devil
into an Angel of light, and turning Light it self into Darkness; making the
signs of Gods favor arguments of his wrath; calling Afflictions and Calamities,
which are the instructions of a Father, the blows of an Enemy; and if
Calamities be whips, making them Scorpions. An unwise man, says the Psalmist,
knows it not, and a fool does not consider it: He does not consider either
the nature of these signs, or the end for which they are sent; but is led by
likeness and opinion. The natural man perceives not the things of Gods spirit,
but they 1 Cor. 2. 14.
are foolishness unto him; as the words of fools, which signify nothing: And
therefore he puts what sense and meaning he please upon them, an interpreter
the worst of a thousand. And so he finds not evils, but makes them; makes them
the mothers of his sorrow, which might be the helpers of his joy. When Reason
and Religion are thrust out of the chair, the Passions full soon take their
room, and dictate heavy things. Then either Fear shakes us, or Hope makes us
mad; either Grief pulls us down, or Joy transports us. One is afraid where no
fear is, as the Psalmist speaks: another is struck dead at the sight of a
statue: and to some even Joy it self has been as fatal as a thunderbolt. All
is from Opinion, the mistress of fools, which makes the shaking of a leaf as
terrible as an earthquake; makes Poverty more sad, the Plague more infectious,
Famine and the Sword more killing then they are. It is not the tooth of Envy,
it is my Fancy bows me. It is not the reproach of an Enemy hurts me: It was
but a word, and Opinion has turned it into a stone. It is not an army of
Sorrows, it is my own Fancy overthrows me. What St. Ambrose speaks of
Poverty, is true of all those evils which are so terrible to flesh and blood;
Non naturae paupertas, sed opinionis vis est, Poverty, as men call it, is but a
fancy; there is no such thing indeed. It is but a figment, an Idol: Men
first framed it, and set it up, and trembled before it. As some Naturalists
tell us that the Rainbow is oculi opus, a thing framed only by the eye, because
there are no such colors on the cloud as we see; so this difference of Rich
and Poor, of Honorable and Dishonorable, of Wars and Peace, of Sorrow and Joy,
is but a creature of the Eye. Did we not think the Soldier tremble, we had
disarmed him: Did we not think Calamities grievous, we might rejoice in them:
Did not our Folly make these Signs terrible, we might then look up, and lift up
our heads. We read of Smyndenides the Sybanite, that he was so extremely dainty
that he would grow weary at the sight of another man's labor, and therefore,
when he sometimes saw a man laboring and painfully digging, he began to faint
and pant, and desired to be removed: Quam inclementer fodicat! says he, What a
cruel and merciless digger is this? So it is with us. Our delicate and tender
education, our familiarity with the vanities of this world, have betrayed our
Reason to our Sensual parts, so that we startle at every unusual object,
tremble at every apparition, make War and Famine and Persecution more terrible
then they are, sink under those signs and warnings from heaven at which we
should look up, and lift up our heads. This our way utters our foolishness,
as the Psalmist speaks. For is it not a great folly to create evils, to
multiply evils? to discolor that which was sent for our good, and make it
evil? to make that which speaks peace and comfort unto us a messenger of
Death?

Let us now consider the Lets and Impedimens, or the Reasons why our hearts
fail us at such sights as these. I shall at this time only remove a pretended
one; having formerly at large upon another Text, Matthew. 24. 25. spoken of
Self-love and Want of Faith, which are real and true hindrances of Christian
Courage. The main pretense we make for our pusillanimity and cowardice is our
natural Weakness, which we derived from our first parents, and brought with us
into the world. For thus we lay every burden upon our forefathers shoulders,
and Adam is arraigned every day as guilty of every defect, of every sin which
is committed in the world. HOMOSUM; I am a man, the child of Adam, born under
wrath, is the common apology of the men of this world, when they fall into
those sins which by watching over themselves they might, and which in duty they
are bound to avoid. As we fell in Adam, so Adam falls in us, falls under fears
and sorrows and calamities, unto the end of the world. And, if we observe it,
this is so common a plea, and so stoutly and resolvedly stood to, as if men did
rather boast of it then bemoan it; and did rather make use of it as a comfort
after sin, then fear it as a burden pressing and inclining to it. For the best
excuse they have, the best plea they make, is, that they are the children of
Adam. I deny not that we drew this Weakness from our first parents: I leave it
not after Baptism as subsistent by it self, but bound to the center of the
earth, with the Manichee; nor washed to nothing in the Font, with Pelagius: But
yet (and it will be worth your observation) I take it to be a matter of
difficulty to judge of what strength it is. I fear we make it stronger then it
is; and I am sure a Christian is bound by that religion which he professes to
encounter and tame and crucify it. For take us in our infancy, not altered a
puris naturalibus, from that which we were made; and then we do not understand
our selves, much less the Weakness of our nature. And then take us in our years
of discretion; before we can come to discover it, Custom and Education, if
good, has much abated; if evil, has much improved the force of it, and our
Sloth or Cowardice has made it strong. A strange thing it is to see little
children in their tender years prompt and witty to villainy, as if they had gone
to School to it in their mothers womb: and this we may impute to original Sin.
But yet Divines generally consent that this original Sin is alike in all; only
it works more or less according to the diversity of men's tempers, as water runs
swifter down a Hill then in a Plain. Again, even in children we see many good
and gracious qualities, which by good education come to excellent effect. In
pueri elucet spes plurimorum, says Quintilian, quae cum emoritur aetate,
manifestum est non defecisse naturam, sed curam; In children many times there
is a beam and hope of Goodness, which, if not cherisht by Discipline, is dampt
and darkened; a sign that Nature was not wanting, but our Care. Now from whence
this difference should come is not easy to discern: but this we cannot but
observe, That be the strength of original Sin what it will, yet there is no man
but is more wicked then the strength of any natural Weakness or primitive
Corruption can constrain. For when evil Education, bad Enamples, long Custom,
and Continuance in sin have bred in us a habit of sinning, cum per secordiam
vires, tempus, ingenium defluxere, naturae infirmitas accusatur, when through
sloth and idleness, through luxury and distemper our time is lost, our bodies
decayed, our wits dulled, we cast all the fault upon the Weakness of our
Nature; and our full growth in sin we attribute to that Seed of sin which we
should have choked.

Behold, the Signs in the heaven, the Sun darkened, the Moon turned into blood;
See Poverty coming toward you as an armed man, Famine riding upon a pale
horse, killing with Hunger and with Death; Behold the Plague destroying,
Persecution raging. I say, Behold these: for to this thou were made, for this
thou were sent into the world, to behold and look up upon these; to look up,
and be undaunted; nay, to look up, and leap and rejoice. For thy whole life is
but a preparation and Eve to this great Holiday of sights. If the eye of Nature
be too weak, thou have an unction from the Holy one, the unction of the blessed
Spirit. For this end ^ John 2. 20.
Christ came into the world, for this end did he pour forth his grace, that he
might refresh thy spirits, and clear thy eyesight, that thou may look up,
and lift up thy head. For tell me; Why were we baptized? why are we Christians?
Is it not to mortify our earthly members and lusts, to dead in our selves the
bitter root of Sin? Is it not to spiritualize, to angelifie, (I had almost said
to deifie) our Nature? For we are no further Christians nisi in quantum
caeperimus esse angeli, but so far forth as we are like unto the Angels; I may
add, and St. Peter does warrant me, so far forth as we are made partakers of
the Divine Nature. Were we not baptized into this faith? I speak to Christians,
whose life should be a continual warfare, not against Beasts, but our Passions,
which, if they be not tied up and held in with bitt and bridle, are as fierce
and violent as they: And a strange kind of weakness it is to talk of Weakness
when we are to fight; for this is to yield before we strike a stroke; not to be
put to flight, but to run away. Nec mirum, si vincantur, qui jam victi sunt;
and it is no marvail if we fall by conquest, who in our own opinion are already
overcome. Beloved, are we weak in Adam? Yet are we strong in Christ. I can do
all things, says Paul, and suffer all things, through Christ that strengthens
me. Though many blemishes befall us by Adams sin in our understandings and in
our wills, yet what we lost in Adam, that with infinite advantage is supplied
in Christ. Are we truly Christians? Then these things, these fearful sights,
cannot hurt us. If they hurt us, it is because we are not Christians. There is
a fable that past amongst the Heathen, that Vulcan offended with the men of
Athens, told them they should be all fools; but Pallas, who favored them, told
them they should indeed be fools, but withal that their folly should not hurt
them. Our case is not much unlike: For though the Devil has made us fools and
weak, yet Christ the Wisdom of the Father has given us this gift, that this
Weakness shall never hurt us unless we will. Fear not therefore: why should we
fear? Christ has subdued our enemies, and taken from them every weapon that
may hurt us. He has taken the sting not only from Sin, but from those evils
which are the natural issues and products of Sin. He has made Afflictions
joyful, Terrors lovely, that thou may look up upon them, and lift up thy
head. I have done with this pretense of natural Weakness, and with my second
part; and I come now to the third and last, the encouragement our Savior
gives; For your redemption draws nigh.

And when these things come to pass, when such terrible signs appear, this news
is very seasonable. As cold waters to a thirsty soul, so is the promise Prove.
25. 25.
of liberty to those who have been in bondage all their life long, under the
fear Heb. 2. 15.
of those evils which show themselves unto us, and lead us captive, and keep us
in prison, so that we cannot look up. When we are sold under Sin, and by that
sold under fears of Calamities, of Death, of Hell; when the Heaven loures upon
us, and Hell opens its mouth; then a message of Redemption is a word fitly
spoken, a word upon its wheels, guided and directed by art, and is as
delightful as apples of Gold with pictures of silver. It is that Penny in the
evening which makes the Labourer bear the burden all the day. How will that
Soldier fight who hears of a reserve and party at hand to aid him? How will
the Prisoner even sing in his chains, when news is brought that his ransom is
paid, and his redemption near at hand? It is a liberty to be told we shall be
free: And it is not easy to determine whither it more affect us when it is
come, or when it is but in the approach, drawing nigh; when we are free, or
when we are but told that shortly we shall be so. And indeed our Redemption is
actus individuus, one entire act; and we are redeemed at once from all; though
the full accomplishment of it be by degrees. When we are redeemed from Sin, we
are redeemed from the Grave, redeemed from the fear of Death; redeemed from all
fear of these fearful Signs and Apparitions, redeemed by our Captain, who
besides the ransom he paid down, has taught us to handle the weapons of our
warfare, has proposed a crown, has taught us to shake off our fetters and
break our bonds asunder. For to this end, he paid down the ransom: and, if we
do it not, we are not redeemed, no not when we are redeemed. It is enough for
him to open the prison-doors: Certainly it is our duty to come out, and not
still to love our fetters, because our Redeemer has led Captivity captive. But
we may say truly of this first Redemption what some in St. Paul said falsely of
the second Resurrection, This Redemption is past already, past on our Redeemers
side, nothing left undone by him: only it remains on ours to sue out our
pardon, and make our Redemption sure. Nor is it any derogation from our
Saviors merit that we have a part in this work. For would we have our Savior
redeem them from prison who will not go out? free them from sin who are
resolved to continue in sin because this grace has abounded, and will be more
slaves because they had leave to be free? or seal up their Redemption who will
not sue it out? But now this is but redemptio elevans, as the Schools speak, a
Redemption which lifts us up from our former low condition, and puts us in a
fair possibility of enlargement; nay in a certainty, if we our selves hinder
not. But yet when it has its proper and natural working, when we do not ponire
obicem, when we hinder it not, it works according to the capacity of the
subject. It works out Sin, yet leaves us sinners; it regulates our Passions,
let leaves us subject to them; it works out Fear, yet leaves us fearful. The
Old man is crucified, but not yet dead; the Passions are subdued, but not quite
extinguished. The Inward man dare look Death and all the terrors of the world
in the face, but the Outward man turns away from such sight. And therefore
there is another Redemption that they call praeservantem, which settles and
establishes us, preserves us in an Angelical state, free from Sin, from
Passions, from Fear. And when this comes, we shall sin no more, hope no more,
fear no more: All sins shall be purged out, all hope shall be fulfilled, all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes, and all trembling from our hearts. And this
is the Redemption here meant, the only trust of the Christian, the expectation
of the faithful, the water of life to refresh them in this valley of tears, the
only cordial for the passion of the Heart, the only rock for Hope to anchor at,
the true fountain from which the waters of Comfort and Salvation are to be
drawn. But then I must tell you, this Fountain of comfort is like the pool of
Bethesda; it is not medicinable till an Angel has stirred it. For our own
carnal Imaginations, may be as so many evil Angels to trouble it; and then we
draw bitterness and poison instead of comfort. For, a little to change St.
Paul's words, Why should it be thought a thing incredible, why should it be
thought a thing desirable with some men that the world and all that is in the
world should have an end? Why should they desire the coming of Christ? Should
he come to meet the Hypocrite with his form of Religion, his feigned sighs and
cheating groans, as he is acting his part, and playing Judas in the shape of
Peter? Should he meet Balaam when he is not so wise as his Ass? or Jonah, when
he runs from Niniveh to Tarsus? Should he come to us at midnight, when we are
in our beds of lust and sensuality? Can there be any comfort to the wicked in
that fire which devours before him, or in that tempest which is round about
him? But if we be qualified as we ought to be, if we repent of our sins, and
bring forth fruits worthy of amendment of life; if we keep our loins girt, and
our lamps burning; if we be doing our Masters will, and waiting for his coming;
then the signs of his coming, that fill the hearts of others with dread, will
fill ours with joy. Then when the ungodly shall cry to the mountains to cover
them, we shall look up with confidence, and lift up our heads: for our
redemption draws nigh.

The Twelfth SERMON, Preached before the HONORABLE JUDGES AT AN ASSIZES HELD AT
Northampton.
ROMANS XIII. 4. He bears not the sword in vain.
THE words are St. Paul's. And it sounds well when an Apostle blows the trumpet
before the Magistrate, and proclaims his power. But as the sound was good, so
was it now high time it should be heard. Christianity was at the bar, and the
Gospel arraigned of high Treason. Christ and Caesar were set at odds; and, as
if his Disciples had forsaken him to follow Judas the Acts 5.
Galilaean; and of Christians were turned Gaulenites, the rumor was, that this
new doctrine endangered the State, and one Kingdom was set up to ruin another;
and the knitting of a Church was the untying of civil Society. This was one of
the Devils first assaults against the Church: And he made it not but upon
advantage. For a sect of people there were, who as Josephus says, would have
(...) * (...), no Lord but God, no King but the King of Kings; and all this
under the fair pretense of maintaining their privilege and freedom. They would
have heard with delight St. Paul speak of a quiet and peaceable life: but his
(...), Be subject, was a word which bored their ears, and changed their
countenance. What? sell their freedom to buy their peace, and after an entail
of Liberty yield their neck to the yoke of Subjection? This was not for the
honor of a Galilaean, or a Jew, of those who had Abraham to their father. This
coat of Disobedience you see was made up by others; but some said Christianity
did wear it. Therefore the Apostle here presents her in an humble posture, upon
the knee, bowing to the Sword, and kneeling to Authority. And he proceeds like
a perfect Methodist. In the former Chapter he laid open and unfolded (...),
that large body of Philosophy, those numerous precepts of mutual conversation.
He levelled the hills, and raised the valleys; he disarmed men of all
instruments of private revenge; and he points in this Chapter to the higher
Powers, and enjoys Loyalty and Obedience. And having laid his ground work,
and drawn that first and fundamental axiom, That all Power and Jurisdiction is
from God, he brings in the Magistrate (...), ^^ a soldier, with a Sword in his
hand; and the motto is, NON FRUSTRA: For he bears not the sword in vain.

We no sooner hear of a Sword, but we think of Power. When the Angel held one
at the East Side of Paradise, it was to keep the way of the tree of life. When
Abraham drew one for recovery of his Nephew Lot, he had jus gladii, the power
of the Sword; and so had David, when he smote his enemies on the hinder parts:
Do we hear the Word called a sword. It is (...), mighty in operation. Is the
Spirit a sword? That Sword is power. So says St. Ambrose, Spiritus, gladius
verbi; verbum, gladius Spiritus, The Word is the sword of the Spirit, and the
Spirit the sword of the Word; both are Swords, both powerful. The Sword was
insigne magistratus, an ensign and badge of authority, put into the hand of
Kings and Emperors when they put on their robes, their purple, (...), those
Princely and peculiar vestiments, to work obedience in the people, and to win
reverence from the subject, ne orederentur esse privati, says Aquinas, lest
the people should mistake them, and esteem them as private men, as fit to feel
a sword as to bear one.

Not to be too anxious in cutting out our way and making our passage; the
Civilians will enform us that the word Sword is not taken merely pro telo, for
a material sword, but that it includes merum imperium, the Right of drawing the
sword, that vindicative and coactive Power, pressing on, and breaking through
the strongest opposition, battering down tumults, sedition, disorders, and
making way to the peace of the weal-publick.

Well then, we see, a coercive and restraining power, a Sword there is. For the
Almighty teaches not Man only by his immediate Wisdom, nor guides him alone
by his invisible finger, but with a finger has drawn out many visible copies
of his words and works, that Man may even see and feel and handle those
instructions which may make him wise; so neither does he govern the world alone
by his immediate unapprehensible Power, by that fullness and infiniteness which
he is, but he also derives a power, conveys an instrument, lets fall a Sword,
to be employed in the very eyes of men. But, in the next place, a Sword is but
a dead instrument, able of it self to produce no effect: all you find in it is
an aptness and disposition to obey the force and virtue of the agent. Goliah's
sword, if Abimeleck wrap it up in a linen cloth behind the Ephod, what is it?
what does it? But let David take it to pursue the Philistines, there is none to
that. Therefore St. Paul not only shows the Sword, but also points out to the
hand that bears it; (...), and (...), the Prince, the Judge, the Magistrate, he
is the Swords-man.

But now the Sword is in the Hand, what must our expectation wait for? Does it
come forth against an adversary? or will it strike at random? Omne
instrumentum disponitur ad virtutem agentis, say the Schoolmen, The instrument
obeys the agent. A Sword it is, and there is much in the Hand that bears it. He
may latch it in the side of Innocence, and wound Justice her self: Naboth may
lose his vineyard, and life too, John Baptists head go off, and St. Paul be
smitten against the law. I say, the Sword neither hurts nor helps: It is the
Hand that does it. We must then, in the next place, fix up the Motto, engrave
St. Paul's NON FRUSTRA upon the Sword; and then strike he must, or else he does
but bear; and in the right place too, and our fear is vanished.

We may now behold the Magistrate placed as he should be, in his proper place,
in the midst between the Offender and the Innocent, looking upon both. To the
good the word is (...), It is a Sword, but fear not: thy innocence has made
him that bears it both thy friend and champion: But if thou have done evil,
the dialect is altered, and he speaks in thunder, (...), Fear, it is a sword,
and terrible. So then we have here wrapped up the Power and the Subject; the
Instrument, the Agent, and the End; Authority granted, confined, and directed; a
Sword committed, born, and used. The parts then are these, and by these lines
we are to pass. First, we must place the Sword, and fasten it too, in its
proper place, the hand of the Magistrate; Secondly, we must join the NON
FRUSTRA to the Sword: and that will bring us in the Third place to the most
proper and peculiar work of the Magistrate, to his prime care, That he bears
it not in vain. Of these in their order.

He bears the sword: That is his Authority, his Commission. For of God it
cannot in strict terms and properly be said that He bears a sword. God is
Omnipotency, and Aeternity, and Power; (...), a sea of essence, says
Nazianzene, and (...), a sea of power; but the Magistrate is the channel and
conveyance of the rivulet. God gives the Power, the Magistrate has it; God
lends the Sword, the Magistrate bears it. Autoritas dicitur de diplomate
principis manu obsignato; Authority presumes a Commission. And though Ambition
(as one observes) has presented this Power under diverse forms and
complexions, of Popularity, Aristocrasy and Monarchy, which is the fairest and
compleatest piece, yet the Commission and seal is still the same. For behold
him who bears this Sword, and is invested with this power, and you shall see
him sealed, and that Divina manu, with the very finger of God. The Kings broad
Seal, what is it. The matter is wax; a small piece of money will buy a greater
quantity: But having the image and superscription of my Prince, it is either my
Pardon, or my Liberty, or my Charter, or my Possessions. So the Magistrate,
what is he? Behold the Man, my fellow, dust and ashes, of as near alliance to
the Worm and Corruption as my self: Nay, behold a sinful man, of as near kin to
Adam as my self: And yet he awes me, and he bounds me, and he keeps me in on
every side. One monosyllable of his turns me about, and is my motion. If he
say, Go, I got If he say, Come, I come: If he say, Do this, I do it. For he is
sealed, and has the image and superscription of the Deity. And as we say that
Laws are numismata reipublicae, the Coin, the Money, in which we may behold the
face and the livelihood of a Commonwealth: so is the Magistrate numisma Dei, a
piece of Coin taken out of Gods Mint. We need not ask whose image or
superscription he has; for he has Gods: And though he bear the Sword, yet he
had it from Him who is said to bear all things. And Heb. 1. 3.
being thus armed, like to God himself, he keeps every wheel in its due motion,
every man in his right place; the master on horsback, and the servant on the
ground: and where Impudence increases, he checks it with a, Friend, sit down
lower. He keeps the hands of the ungodly from the white hairs of the aged, and
the teeth of the oppressor from the face of the widows. He lays his hand upon
the orb of that Commonwealth, (...), that it move not incomposedly and
unsteddily. And in this he does give unto God those things which are Gods, his
own coin, his own image, not clipped, not dashed, not defaced; a powerful Just
man, the fairest picture and representation of his Master.

But though God has conveyed his Power, and given his Sword, yet he has not
done it to every man upon the same terms; not to Joab the Captain of the Host
as to David the King; not to Shaphan the Chancellor as to Josiah on the
throne; not to Gallio the Deputy as to Caesar the Emperor; not to the under
Officers as to the lower Justices; not to the Justices as to the Judge; not to
the Judge as to the King. Non variatur praerogativa autoritatis aut
differentiae numero illorum quibus est concredita potestas, That the
prerogative of Authority is the same in all, that a Burgomaster of Amsterdam
shall stand in competition with the greatest Monarch for Right and Sovereignty,
is a doctrine which trips at the very chair of Majesty, and calls for Parity
and Popularity. But let it die, and be buried with the Author, that man of
contention; or if not, let it breathe in its own coast, and be a
beyond-sea-doctrine still. Here is no such equalizing of Powers, no print or
foot-step thereof in the Apostle. For see here even an order of Order, (...)
and (...). These Powers are ordinatae, not permitted, but ordained; 2. (...),
subordinate, under God; 3. (...), Marshalled, set in order; constituted,
decreed, subordinate, ordained. Here rota in rota, a wheel within a wheel,
and a sphere within a sphere. God, the first Orb, the great compassing Wheel;
the Kings is absolutum Dominium, absolute under God; yours, concreditum and
delegatum, dependant, and by way of delegation. Mutuato splendetis lumine, you
spangle in your spheres like stars, but it is with a borrowed light: and he who
holds you now in his right hand, may let you fall, and fix up others. For he it
is who by you conveyeth and lets forth himself to his subjects, his house is
the tribunal while you are sitting. When you bespeak the Jury, the Charge is
his; and when you give sentence, he condemns the guilty. Therefore Nazianzene,
where he tells us that Magistrates are the very image of God, thus sorteth he;
the King, a complete piece; the middle sort, but half-pictures; the lowest like
those (...), drawn but to the shoulders.

But yet again, all carry the image of God, and every one bears the sword,
though delivered some at the second or third hand, as they say. And God has
both appropriated and fastened it. No private man may be a swords-man. If Peter
will be drawing to lop off an ear, Christi patientia in Malcho vulneratur,
Saint Tertullian; Christ's Patience is wounded by Peter's impatience, and he must
hear, Put up thy sword into its place, for he that draws Matthew. 26.
the sword shall perish by the sword. God puts the sword out of our reach. For
Revenge is (...), an imbred desire, kindled in the very heart of Man by Nature.
And to that lesson and dictate of our first Mother, Vim vi repellere, To defend
our selves, and to drive back force by violence, we have added (...), the
Thirst and pursuit of retaliation. And this Lesson the World has long since
taken out and digested, and reads it in its own corrupt edition, and calls it
Justice. Esau will kill his brother Jacob; for should he have my birthright?
Every male of the Shechemites must fall under the sword; for should Shechim
abuse our sister as a whore? But our later and more gallant times have
commented, and glossed upon this Lesson, have drawn out leges (...), a method
of Quarrelling, and an art of Murder. And they proceed sub formata, under a set
form; as legally as you use to do in your Courts of Justice. Every hand with
them is fit for a sword; every arm, an arm of Justice; the right Sword is not
thought on, till they feel it. Further yet; as God has appropriated the Sword,
to make it the Magistrates, so has he fastend it, to keep it in his hand. No
discontent shall move it, no argument stir it, no murmuring sheath it; no time,
no calling, no liberty free or privilege from the power of it. It may be drawn
at Jerusalem as well as at Athens, in the Land of Jewry as well as in streets
of Ashkelon, amongst the faithful as well as amongst unbelievers: Let them
accuse one another, may be the voice of a Christian as well as of the Acts 19.
Town Clerk of Ephesus.

A Generation there are that would long since have wrencht the Sword out of the
Magistrates hand, and broke it. A Generation that had raised themselves to such
a pitch of Perfection that they could be wicked, and not guilty; to such a
health of spiritual goodness, that sickness it self might be their health; to
such a constitution and temper of Holiness, that no airasie, no distemper could
alter it: like those Beguniae in the Historian, or those Indian Gymnosophists,
who by a few years austerity had purchased an age of licentiousness and luxury.
They were now become (...), more regular then the Rule, more exact than the
Law, more bright then Light, above the Command. Will you hear them in their own
Dialect? A Hezekias is no better than a Sennacherib; a Constantine as
unsufferable as a Julian; every Magistrate a tyrant, and every tyrant a Devil.
What need of other guide then the Spirit? of other Court than Heaven? of other
lash than that of Conscience? Speak we of Tribulation? It is their portion.
Injury is a benefit. Take away their cloak, they punish it with the gift of a
coat; Meum and Tuum are harsh words in the Church. They are almost of the mind
of the Corpocraliars in Clement, who because the Air was common, would have
their Wives so too. Ridiculous men! who not only mistake their God, but would
teach him. It is true; rather than thou should take the Sword into thy own
hand, let thy Eye go out, thy Coat be lost, and thy right Hand be cut off: But
let the Magistrate strike, and the blow is not a blow of Revenge, but of
Justice. Morality teaches us to do no wrong: That which Religion adds is no
more but this, to keep our mind in an habitual preparation of Suffering it. And
thus the Schoolmen and Casuists out of Augustine interpret those precepts of
our Savior, That we ought then to retain the heart of a friend when we have
taken upon us the name of an adversary, and so compose our selves that we
should choose rather to loose our Right than our Charity. But Charity seeks
not her own. A good Argument not only to keep me from the Tribunal, but to
drive me also from the Church. And yet he who bid me cast my bread upon the
waters, has prescribed me also that form of prayer, Give us this day our daily
bread. It is true; Regulae Caritatis latius patent quam juris, The rules of
Charity are of a larger extent than those of the Law. If thou owe a hundred
measures of oil, Charity takes the bill, and sets down quickly, and writes
Fifty: And if thy vessels be quite empty, she cancels the bill, and teareth the
Indenture. But it is as true too, that Charity begins at home, and he that
provides not for his own family is worse than an Infidel. These precepts of our
Savior non consistunt in puncto, are not to be read in that narrow compass
they lie, but have their certain latitude. Let my Charity shine forth like the
Day, but not to darken the luster of Justice. Let her stretch out her hand to
the furthest, but not to reach at the Sword of the Magistrate. And as they
mistake our Savior, so would they take upon them to teach him. A trick the
world has long since got, To be angry with Gods Providence, To teach his
Wisdom, To guide his Hand, and as he in Photius, To put their own shape upon
the Deity, and to confine and limit God to their own fancy. If that be
thwarted, the most blessed Peace is but tumult, the most gracious Government
tyranny, and Order it self disorderly. Why should Christ become man? say some.
He might have satisfied (...), with his bare naked Divinity. If he will take
flesh, and redeem, he may do that, and not satisfy, say others. And says the
Cardinal, God had not dealt discreetly, if he had not established a visible and
infallible, a universal Catholic, and yet particular, Church. And if God be
Judge of all men and Deus ultionum, what need then (...) and (...), these
counsel-tables and seats of judgment, and the dread and horror of an earthly
tribunal? What use of a Sword in the hand of a Magistrate.

I have grappled, you see, with a mean adversary; but I found him in my way,
and could not well balk him; I leave him to that censure of the Philosophers on
those who should deny either Worship to God or Love to Parents, (...), He
should smart under the Authority he denies, and be confuted with the edge of
that Sword he questions.

But we shall meet with Giants indeed. Not a Sword you see but they snatch at.
If they meet with two at once, Ecce duo gladij, both theirs: And they take
them, and put them into the hand of that Man of pride; and he fights against
Authority, Sword and Bearer, King and Caesar, Christ and all. They read these
words as we do: And this Sword is secular Power with them too. But then this
Power is a subordinate and dependent Power; this Sword is a sword at will, as
we say; a sword which like Joseph's brethrens sheaves to his sheaf, must bow and
make obeisance to the high Priests Sword. And the Magistrate is left
palsy-strucken, and the Sword tottering in his hand: a breath, a frown of the
supreme Head disarms him. But oh the artifice and slight of Satan! The
Conclusion is, He must be disarmed; but the first Proposition is, He bears
his sword. For by these degrees and approaches they reach at it. The First step
is, He bears the sword; and therefore he must be able to wield it; and
therefore he must have some Master of defense, the Pope forsooth, to instruct
him; and therefore he must guide his arm by his direction, and strike as he
prescribes: If he misplace his blow, he must be corrected; if he be
incorrigible, he must be disarmed. There is the last, Syllogismus vere
destructivus, a bloody destructive Syllogism. Inauguration is the Medium, and
Deposition inferred. This is a Chain to bind Kings in, and the first link is
Power. Here is a Building ruined by the Foundation which should sustain it, and
the Magistrate disabled by his Commission. Thus has the yielding Devotion and
forward Piety of some Christian Emperors warmed and animated the Bishops of
Rome, and made them active to question that Power which once did shelter them;
and then the Sword became their port and argument which was before their
terror. For look back, and behold them temporibus malis, when persecution
raged; they were no Swordmen then. You might see them in another posture; a
borer in their eyes, a whip on their backs: no Sword, but what was drencht in
their own blood, and their Crown was Martyrdom. Or look and behold S. Paul here
pleading the right of this Magistrate, upholding that Sword which he was to
feel, adoring that Power he sunk under, and bowing to Majesty when the throne
was Nero's. It is the gloss of a Jesuit upon the Apostle; but he glosseth too
upon that Gloss: Ecclesia non subvertit Regna; The Ephod and the Robe suit
well: The Church thwarts not secular Power, nor is one sword drawn to break
another; but both together glitter in the face of Disobedience, to strengthen
the pillars of a Kingdom. Let then both swords be drawn together, the one to
pierce through the heart, the other, to drink the Luke 35. 2.
blood of the wicked, the one, to cut out those causarias parts animae, those
Deuteronomy. 32.
maims and bruises of the soul; the other, to cut off the ungodly from the
earth: the one, to hang over (...), that laboratory and workhouse of the soul,
that no Babel be erected there, no curious piece of guile shaped there, no
refuse silver come there, no works of iniquity set up there; but then Vengeance
lying at the door, and the other sword ready, if they come forth and appear, to
abolish them, to pull down that Babel, to break those carved pieces, to dash
those plots, to demolish these works: The one, to guide us (...), in things
pertaining to God; the other, (...), in matters of this present life.

We have now put the Sword into the Magistrates hand. It is now time to
proceed, and place the NON FRUSTRA upon the sword. Having settled Authority in
its proper subject, our next task must make good, that it is not there in vain.
Our second part.

Those actions which are irregular, and swarve from the rule, the Philosopher
calls (...), odious, frivolous actions, to no purpose: Nec quid, nec quare; No
reason can be given why they should be done. Adultery to night is pleasure; to
morrow, my disease. Murder is now my thirst; anon, my melancholy. Here is a
Frustra indeed: I am more vain than Vanity it self. But the Quare? the
Wherefore? to me, and you have silenced me. But those things which are laid and
driven to a right end will admit a Quare? Wherefore the sword? Wherefore
Authority? The Apostle is ready, and meets you with an answer, That we may lead
a quiet and 1 Timothy 2. 2.
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty; That every man may sit under his
own vine, and under his own fig tree; that the poor man may keep his lamb, and
the jawbone of the oppressor be broken; that Peace may shadow the
Commonwealth, and Plenty crown it. There is scarce one Quare? resolved with so
many Answers. (...), says Basil, This is not a matter of jest, but earnest.
For would you have diverse Families drawn into one body politic? This is (...),
the very bond and tie of Society. Would have the Laws kept? This is (...), a
watch, a guard set upon the Laws. Nay, would you have any Laws at all? This is
(...), the Lawgiver. For, as Julian calls the Law (...), the Child of Justice,
so may we call it the child of Authority. For as Authority nurseth and
defends and strengthens it, so it was the Midwife which brought it forth,
and the Mother too which conceived it. When it was in semine, in principiis,
when it lay hid in the lap of the Law natural, Authority framed and shaped and
limbed it; gave it voice, and taught it to speak its own language, but more
audibly; declared, expounded, amplified it, and was its interpreter. Will you
have a Church? Authority gathers it. Would you have the Church continue so, a
Church still, and not fall asunder into Schisms, nor moulder into Sects, nor
crumble into Conventicles? Authority is the juncture, the cement, the
Contignation, (...), the pale, the fence, the wall of the Church keeping it so,
that neither the Wolf break in, nor the Sheep get out; that neither Heresy
undermine the bulwarks without, nor Schism raise a mutiny within. Such an
accord and sympathy there is between the Secular and Spiritual Sword, between
the Church and body Politic, that if the one be sick, the other complains
(...), says Socrates, at the same time. If the Commonwealth swell into tumors
and seditions, you may see the marks and impressions thereof in the Church: and
if the Church be ulcerous and impostumate, you may see the symptoms and
indications in the body Politic. So that now we may well render (...), non
sine causa: There is good cause, good reason, that a Sword should be held up,
that Authority be established. And to this Non frustra we may add (...).
Authority is not only not in vain, but profitable. And we may now ask not
only Quare; but, (...); not only, Wherefore? but, What profit is there? And
we can answer and resolve with the Apostle, (...), Much every manner of way.
For let Cities talk of Charters, and Tradesmen of gain; let Scholars speak of
learning, and Noblemen of honor; let the Church sing of peace to the
Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth echo it back again to the Church.
Attribute these to what you will; this is (...), this is all. This is Isaiahs
nail in a sure place, on which hand both Laws, and Church, and Commonwealth.
If you but stir it, you endanger; if you pluck it out and remove it, you batter
all. And this argument ab utili, quite shuts up Frustra. (...), That which is
profitable is good: and that which is good is not in vain. But to step one
degree further; To this (...) we may add (...), Necessity to Profit. Profit may
lead me, Necessity chaineth me. I run and meet with Profit, but I am forced and
plucked by Necessity. And if it be not only well it should be so, but be so as
that it cannot be otherwise, then is it not in vain. It not Profit, yet
Necessity excludes Frustra. And necessary Authority is, not so much on Gods
part as on ours. For, as Aquinas speaks of the natural Temple, Propter Deum non
oportuit Templum fieri, God had no need of a Temple made with hands, but Man
had need that God should have one: so God could have redeemed us by his own
immediate absolute Sovereignty; he could have governed us without a Sword; but
it was not good for Man to be so governed. We were gone away from God, and set
our selves at such a distance that it was not good he should come too nigh us.
And therefore St. Basil calls it (...), his love to Man, that as he had drawn
Heaven as a curtain, and made it (...), the veil of his Divine Majesty, so in
all his operations and proceedings upon Man he is still Deus sub velo, God
under a veil; hidden, but yet seen; in dark characters, but read; silent, and
yet heard; not touched, but felt; still creating the world by conserving it. I
say, Necessity has put the Sword into the hand. For God appears through other
veils, by other Mediums, but we hide the face, and will not see that light
which flasheth in our eyes. He is first sub velo naturae, under the veil of
natural impressions, speaking to us by that Law which Tertullian calls legem
naturalem, and naturam legalem, and speaking in us, but at a distance,
preventing us with anticipations, dropping on us, and leaving in us, (...),
those common notions, and practick principles. To love God, hate evil, To
worship God, and the like, domi nascuntur. To do as I would be done to, (...),
it is my contemporary, my domestic, born and bred with me. I received it with
my first breath; and it will live in me, though I attempt to strangle it; it
will live with me, though I would chase it away. Non iniquitas delebit, says
Augustine: These things are written with the finger of God, and Sin it self
cannot blot them out. But though I cannot blot them out, I may enterline them
with false glosses, though I cannot race them out, I may deface them. My Envy
may drop on them, my Malice blur them, and my Self-love misplace them. On this
foundation of Innocence I may build in blood; on this groundwork of Justice I
may set up Oppression. I may draw false consequences from these true
principles: I must do good; I do so to my self when I wrong my neighbor: I
must shun evil; I think I have done that when I run from goodness. Like those
(...) in Aristotle those stiff and stubborn defendants, to what is first
proposed, we easily yield assent; but at last (...), we hunt-out tricks and
evasions: We are all Sophisters, but it is to cheat and delude our selves. And
now if we read these principles in the worlds corrupt edition, if unjust man
may be the Scholiast, thus they lie: see, and read them: INJURIAM FECISSE,
VIRTUTIS EST; to do injury is virtue; To oppress is power; Craft is police;
Murder is valor, Theft is frugality; The greatest Wisdom is, not to be wise to
salvation.

And therefore, in the second place, God presents himself again under another
Medium, sub velo legis scriptae. He would be read as it were in tables of
stone. And in these tables he writes and promulges his Law Moral. Will this
prevail? No, he must back and strengthen it with the Judicial. Sin must be
brought forth, and seen in its own shape, Murder wallowing in the blood she
spilt, Fornication in a whitesheet with shame upon her forehead, Blasphemy with
its brains dashed out, Idleness starved, Theft sub hasta, brought to public
sale, and condemned to slavery. But under the Gospel Hell it self is unlockt,
her mouth opened, and all her terrors displaied. Who would now think that this
were not enough to stay our fliting humor, to quell our raging temper, to bind
our unlimited desires? Who would not think that this two-edged sword of the
Word would frustrate and annihilate all other swords? If I had set my face to
Destruction, this should turn me, if I were rushing forward, this should stay
me.

But, alas! we break through these repagula, we run over these sufflamina. God
speaks in us by the Law of Nature, but we hear him not. He writes to us by way
of Letter and Epistle in his Divine Law, but we answer him not. Besides this,
we too often reject and reverberate his gracious instructions and incitements
by the wise counsel and examples of good men. In both God beckneth to us. It is
now high time he speak to us through a veil of Blood, that he put the bridle
into our mouths. If Hell will not fright us, then we must hear those more
formidable words, as S. Augustine says, more formidable to humane ears,
Occido, Proscribo, Mitto in exilium, Death, Proscription, Banishment. Tribuno
opus, and carcere: Lay the whip upon the fools back. For to be thus questioned
many times prevails more then a Catechism.

Therefore Theodorete calls this Sword, this Power, (...), a most catholic and
sovereign remedy; and Luther, necessarium corruptae naturae remedium, a
necessary remedy for weak decayed nature. When the Fear of God boundeth us not,
imponit timorem humanum, says Irenaeus, he aws us with the Sword and humane
Authority. When the destillation of his dew and small rain will not soften us,
down came his hailstones and coals of fire to break us. A remedy it is our
disposition and temper looks for and requires. For we are led for the most part
by the Sense. We love and fear at a distance. And as the object is either nigh
or remote, so it either affects or frights us. (...), The greatest evils, and
so the greatest goods too, are least sensible. Villam malumus quam caelum,
says Augustine, We had rather have a Farm, a Cottage, than Paradise, and
three lives in that than eternity in Heaven. We had rather be rich than good,
mighty then just. Saint Ambrose gives the reason; For, says he, quis unquam
justitiam contrectavit? Who ever saw Virtue, or felt and handled Justice? And
as our Love, so stands our Fear: Caesarem magis timemus quam Jovem; We fear Man
more than God, and the shaking of his whip than the scorpions of a Deity, A Dag
at hand frights more than great Ordinance from the Mount, and a Squib than a
crack of Thunder. He that could jest at a Deity trembled at a Thunderbolt. The
Adulterer says Job, watches for his twilight; as if God had his night. And,
The ungodly lies in wait to spoil the poor, says David. He seeks a day and
an opportunity, as if God had not one every moment; and he does it secretly, as
if that (...), that revenging Eye, were put out. And though he stand as a butt
for Gods Vengeance, and a mark for his arrow, and fuel for his fire, the very
center wherein all Gods curses may meet; yet he cleaves to his sin, he hugs and
embraces it. Would you have a separation and divorce made? It is more probable
a Whip should do it then a Sermon, an Officer then a Preacher, a Warrant then
an Anathema. You must sue for it in the Court of Justice, not in the Church. So
sensual, so senseless many are. Therefore the Holy Ghost in Scripture presents
and fashions himself to the natural affections of men. And that we may not turn
bankrupts, and sport or sell away our livelihood and estate in Heaven, and so
come to a spiritual nothing, to bring us to the other world, he tells us of
something which we most fear in this. To those who love liberty, he speaks of a
prison, a jailer, an arrest. Those who dare not step into the house of
mourning, he tells of weeping and gnashing of teeth; and to those tender
constitutions who can endure no smart, he threatens many stripes. NON SINE
CAUSA GLADIUM, is the servants and hirelings argument; and many times it
convinces and confutes him, it dulls and deads the edge of his affection. It
destroys Murder in anger, quenches Adultery in the desire, sinks Pride in the
rising, binds Theft in the very purpose; and, ut seta filum, as the bristle
draws the thread, it fits and prepares a way for Charity and Religion it self.

We may now then engrave this NON FRUSTRA upon the Sword, and settle it as an
undoubted conclusion, That Authority was not granted in vain. Unless you will
say that the Law was in vain, and Reason in vain, and Man in vain: unless you
will Put the FRUSTRA upon the Church, the World, Hell, Heaven it self. And if
the Sword be not in vain, then in the next place, by an easy illation the Duty
of the Magistrate will follow, which is, Operam fortem and diligentem dare, as
the form runs, Strenuously to contend (...), ne frustra, that he bear not the
Sword in vain. My third and last part.

There is no danger of a frustra but here. For potestas habet se indifferenter
ad bonum and malum, says Aquinas; Authority, though directed and ordained to
good alone, yet stands in an even aspect and indifferency to both good and
evil. In it is the life of the innocent, and in it is the destruction of the
wicked; and it may be the flourishing of the wicked, and the death of the
innocent. The Magistrate may (as the Devil is said to do) (...), invert the
order of things, put shame upon Integrity, and security upon Sin. The Sword is
an instrument; and he may use it as he will: and so of a fiery and sharp sword
he may make it gladium ficulneum, a wooden and unprofitable sword; and then the
drunkard may reel in the streets, and injury may rage at noonday for all that;
or pictum gladium, no better then a Sword in a painted cloth, only to be looked
upon. He may use it, not like a Sword, but like David's rasour, to cut
deceitfully: or he may let it rust in his hands, that, as that Lawyer
complained of the Sword in his time, it may be fit for nothing but to cut a
purse, let out a bribe.

Thus it may be. But our task is to keep off this Frustra from the Magistrate.
And see in my Text they are severd and diametrically opposed; Frustra is placed
e regione, point blanck to the Magistrate. For the Apostle lays it down (...)
and (...), he puts a Non, a negation, between them. He speaks it positively,
and he speaks it destructively, (...), he bears not the sword in vain. The
(...) and the (...), the Duty and the Power, the Office and the Definition the
same. That which should be so is so, and it is impossible it should be
otherwise, say the Civilians. For at this distance these terms naturally
stand. But when we read a corrupt Judge, a perjured Jurer, a false Witness, we
have conciliated them, and made up the contradiction.

These terms naturally stand at a distance: we must then find out something to
keep them so, to exclude this Frustra, to safeguard the Magistrate, that he
bear not the sword in vain. And we need not look far. For it is the first thing
we should look upon; and the Philosopher points it out to us, (...), to
propose an end. Non agitur officium, nisi intendatur finis, say the Schools. I
stir not in my duty, if this move me not; and I faint and sink under my duty,
if this Continue not that motion. And down falls the Sword with a Frustra upon
it, if this uphold it not; I am but Man, and my actions must look out of
themselves and beyond themselves. I have not my compleatness, my perfection, my
beatitude within my self; and therefore I must take aim at something without my
self to enfeoff and entitle me to it.

Now the Magistrate has diverse ends laid before him; First, that first and
architectonical end, the Glory of God; and then, that which leads to that, the
Peace of the Church; and that which procures that, the Preservation of Justice;
and that which begins that, the proper work of Justice it self, to stand in the
midst between two opposite sides till he have drawn them together and made them
one; to keep an equality even in inequality; to use the Sword not only
rescindendo peccatori, to cut off the wicked, but communi dividundo, to give
Mephibosheth his own lands to divide to every man his own possessions. Then the
NON FRUSTRA is upon the Magistrate as well as upon the Sword, when the Law is
not only the edge of this Sword, but flabellum justitiae, a fan to blow and
kindle up Justice in the breast of the Magistrate, that it may warm and comfort
the oppressed, but to the wicked become (...), a consuming fire: When he lays
not these ends aside, and instead thereof places others; for the Glory of God,
some accession and addition of Honor to himself; for the good of the
Commonwealth, the filling of his Coffers; for the Peace of the Church, the
avoiding of a frown: for the right of the oppressed, his own private
conveniences; and for the Truth, Mammon. There are many ends, you see; but
that is most pertinent to our present purpose which the Apostle sets down in
this Chapter; Terror to the wicked, Security of the good, Justice on both sides.

And first, the Magistrate, like God himself, (...), governs us by that which
is adverse to us, curbeth the transgressor by the execution of poenal laws;
which St. Basil calls (...), a purging, cleansing, refining fire, even of that
other fire, which when it breaks forth is Lust, Adultery, Murder, Sedition,
Theft, or what else may set the Church and Commonwealth in a combustion.

And, in the next place, this end has its end too. For no Magistrate does
simply will the affliction and torture of the offender, or punish only to show
his authority, but (...). He has an end for that too. His Power rests not in
the evil of punishment, but looks further, to the good of amendment, and to the
good of example; not to the taking off heads, but piercing of hearts; not to
binding of hands, but limiting of wills; not to the trouble of the sinner, but
the peace of the Commonwealth. This is the very end of Punishment, to destroy
that proclivity and proneness to sin which every evil action begets in the very
committing of it. Lay the whip upon the fools back, and slumber is not so
pleasant; bring him to the post, and he unfolds his arms. Set up the Gibbet,
the Gallants sword sticks in his scabberd; exact the mulct, and he has lost
the grace of his speech and half his Gentility. Let the sword be brandisht, and
Sin is not so impudent, but croucheth and mantleth her self, and dares not step
forth before the Sun and the people.

Gird then the sword upon the thigh, O most mighty. You who are invested with
this power, remember the end. Remember you were placed with a Sword, hostire
iniquitatem, in a hostile manner to pursue the wicked; to run after the
oppressor, and break his jaw, and take the prey out of his mouth; to destroy
this Wolf; to chase away the Asp, the poisonous heretic; to cut off the hands
of Sacrilege; to pierce through the spotted Leopard. And in doing this you
perform the other part; You defend and safeguard the innocent. The death of one
murderer may save a thousand lives; and the destruction of one traitorous
Jesuit as many souls. Qui malos punit, bonos laudat; The Correction of the
evil is the Commendation, nay, it is the buckler, the castle, the defense, of
the good. And it may prove too the Conversion of the wicked. The blood of one
Wolf may work an alteration and change of another; the Leopard may come to
dwell with the Kid, the Wolf may feed quietly with the Lamb, the Lion may eat
straw like an Ox, and the Asp play with a Child. Isa. 11.


The poenal Statutes are (...), copies, and samplers: and a Judge must do as a
Painter does, says Plato, follow and imitate his forms and draughts. Where the
Law is drawn in lines of blood, he must not lay on colors of oil: Where the
Law shows the offender in chains, he must not present him at liberty: Where it
frowns, he must not draw a smile, nor, Timanthes like, draw a veil, as not able
to express that frown. No; he must take his proportions and postures from the
Law, Oppression must be portrayed with its teeth out; Murder, pale, and wounded
to death; Idleness, whipped; the common Barretter, with papers in his hat. He
must similem pingere, not a Man for a Beast, not a Dog for a Lion, not a Fox
for a Wolf, not Manslaughter for Murder, not Usury for Extorsion, not Deceit
for Oppression, not a sum of daily incursion for a devouring one. He must not
depose and degrade a gallant boystrous sin, and put it in a lower rank, to
escape unpunished with a multitude. The neglect hereof brings in not only a
frustra but a nocivum with it. It is hurtful and injurious. It heaps injury
upon injury: And the first lights upon God himself, of whose Divine Power this
Power is a very beam; which falling upon a minister of Justice, falls as the
rays of the Sun upon a still quiet cloud: the reflection is equal and glorious:
But falling upon a corrupt unjust man, it falls as upon St. Jude's cloud
without water, or St. James his wave of the sea, tossed with the wind, and
carried about: the impression is flitting and vanishing, and the reflection
unstedfast and unequal. That this beam from heaven should be cast away upon an
empty cloud or a wave, is a piece of injustice. Besides it is contumelious to
God. For by injustice men undervalue him, and put him below his vassal, as if
his Omnipotency were weaker then Man, his Honor cheaper then a Fee, Heaven at a
lower price then a Bribe, and Christ himself not worth forty pieces of silver.

From God the injury descends to the Commonwealth. It brings in that which it
should cast out. Sin unpunished makes a greater breach then Sin committed. For
Adultery and Murder, Drunkenness and Deceit, may give the blow, but Injustice
wounds. They may call for the vials of Gods wrath, but this pours them forth:
They may invite his vengeance, but this pulls it down. Talk of those numerous
volumes of Sin, but this is all, this does all. This dislocates and perverts
the course of Nature; this changes it, says Basil, (...), into another
temper. It puts supernatural aspects upon natural effects. If it be a Comet, it
makes it ominous; if a vapor, it dampeth it with a plague. Will you have no
Sword hang over the Commonwealth? Then use that power which is put into your
hand. Would you have her of a healthy constitution and temper? Then cut off
putred and fester'd members. Turpis est pars quae toti suo non convenit: It is
an ill member for which the whole body is the worse. Ut in Sermon literae,
says St. Augustine, As Letters in a word or sentence, so Men are Elementa
civitatis, the principles, the parts, which concur to make up the Syntaxis of a
Commonwealth. (...), says he in Thucydides, for men are the city. But then
each capital and grand offender is a letter too much, or rather a blur, in the
sentence. Blot it out therefore, wipe him off from the face of the earth, and
the composition is entire.

Thirdly, many times the injury falls upon the offender; Who has lost his
Physic, (for Punishment is (...), medicinable, and does heal) whose greatest
punishment it is that he is so much wronged as to be befriended, and so much
favored as to be unpunished, to have his wounds exulcerate by a gentle hand,
to be poisoned with oil, to be chained with liberty, and being freed from
prison to bear about with him the cause of his imprisonment.

But the wrong wrests and dwells in the Magistrate; Who in a manner abjures his
office, degrades himself by his connivence, and makes the Sword less terrible
by not using it; the not executing the Law upon the greatest working a secret,
and reserved contempt thereof in the meanest. What speak you of the Law? I can
have it in sudariolo, in the corner of my handkerchief. What though it be vocal
against me? I can silence it. What fright you me with a Sword? I can play with
it. (...), That invisible tyrant, Gold, as Nazianzene speaks, dominers and
kings it over the Magistrate himself; and it is the Judge, the Advocate, the
Law, the Sentence, and the Magistrate sits guilty on the Bench, and the lesser
thief, says Basil, holds up his hand at the bar.

Here is then the danger of a Frustra. And this is the authentic and original
Frustra. And from the Magistrate we transcribe this Frustra, upon the Law and
Authority too: For the Law of it self is surda res, as the young men in Livy
complained, deaf and unexorable, Though thou speak aloud, it hears thee not;
and though thou speak it fair, it regards thee not: It is immovable, like a
rock; and it keeps its countenance, and stares the offender in the face. Thou
can not complement with it. No riches can batter it, no Power move it, no
Bribe alter it. If it seem to change countenance, it is not its own face, but
the paint and visard of the Magistrate. When Injustice drives and beats upon
this rock, that falls out which Tertullian observes of Infidelity meeting with
a convincing Argument, Injustice prevails, and the Law is vanquished, and
(which is monstrous) the Ship is safe, and the Rock shipwrackt. For the
Magistrate, as he is the life, so may be too the death of the Laws. In the Law
there is vis movens, and vis obligans, say the Jesuits, there is regula and
imperium; and it looks upon two faculties of the soul. It is both directive,
and coactive; it is a rule, and a command; a rod and a staff. It has its
lightning, and its thunder; it flashes upon the Understanding, and it thunders
upon the Will; it directs and regulates, it obliges and constrains. These be
its proper and peculiar functions and operations. But then the Magistrate may
slumber and benum it in all these; he may dead its force, and weaken its power,
and slug its motions. He may beat back this lightning, and drown the noise of
this thunder; he may put a Frustra upon it: that it would be better have no
Laws, than to give them life, and then bury them alive; or, if you suffer them
to live, to rack and torture them; to sell them to those crimes they frown at;
to give them to my wife, my friend, my servant, my lust. Better no Sword, than
that a Frustra should be upon it, then that Injustice should draw it.

Oh then, you that have this Sword put into your hands, as you tender the life
of the Laws, the peace of the Commonwealth, the good of your brethren, the
glory of God, the dignity of the Sword it self; bear it not in vain. Sever not
the Duty from the Power; let not the Sword destroy the bearing, nor one Sword
be living and eminent in the Text, and the other (...), like a flower in its
fading, ready to wither and vanishand steal away. Think of your Power, but
think of your Duty too: think of the Sword, but think of the hand that bears
it, and think of that hand that put it into the hand, whose every finger is
Power. Think then it is a Sword, and draw it against the most giant like
sinner, the most proud and insolent offender, and draw it for those
grasshoppers, even those who seem little and mean in the eye of the world, and
those who perhaps loose in their esteem to preserve their honesty. Draw it
(...), and (...), to cut off the hand of Violence, and to guard and shelter the
innocent, and revenge his cause. Let Wisdom direct your hand, and courage
strengthen it. With the one pierce thorough to the Truth, even through those
black mists of Trade and Overture, and false accusations and crafty
Undermining, and those mists which either the Lawyer or Witness, or Informer
shall cast, and those fogs which the corrupt heart of man may send up of
Ambition, Covetousness, Pride, Uxoriousness; and then, like good archers,
having found your mark, be men, and draw up your arrow to the head. End not
where you began, with a fair intent and good resolution; but crown it with
performance. March forward to the end; go on in that strength, O thou man of
Power. Let not a gift out of the bosom stay thee, nor a letter divert thee, nor
a frown from Greatness tire thee, till thou come ad terminum, till thou have
taken Justice, and drawn her out of these mists, and dispersed these fogs, and
led her thorough those retardations and encumbrances; till thou have clothed
thy self with her, and can say thou have finished thy course. And to this end
give me leave, Right Honorable, by way of conclusion, to be to you a memoria,
not a consiliis for this time to be your Register, and to reach into your hands
the book of Records. And I find therein a Curse enrol'd for the sowering of
Justice, for turning Judgment into wormwood, by corrupting, and into vinegar by
delaying it, and I find a Day of Visitation for not executing the judgment of
the fatherless. But then in this book too I find as many Blessings in a fair
and legible character, for executing of judgment, and destroying the wicked.
Take, read them to your Comfort; For the Non Frustra of bearing the Sword, many
Jer. 5.
Non Frustra's; a Non Frustra upon the Church; peace within her walls, and
prosperity within her palaces: a Non Frustra upon the Commonwealth, gold there
as silver, and silver as brass: a Non frustra upon the Laws; they shall now be
seen, and heard; they shall lighten, and they shall thunder: and a Non frustra
upon your selves. To you that thus bear the Sword, it shall not be in vain: but
in life it shall be your crown and garland? and in death, when the Sword falls
out of your hand, no cries of orphans, no tears of the widow, no groans of the
oppressed will disquiet your peace: but having resigned your Power, delivered
up your Sword Jovi vindici, to the the God of Revenge; having, Curtius like,
given your selves for your Country, sacrificed your selves, all your selves,
your Covetousness, your Ambition, your Self-love, he will receive his own, his
Deputy, his representation; and the Non frustra shall be seated with an Euge,
not only Not in vain, but Well done. And for a tribunal on earth you shall have
a mansion in heaven. Your circuit shall be enlarged, you shall judge not some
Shire or County, but the world: and be arrayed in whole robes of Innocence,
even of that Innocence which you have protected. And for Mortality you shall
receive Eternity, for Power Glory, for a Sword, a Crown. Which God grant us all
for his Son Christ Jesus sake.

The Thirteenth SERMON.
1 Pet. II. 13, 14, 15, 16. Submit your selves to every ordinance of man for
the Lords sake, whither it be to the King, as Supreme.

Or unto Governors, as unto them who are sent by him for the punishment of
evildoers, and for the praise of them that do well.

For so is the will of God, that with well-doing ye may put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men.

As free, and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the
servants of God.


LET every soul be subject to the higher Powers, says St. Paul the Doctor of
the Gentiles, Submit your selves Romans 13. 1.
to every ordinance of man, says St. Peter here, the Apostle of the
Circumcision. So this precept of Obedience to Governors reaches home unto
all: There is neither Jew nor Gentile, neither bond nor free, but comes under
this Law. We have two Apostles (one whereof in another case withstood the other
to the face) Gal. 2. 11.
both jointly standing up for the higher Powers, even for that Authority which
struck off the head of the one, and nayl'd the other to the cross. Both deliver
what they received from Christ: For what they lay down concerning Authority is
but an exposition and Commentary upon Christ's, Give unto Caesar those things
which are Caesar's. Obedience, Submission and Subjection take in all, all even
to a penny. Above all we cannot but observe how wisely and fully both the
Apostles press this doctrine, how they fight with the same weapons to defend
the King on his throne; how they bring the same Arguments, Arguments as
irresistible as that Power which they defend, (...), says St. Paul; (...),
says St. Peter: to the higher Powers, says the one; to Kings and to
Governors sent by them, says the other. And they both walk by the same rule,
ground their precepts upon the same reason. All power as from God, says St.
Paul; and Submit for the Lords sake, says S. Peter. They both hold up the same
Sword, terrible to evil doers, and which shall win praise to them that do well.
Again, not for wrath, but for conscience sake, says the one; for so is the
will of God, says the other. And the Will of God is in a manner the essence of
every Duty; It brings it home to the inward man, and to the very conscience,
and leaves it not as matter merely arbitrary, but which must be performed upon
pain of Death and Damnation. Hitherto both these glorious Apostles, as they
minded the same thing, so speak almost the same words; scarce any difference
between them. But St. Peter seems to be more particular, and at large to unfold
what is more briefly wrapped up by St. Paul. First he strives to take off a
foul imputation which was laid upon Christianity, That it made men disobedient
and refractorie to Government, in these words, That by well-doing you may put
to silence the ignorance of foolish men. Secondly, he takes away all pretense
from the Christian, which might shake his Loyalty, or make him cast a
favorable eye on that Disobedience which might open the mouth of an Infidel,
not only against the Christian, but even against Christianity it self, in
these words, as free, and not using your liberty as a cloak of maliciousness.
Take the conclusion of the whole matter; (...), We must needs be subject. The
King is placed in his throne; his Governors set abroad by him: and we must
submit, 1. propter Dominum, because the Lord has so commanded it; 2. propter
nos ipsos, for our own sakes, that we may live a Godly and peaceable life,
whilst, the wicked are punished, and the good praised. 3. Propter imprudentes,
for those fools sake, qui hominum vitam rebus assignant, who are very ready to
draw an Argument from the Person to blemish and deface his Calling and
Profession. Nor can our Freedom by Christ privilege us: for we must submit
quasi liberi, as free, and quia liberi, because we are free. For to this end we
are made free, that we should work all righteousness, and not make our Freedom
(...), a cloak of maliciousness; that by obeying of Kings and Governors we may
be the Servants of God.

This is the sum of these words. In them there be diverse circumstances
observable, which we cannot handle now. We will therefore confine our
meditations, and consider the Object, which is (...), every humane ordinance;
which has here its distribution into Superior and Infeferior, first, the King,
secondly, those Governors which are sent by him, and are his Vicegerents. 2.
What is meant here by Submission. 3. The Motives to win us to the performance
of this Duty. One is drawn ab autoritate, from the Authority of God himself,
whose Deputys, Kings and Governors are; We must submit for the Lords sake;
another, ab utili, from the Good and Benefit we receive from them, in the
punishment of evil doers, and the praise and encouragement of those that do
well. Of these in their order; and first of the Object, Submit your selves to
every ordinance of man.

What this (...), this ordinance of man, this humane creature, is, there is
some dispute, and by diverse hands it has been fashioned and shaped as it were
into diverse forms. Some have tendered it as a Law, as a Constitution, made by
man; Others have presented it as a Man, though not invested with Authority; and
so have made every man both a King and a Subject; a King, to receive honor;
and a Subject to give it; every man being bound by Christianity, as by a Law,
to esteem every man his Superior, and better than himself. Some take it for the
civil Power it self, which though it be ordained of God, and so is his
creature, yet it was first received and approved of men, and so may be said to
be a humane constitution: a Deo, says St. Paul, because all power is derived
from God; humana creatura, says St. Peter, because even Nature it self has
taught men this lesson, That two are better than one, and that every family and
every man, is most safe in a collection and Society, which cannot subsist but
by a mutual dependence, Eccles. 4. 9.
and a friendly subordination of parts, where some are governed, and others
bare rule. To reconcile all, we may observe that rule in St. Augustine, Turpe
est disputantibus in verborum quaestione immorari, cum certamen nullum de rebus
remanserit, It is a thing not seemly to dwell long upon the words, and to
contend and criticize thereupon, when the sense is plain. Though we cannot
separate the Power from the Man whose power it is, yet it is plain by the
distribution which follows, that it cannot be meant of the Power, but of the
Man upon whose shoulders the Government lies. For we cannot properly say of
Power, that it is either King or his Deputy. It is very probable, what a late
writer has observed, that by this phrase the name of Magistrate is expressed in
general; and that St. Peter calls him (...), a creature, as the Latins say,
creare consulem, to make or create a Consul; and that he styles him a humane
creature, not that the Magistrate has his Authority from men, but because
Magistrates themselves, who are endowed with this Authority, are men. So that
the word (...) has reference, not to the Efficient cause, but to the Subject,
to the Man in Authority, who is the creature of God, from heaven, heavenly. Nor
indeed is it much material which sense we take, but that the words will bear
this last better then the other. For as the man is, such is his strength; and
as the Magistrate is, such is his Power. They are (...), and bear so near a
relation that they cannot subsist but together: And St. Paul joins them
together, and makes them one. For whom he calls Rulers in one place, he calls
the higher Powers in another. They are humane creatures, as being men, and
formen; but in respect of their power, neither of men, nor by men, further then
their consent. No: (...), could the Pythagoreans say, Kings and Governors are
creatures of Gods making: And we may say of them as the people spoke of Paul
and Barnabas, Gods are come down to us in Acts 14.
the likeness of men.

Now this humane ordinance or creature, if you take it for the Power it self,
is still the same: and though it be conveyed by diverse subordinations unto
diverse, yet it differs no more then Water in the chanel does from what it was
in the fountain. For as the King rules in nomine Dei, in the name and place of
God, so does the lower Magistrate judge the innocent and punish the offender,
but withal in nomine Regis, in the Kings name. But if we take it for the
Magistrate himself, then it has degrees of Sub and Supra. (...), the King, is
(...), supreme and transcendent: The Rulers and Governors, which are sent and
appointed by him, move in a lower sphere, and, as the Stars, differ from one
another in glory. For, as we say in Logique, that the middle Species is the
Genus in respect of a lower, yet but the Species in respect of the Genus, so
Magistrates in comparison of Inferiors are public persons, and yet again but
Private men in respect of him who is Supreme. There is indeed a derivation, but
no equalizing of power. Regis absolutum Dominium, the Kings Dominion is
absolute under God; theirs who are sent, concreditum and delegatum, dependant,
and by way of delegation. For the King is in the Kingdom as the Soul in the
Body. And the Philosopher will tell us, Anima est ubi animat, The Soul is
wheresoever it has its operation. And so is the King wheresoever he rules:
For he sends his Governors, and by them conveigheth and lets forth himself
into every corner of his Kingdom. His house is the Tent whilst the Captain is a
commanding; the Province, whilst the Deputy is a governing; the Tribunal,
whilst the Judge is a sitting; the Consistory, whilst the Bishop is a
censuring. And there is no place hid from his power, but his power is every
where, where his Laws are in force. For these Governors are taken in in partem
curarum, to ease the King of his burden; not in partem imperij, to share with
him in his Supremacy. The King then, or Emperor, is still (...), in his
sublimity, in the very Zenith of state, and admits none to be above him, or in
the same altitude. He is the first compassing wheel; others are carried about
by his motion, moving as the Kings Law moves, and, as he gives charge in the
Comedy, ubi hic respicit, illi continuo recipient, watching his eye and
commanding the execution of his Laws. In a word, the King is sent from God, a
quo est secundus, post quem primus, from whom he is the second, and after whom
the first: and the lower Governors are sent from the King, who has power from
God thus to send them. Their Sheaves must stand round about and make obeisance
to his Sheave; the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars must yield submission to
him, ut supereminenti, as to one supereminent; and all men must yield obedience
to the Governors and Magistrates, as to God's indeed (for so they are called)
but missis ab eo, as sent and deriving their power from him who is supreme. And
in this eminency the King stands pro omnibus, and supra omnes, for all, and
above all. Nor can any hand depose or draw him lower. None can draw him from
that pitch and height where God has placed him: but he is still Supreme, as
over the People, so over the Priest. Nor does the Water of Baptism wash off
his ointment: He is not less a King because he is a Christian; but then Supreme
when he makes himself a Servant to all. The Holy Ghost has thus styled him.
And it may more truly be said of the words of God then of the words of
Consecration. Id operantur quod indicant, They work that which they signify,
and make him Supreme who they style so: Supreme in temporal things, to appoint
Officers, to send out Governors; and Supreme in spiritual, to punish them that
do evil, and encourage them that do well. He is bound indeed sceptra subjicere
Christo, to lay down his Scepter at the foot of Christ, to serve him in
holiness and righteousness all the days of his life, to punish wickedness and
vice, and to maintain Gods true Religion and Virtue. But all this, I am sure,
cannot amount to this, least he should come down a step lower, and yield to
that spiritual power of the Pope, who pretends to direct and guide, but will at
last devour his temporal, and disrobe the King because he is a Christian. This
were to make his Supremacy not a privilege, but a bare title, to be played
withal, and tossed from Gloss to Gloss, from distinction to distinction; to
call him Supreme as they did that Pope Boniface, who had indeed but a hard and
unpleasing countenance. Therefore though the high Priest turn Politician, and
take up two Swords at once, the Spiritual and the Temporal, and by the Word of
God will make himself a God, to set up Kings, and depose them at pleasure, yet
the King is in his Zenith, in that pitch of Majesty in which the hand of God
has placed him, and the Nobles and Magistrates, which he sends forth, circle
and compass him about as a ring; using his power to defend his Power; holding
up his hands as Aaron and Hur did the hands of Moses; ruling under him, and for
him, and keeping him still (...), Supreme above both Priest and People. And to
the King, as Supreme, and to the Governors, as sent by him, we stand here
commanded to submit our selves. Which is the Duty, and comes next to be
considered.

To submit our selves is a hard Duty, from which our very nature is a verse.
Not to do what we would, and to be subject to whom we would not, is a hard
saying, and few there are can bear it. Such is the perverseness of our
dispositions that we would do many things which we omit, were they not tendered
unto us under the high terms of a command. And this Indisposition of our minds,
this Unwillingness to be brought under, though many times it hinders our
submission, yet, when we subdue and master it, it crowns our Obedience. We had
need therefore of these remembrances, which may kill this humor in us, and
make us obey, not grudgingly, but with a willing mind. For this Submission, how
harsh soever the name sounds, is that by which we purchase our liberty. And as
it is perfect freedom to serve God, so is it no impeachment to our Liberty, to
submit our selves to the Magistrate* but we are then most highly exalted when
we couch and lie down at his feet. Dementia est potius trahi quam sequi; It is
a kind of madness, when Authority speaks, to hold back and withdraw our selves,
to be drawn rather then to follow and to submit rather upon the noise of the
whip than of the Law. We may perhaps think it a gay and pompous thing to sit in
the Throne or Seat of Justice, from thence to breath forth words of power, to
say to one, Go, and to another, Come, to show what wonders we can work with a
frown, to send forth Edicts, and promulge Laws. This may fill the minds of
those whose eyes dazzle at the beams of Majesty. But it is no paradox to say
that there is as great glory in Obedience. For he who subjugates his Will to
the lawful commands of others, has set up a throne within himself, and
commands that which no King can force; nay, he sets up a tribunal in his Soul,
and passes sentence upon the Judge himself, and shows that he is as able to
obey as the other is to command. He who is thus a servant is the Lords freeman;
and he who can thus obey is his own King and Judge.

Now this Submission consists not in the casting-down of the eye, or in the
bend of the Knee only, but in the yielding up and surrendry of the whole man;
Of the Hand, not to lift it up against that Power which is Gods, and which, if
we do not submit, will crush us to pieces. To say, Hayle master, to the
Magistrate, and then to oppose him, is but Judas-like to kiss Authority, and
betray it. To say with the Church of Rome, O King, live for ever, and yet to
strike at his Crown and Dignity, is to leave him a Crown indeed, but made of
thorns, and to make his Power more irksome than Subjection. To stand up
against those Governors which are sent, and not to give them their due honor
because they are not Caesar, is a breach of the same Law, and a flat defiance
of the King, only one removed, and at the second hand.

And as we must submit the Hand, and not lift it up, so must we also the
Tongue. This member is very apt to swell, and lift it self up, and speak proud
things. It will sooner blaspheme than pray; because Prayers are troublesome,
being to be uttered with an humble and submissive voice; but Railing and
Liberty of language seem to place me above my Betters, make me Superior to my
Governors, a King of Kings, and a Lord of Lords. Now this liberty of the
Tongue is well-near as dangerous as that of the Hand. For no sooner has
Discontent breathed it self forth, but it infects like the Plague, because it
commonly meets with those dispositions and tempers which are very apt to take
it. No sooner is the word gone out of the mouth, but it enters the heart of the
standers by; who, says Mr. Hooker, are very attentive and favorable hearers,
to suck in any poison which is breathed forth against the King or the Governor
which are sent forth; and anon it multiplies, and every valley and obscure
corner is ready to echo it back again.

Lastly, as we must submit the Tongue and the Hand, so the Thought also. Else
the Tongue will be a sharp sword still, and the Hand ready to reach at every
weapon and instrument of cruelty it finds. Been subactum cor, a Heart well
subdued and conquered, will nail the Tongue to the roof of the mouth, and make
the Hands hang down as not able to strike. But if the Heart be not hammered and
softened and kept under, then the Tongue will be loose, and run through the
earth, and the Hand will be lifted up to pull the King and his Governors on
the ground, and lay their honor in the dust. That Disobedience which at last
is talkative and proves as violent as a tempest, was at first but a whisper in
the heart: and an army drawn out in the field was at first mustered up in
cogitatorio, as Tertullian speaks, in the Phansy, which is the shop and
elaboratory of the Thoughts, and sets up a whole family of them in the Soul.
Kingdoms have been ruined, Magistrates have been slain, States have been
distracted, seditions raised; and all these had no more solid foundation at the
first than a Thought; That we may therefore truly submit to the King and his
Governors, we must (...), as Chrysostom speaks, Slumber all vain and absurd
imaginations, lest that pleasure, which we do not repress in the Phansy, do at
last break forth and domineer in action; lest that which is now but a
discontented thought, may gather strength by degrees, and at last break forth
into open impatience and disobedience. And if our own Safety and Security, if
the Peace of the Commonwealth, if Plenty and Prosperity, be not of force
enough to shackle our Hands, to shut up our Lips, and to keep down our Thoughts
from rising in our hearts; if these be weak motives, let him that shakes the
heaven and the earth move us, and let us submit to at least Governors for the
Lords sake. Which is the first Motive, drawn from the Authority of God himself,
and comes now to be handled.

And this is a Motive indeed, (...), the greatest and most winning Motive. For
the Will of God is the rule of all our actions. Man, who is a reasonable
creature, made after Gods own image, must hearken to Gods voice, bow down to
his Authority, and amongst all his attributes especially look upon his Will. If
he had no Eye to see us, no Hand to strike us, no thunder to destroy us, yet
what he wills we must do, because we are his creatures and the work of his
hands. Has Discontent drawn thy Sword? Let the will of God sheath it. Do
thoughts arise in thy heart? Let the remembrance of this slumber them. Art thou
now ready to sinite the Magistrate, and those who are in authority, with the
tongue? Seal up thy lips, for the Lords sake: not for fear of the whip, or the
keen edge of Authority, which commonly cuts through the heart of those who rise
up; not because the Magistrates hand is too heavy for thee and keeps thee
under; but submit for the Lords sake. Now we may be sure it is to be done for
the Lords sake: For, all power is from God, says the Apostle; all Authority is
his. Ille regna dispensat cujus est orbis qui regnatur, and homo qui regnat; He
disposes of Kingdoms who made the world which is governed, and the men that
govern. Inde Imperator unde homo antequam Imperator. The King receives his
power, from that Hand which made him, and his Commission from that mouth which
first breathed into him the breath of life. For the Emperor to say, mihi hoc
Imperiumpeperi, This Sword has gained me the Crown, is foul ingratitude. And
for the Pope to say, Mihi data est potestas. All power is given to me to root
up and plant as I please, is high treason against the Majesty of Heaven and
Earth. Indeed St. Peter calls the King the ordinance, or creature, of man: and
so he may be, and yet the creature of God also. For though this power be
communicated by the consent of men, yet notwithstanding it is also from God; as
water is from the fountain, in what channel soever it is carried along.

Behold then, It is Gods power; and if thou look upon the Man, who is thy
fellow, dust and ashes, if thou look upon his Weakness and infirmities,
which peradventure thou may discover in the midst of all his Glory and
Majesty, and thereupon art unwilling to submit for the Man's sake, who is of
like frailty and passions with thee; or for the Kings sake, who is but a man;
or for Authorities sake, which has no pleasing aspect; yet do it for the Lords
sake, and because the Authority is his. For his sake do it, though it be to a
Man; though it be to a Man of infirmities; though it be to Authority, which
sometimes speaks better things. It may peradventure be a sin for thee to obey;
but it shall never be laid to thy charge, if thou submit. This, I say, is a
strong motive. And indeed that is true Submission which draws a Jove
principium, its beginning from God, which is from heaven heavenly, which is
brought about by Religion and Conscience. That Obedience is a Sacrifice which I
offer up for the Lords sake. That Obedience more resembles God and his
Eternity, because it is constant and lasting: but that Submission which like
Pharaoh's, is driven on with an Eastwind, passes away with that wind, or moves
like the wheels in a Clock, no longer then the plummets are on, no longer than
Fear or Hope, or other humane considerations stir it about: When these are
taken off, or fall to the ground, PROPTER DOMINUM, for the Lords sake, will
little avail: though God speak once and again, yet we lift up our heads, and
stand stiff against Authority. And therefore though this be a Motive one of a
thousand, one that may stand alone by it self, our Apostle here backs it with
another, not so powerful in it self indeed, but to flesh and blood, more
persuasive which he draws ab utili, from the Good and Benefit we receive from
Kings and Governors, in the punishment of evil doers, and praise of them that
do well. With which we will conclude.

These two, Reward and Punishment, are as two pillars to uphold the body
politic. For though we ought, as the Orator speaks, virtutes propter seipsas
gratis deligere, to love every Virtue for it self, and for that native beauty
which the eye of reason does soon discover, and though interest omnium recte
facere, it concerns every man, though there were no cord of Love to draw him,
to do that which is right and just; yet if the Sword be not as ready to protect
the innocent as to devour the wicked, if there be not Praise for the one as
well as Punishment for the other, the best will soon fail in their duty, and
sink and fall in the performance, wanting that Spirit which should cheer them
up, and keep them in life and action. The King and his Governors, as they
scatter and fan away evil with their eyes, so do Prove. 20. 8.
they derive a kind of influence on Goodness, to make it grow and flourish.

Authority is both a Sword and a Buckler, a Buckler for the innocent, and a
Sword to cut off the wicked from the earth. And in this respect Synesius in his
12. Epistle tells us that this (...), this public Sword of Justice, is as
necessary for the purging of a City, for the scouring of all mischief out of
it, as the great Basins which were wont to be set at the entrance of Temples
were for the cleansing of their hands who were to enter. And therefore it is an
axiom in Policy subscribed to long since, That it is better to live sub dura
lege quam sub nulla, under the hardest Law then under none at all, to live in a
State where the least apparency of offense is punished with rigor, than under
such an one where every man may do what is pleasing in his own eyes without
restraint. For Severity or Tyranny (as one observes) is but like a Tempest or
Whirlwind, that throws down here and there a fruitful tree, and here and
there peradventure a tall Cedar; but Confusion and Anarchie, like a Deluge,
sweepeth away all before it, all the fatness of the earth, all the increase of
Cattle, beats down Towns and Countries, and makes of walled Cities a Wilderness.
Whilst Justice and Authority prevails, He that sows, sows in hope; and he
that Joh. 4.
thresheth, thresheth in hope, that he may be partaker of his hope, as the
Apostle speaks: but in Confusion, the proverb is fulfilled: One sows, another
reapeth; and as it is said of that community of the first Christians, No man
can say that that which he possesses is his own.

Now the proper work of the Magistrate is not only to cut off the wicked from
the earth, but to divide to every man his own possessions; to break the jaw of
the ungodly, and to take the prey out of his mouth; to be a wall of brass to
the innocent, and terror to the wicked. And this will usher in a myriad of
blessings, and make up that Hymn, that Angelical Antheme, Peace on earth, good
will toward men, and glory to God in the highest heaven. For to punish evil
persons, is to do a cure upon those who have broke the Laws, and upon others
also, that they may not break them. And the Magistrate, like God himself, does
de perverso sanare, govern us by that which is adverse to us; and in the way of
the transgressour he places contrarium aliquid and impedicus, sets up
something to stop his course, to check his violence, to curb him in his full
carreere, to wit, the execution of penal Laws, which is the execution of the
very anger of God. Nor does he (...), simply will, the affliction and torture
of the offender, nor rests in the evil of Punishment; but he looks forward to
the good of Amendment. For this is the very end of Punishment, To destroy that
proclivity and proneness which is in evil men to break their bounds, To take
off the illecebrae, the inticement and allurement of Sin, To wash off its
paint, To pull the honycomb from the lips of the Harlot, To wipe the oil from
off her mouth, To sour the sweetness of stolen waters, and by the sharpness of
external terror to take away the savor and complacency of some habitual
delightful Sin; that so every man may sit under his own vine, and under his
own fig tree, and drink waters out of his own cistern; that Peace may shadow
the Commonwealth, and Plenty crown it; that Oppression grind not the face of
the poor; nor Lust climb up to an unlawful bed, nor Deceit remove the
landmark, nor Sacrilege destroy the Temple; ut peccare non liceat, that
evil-minded men may not be so miserable as to carry a License about with them
to commit sin, nor a Protection in their bosom from the stroke of punishment.

Thus does not only the Hand, but the Eye, the Counsel and Wisdom of the King,
who is supreme, and of the Governors, which he sends, scatter away all evil;
fight against corruption in Religion, in Manners, in Doctrine, that Truth and
Peace may kiss each other. Thus are they sent out to watch over us for our
good. This they do for us: And we cannot do less than submit unto them, if not
for the Lords sake, yet for our own, whose affairs they manage, whose estates
they secure, whose sleep they make sweet, and labor fruitful; by whose means
we enjoy much peace. Parce tibi, si non Carthagini; if we will not submit unto
them for the Commonwealths sake, yet let us do it for our own; if not submit
unto them, yet at least to our own Good, to that which is our Wealth, our
Safety, our Happiness. And let us not only submit unto them, but bow the knee
and fall down before that God by whom Kings reign, and Governors decree
justice; and offer up strong cries and supplications to him, that he would
preserve our most pious and religious King Charles, and bind up his Soul in the
bundle of life; that he would give his judgments to the King, and his
righteousness to those Governors which are sent by him; that so the Lord may
speak peace unto us, and and to our Land; that we be not led into captivity,
and that the enemy be never able to shoot an arrow amongst us; that whatsoever
the King does may please the people, and whatsoever the people do may be for
the safety of the King; that God would bless and protect both King and Nobles,
and the Governors which are sent, and the People for evermore.

The Fourteenth SERMON.
Psalm. LXVIII. 1, 2. Let God arise, let his enemies be scattered: let them
also that hate him, flee before him:

As smoke is driven away, so drive them away; as wax melts before the fire,
so let the wicked perish at the presence of God.


I Will not stand to reconcile opinions which may arise concerning the title
and occasion of this Psalm; whither it be (...) or (...), A Psalm of David's
composing; or, A Psalm made for him, and delivered per manum David, by the hand
of David, to him that excels, or the Master of Music. Whosoever composed
it, at the first hearing of the words you cannot but apply it to our present
occasion. For enemies God has who are gathered together, and our prayer is
they may be scattered; enemies shall hate him, and defy him to his face; and
these who should be glad to see to fly from his face. Our hope is they are but
smoke, and may be driven away; but wax, in appearance a hard and solid body,
strongly united and compact together by the devils art, but yet as wax will
melt before the fire of his wrath, and when it shall please God to arise, shall
perish at the presence of God. You may, if you please, take the words either as
a Prayer or as a Prophesy; as a Prayer, that they may; or as a Prophesy, that
they shall be scattered. Or you may read it, SURGENTE DOMINO, As soon as the
Lord shall arise, his enemies shall be scattered, and so make it a Theological
axiom: and so it is a proposition aeternae veritatis, everlastingly true, true
in the first age of the world, and true in the last age of the world, and will
be true to the worlds end. We may make it our prayer, that they may be
destroyed; and we may prophesy that they shall be destroyed. Summa votorum est,
non ex incerto poscentis, sed ex cognitione, scientiaque sperantis, says
Hilary; It is a prayer, not proceeding from a doubting and wavering heart, as
if God did at sometimes deliver his Church, and at others fail and leave her to
the will of her enemies; but grounded upon certain knowledge and infallible
assurance that he will arise, and not keep silence, and avenge himself of his
enemy. For there is a kind of presage and prophesy in Prayer: If we pray as we
should, he has promised to grant our request: Which is a fairer assurance than
any Prophet can give us. Let God arise, and God will arise, is but the
difference of a Tense, and the Hebrews commonly use the one for the other.

Whoever compiled this Psalm, most plain it is that he borrowed it from Moses,
who when the Ark set forward used this very form, Rise up, O Lord, and let
thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee fly before thee; and,
when it rested, Return, O Lord, to the many Thousands of Israel. Now Numb. 10,
35. 36.
the occasion of this Psalm is diversely given. The Jews refer it to the
overthrow of the army of Senacherib, when the Angel of the Lord smote in one
night a hundred fourscore and five thousand of the Assyrians. Others to David's
victories over his neighboring enemies, the Ammonites, Moabites, Syrians, and
Idumaeans. Others to the pomp and triumph in 2 Kings 19. 35.
which the Ark was removed by David from Kiniathaarim to the house of
Obed-Edom; and from thence to Sion its resting place: The Fathers most of them,
apply it unto Christ, who most gloriously triumphed over the Devil and the
powers of this world, and showed them openly, who led captivity captive and
gave gifts unto men, as S. Paul himself borrows the words out of this Psalm.
Take the Cliff how you please, the Notes will follow, and we Ephesians. 4. 8.
may take them up. No Assyrian so cruel, no Rabshakeh so loud, no Ammonite, no
Moabite, no Philistine so bloody as a Jesuit, or a Jesuited Papist. Take in
the Devil himself, and then you have a parallel, the wicked one indeed (...),
as Basil terms him, the wonderful mischief, who like the Tyrant in the Story,
if all men in the world had but one neck, would strike it off at a blow; as his
instruments at this day would ruin three Kingdoms by shaking of one. Or, if
you please, suppose now you saw the children of Israel moving their tents, and
the Ark, which was the pledge and testimony of Gods presence, on the Levites
shoulders; and the same thought almost will apply it to the Church, where we
may be sure God is as present as he was in the Ark. Indeed wicked persons, as
wicked as the Amalekites, have a long time endeavored, and do now strive, to
throw it down from the shoulders of those that bear it, and cannot endure to
hear that God should be worshipped in spirit and truth. But no Amalekite, no
Ammonite, no Jebusite, no Philistine did overthrow the one; no Jesuit, no
Devil shall prevail against the other; but the Ark shall be brought to its
resting place, and the Church, which is the pillar of truth, shall be upheld by
the Truth, and after many removals, after many persecutions, after many
oppositions, though the Devil rage, and wicked men take counsel together, shall
be brought in triumph to its resting place, and appear before God in Sion. God
will never fail his Church, Though his enemies gather themselves together, they
shall be scattered; though they fight against him with hatred and malice; they
shall fly before him; They are but smoke and they shall vanish, they are but
wax, and they shall melt away. Upon an Exsurgit follows a dissipabuntur. If God
arise, all the plots and machinations of his enemies shall be but as smoke. You
may pray for it; you may conclude upon it. Let God arise, and let his enemies
be scattered; or, God will arise, and his enemies shall be scattered; they also
that hate him shall fly before him, etc.

In which Prayer, or Prophesy, or Conclusion, you may as in a glass, behold the
providence of God over his people, and the destiny and fatal destruction of
wicked men. Or you may conceive God sitting in heaven, and looking down upon
the children of men, and laughing to scorn all the designs of his enemies, his
Exsurgat, his Rising, as a tempest to scatter them, and as a fire to melt them.
And these two, Exsurgat, and Dissipabuntur, the Rising of God, and the
Destruction of his enemies, divide the Text, and present before our eyes two
parties, or sides as it were, in main opposition. Now though the Exsurgat be
before the Dissipabuntur, God's Rising before the Scattering, yet there must be
some persons to rowse God up and awake him before he will rise to destroy. We
will therefore, as the very order of nature required, consider first the
persons which are noted out unto us by three several appellations, as by so
many marks and brands in their forehead; They are 1. enemies, 2. haters of God,
3. wicked men. But God Rising in this manner is more especially against the
Fact than the Person, and against the Person but for the Fact: We must
therefore search and enquire after that; and we find it wrapped up and secretly
lurking in the Dissipabuntur, in their punishment. For Scattering supposes a
gathering together, as Corruption does Generation. That then which moved God to
rise was this; His enemies, they that hated him, the wicked, were gathered
together, and consulted against God and his Church. As we see it this day; and
seeing it, are here meet together to fall down before God in all humility, that
he may arise and scatter them. This is Nunc opportunitatis, the very time, and
appointed time, for God to arise. In which Phrase is employed a kind of pause
and deliberation, as if God were not always up, and ready to execute
judgment. And hereby he manifests 1. his Patience to the wicked; He is not
always up, as it were, to destroy his enemies: 2. his Justice, which comes at
length, though it come not so soon as men in misery expect: 3. his Mercy to his
children; Though for a while he seem to sleep, and not to hearken to the voice
of their complaints, yet at last he rises up and helps them. Lastly, we shall
take notice of the Effect or End of this Rising; and that is the Destruction of
his enemies, here drawn out to our view in four several expressions, as in so
many colors. 1. DISSIPABUNTUR, they shall be scattered; 2. FUGIENT, they shall
fly; 3. DEFICIENT, they shall vanish like smoke; 4. LIQUEFIENT, they shall be
melted as wax: Which all meet and are concentred in PERIBUNT, they shall perish
at the presence of God. And of these in their order.

We are to find out first the Parties here to be scattered; and they are termed
the enemies of God. And we may conceive it a very hard matter to find out any
at jar and opposition with God, whose very Essence is Goodness; whose Power is
irresistible, whose Justice is impartial, whose eye is ten thousand times
brighter then the Sun, whose Word runs very swiftly, and whose Word did
make, and whose Word can dissolve the world. I know, says Job, That thou can
do every thing, and that no thought can be Job. 42. 2.
withheld from thee. And from this knowledge of his he draws, this
conclusion and resolution, to abhor himself, and repent in dust and ashes.
Behold v. 6.
the Angels, they are ravished with his infinite beauty, and fall down at his
feet; the Creature keeps it self in a natural and constant league and
friendship with him. He commands the Sea and it obeys; the Moon knows her
seasons, and the Sun his going down. All the Creatures observe that course
which he has established, not guilty of sacrilege, as Tertullian calls it, or
rebellion against the Lord their Maker, which is their concord and sympathy,
with his eternal Goodness. Look on the whole Universe, and you find no enemies
to God but the Devil and those quos perditus cupit perdere, whom, being
destroyed himself, he desires to bring into the same destruction. Here then we
may find God's enemies, even amongst those whom he created after his own image,
whom he made capable of eternal happiness, whom he was willing to call his
friends. The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his master's crib. Every
creature is at his beck, and bows down in an humble submission unto his will:
Only Man does not consider the wonderful beauty and love and goodness of his
Maker; but embraces Vanity, and makes leagues with Death it self, and for the
love of every trifle that flatters his fancy is presently at odds and
opposition with his Creator.

Amongst Men then are Gods enemies, nay (...), as St. Paul calls them, and as
they are here termed in the Text, Haters of God; not only odio inimicitiae, by
being at odds and variance with him, and by the neglect of his commands, but
odio abominationis and fugae, by running back from him in all their ways,
being angry with his Providence, ready to teach his Wisdom, controlling his
Precepts, loathing his Ordinances, which is in effect to wish there were no God
at all. Consider God in himself, as he is (...), as the Philosophers call him,
the perfection of Goodness; as he is (...), that infinite and exemplary Beauty;
as he is (...), the Lover of mankind (for so he delights to be called) and in
this perfection and beauty and love we cannot more hate him than we can be
ignorant of him who fills all things. But then consider and behold him in
those beams and radiations which flow from him, in the effects of his
providence and justice, which though they always fall even in a right line
where they should, yet many times they thwart and fall cross to our inordinate
wills and affections; and so the world is full of enemies and haters of God;
men who are angry with the commands of Goodness, because they will be evil, men
who repine at his instructions, because they will not obey; men who murmr at
his threatenings, because they deserve his judgments; men who would, if it were
in their power, pull him out of Heaven, because he sits there to fling them
down to Hell. We have a common saying, but it is not so true as common, That
all men are naturally enemies to God. This cannot hold of that nature in which
we were created. For no man does or can hate God till he have first given God a
just occasion to hate him; no man can be his enemy till he offend him. For to
keep God's commandments is to love him. But then when Lust has conceived, and
has brought forth Sin, as St. James speaks, and when Sin is finished, and has
brought forth Death; then when men fear the heat of God's displeasure, and look
upon his hailstones and coals of fire now ready to fall upon them, there
arises that dissonancie and disaffection which is the cause of Hatred between
God and Man. Odium timor spirat, says Tertullian, Hatred is a kind of
exhalation, and breaths from Fear. And as it is amongst Men, so is it here;
Proprium est humanae infirmitatis odisse quem laeseris, It is proper and
peculiar unto us to hate those whom we have wronged. So here, when we have
drawn God's Sword against us, and tremble at the blow which is ready to be
given, then we turn countenance against God, and are not only inimici,
enemies, but osores, Haters of God: then the very common notions with which we
were born begin to be slurr'd and blemished in us; our Envy drops on them, our
Malice discolors them, and our Lust polluteth and defaceth them. As for God,
the thought of him is not in all our ways. And now when God says, Thou shall
not commit adultery, no bed is pleasant, but that of the Harlot; and when he
says, Thou shall not steal, no bread is sweet but the stolen; and though he
say, Thou shall not lie, yet we make lying as common as our Language; and we
break the two tables of the Law, not in zeal, with Moses, but in opposition,
with a heart full of rancor and malice against God himself. And this is it, I
conceive, which Aquinas means when he tells us, Prius est odium proximi quam
Dei, We first wrong our neighbor, and then God. First we oppose those decrees
which God has past to bound and limit us in our conversation, and so by
consequence bid defiance to the eternal Lawgiver. For he that slanders his
neighbor, will be as ready to blaspheme God; nay, in slandring his brother he
does blaspheme his Father which is in Heaven. He that takes his brother by the
throat rather then his humor should be crossed, if God were within reach,
would pluck him out of heaven. And thus we grind him in our Oppression, we rob
him by our Sacrilege, we wound him by our Cruelty, we pollute him with our
Lust. If he make Laws, we make it our strength to break them. If he raise one
to the pinnacle of state, and leave us in the dust, we quarrel at his Justice.
If he establish Government, we desire change. And though he build his Church
and found it upon himself, yet we are ready with axes and hammers, and all the
power we have to demolish it. When he has a controversy with us, we hold a
controversy with him, and nothing pleases us but the work of our own hands.
Men never fight against God till the thunderbolt is in his hand, ready to fall
on them.

And now we may descry those peculiar Enemies and Haters of God whom the
Prophet here prays against, even those who are enemies to the Truth and the
peace of the Church. I told you that this prayer was uttered by Moses at the
removing of the Ark. When the Ark was lifted up on the Levites shoulders, the
voice and acclamamation was, EXSURGAT DOMINUS, Let the Lord arise. And
therefore we may observe, that Moses Number. 10.
and David did call the very Ark it self God; not that they were so idolatrous
as to make a wooden God, but that they knew the Ark to be the surest testimony
of Gods presence here on earth. So that God's enemies are those who are enemies
to the Ark, to the Church of God, and to the peace of the Church. And let men
flatter themselves as they please with this or that fair pretense they shall,
certainly learn this lesson in the end, That they may as well fight against God
himself as against the Church, That neither they nor the gates of Hell can
prevail against it. To draw this yet closer to our purpose; the Ark was a type
of the Church; nay, by the Apostles quotation of this Psalm, the words, though
they are verified in both, yet are more applyable to the Church then the Ark.
And though we do not call the Church God, yet we shall find that God is married
unto her; that he is ready to hide her under his wing; that he is jealous of
the least touch, the least breath that comes toward her to hurt her; that he
that touches her touches the apple of his eye. When the Church complains to
God of her enemies, God also complains as if he himself suffered persecution.
When Saul breathed forth threatenings and slaughters against the Disciples of
the Lord, he presently hears a voice, Saul Saul, why persecutest thou me? And
that voice was the voice of God, which struck him to the ground. When Acts 9.
and Acts 7. 51.
St. Stephen tells the stiff-necked Jews, that they always resisted the Holy
Ghost; he presently in the next verse gives the reason, Which of the Prophets
have not your fathers persecuted? So that to persecute the Prophets, that
blessed Protomartyr may make the Commentary, is to resist, (...), to fall cross
with, the Holy Ghost, with God himself. Touch not mine anointed, Psalm. 105. 19.
says God, and do my Prophets no harm. Touch them not, for they are mine: And
whatsoever you do unto one of them is done unto me, is true in the bad sense as
well as in the good. For certainly God cannot be touched any other way. Our
Blasphemys, our Uncleanness, or Rebellions, though they fight against him, yet
touch him not: but when wicked men conspire against the Truth and the
professors of it; when their Swords are drawn not only to touch, but to strike
them through; then up God rises, and bestirs himself, as if he were in danger
to be touched and hurt. We know all that the Devil works against mankind is
done out of malice to God himself. Prius votum Daemonis fuit Deum esse;
alterum, ne Deus esset: His first attempt was to be God; his second, that there
should be no God at all, to destroy that Majesty which he could not atchieve.
Which since it is impossible for him to compass, all his devises and
machinations are, nullum sinere ex portione Dei esse, as the Father speaks, to
rob God of his inheritance; to strike at his heart whose knee bows unto him, to
persecute them that sincerely worship him, and to make all men like unto
himself, enemies to God. To this end he sets upon the Ark, he levels his forces
against the Church of Christ, he sends forth his emissaries, his instruments,
his Apostles, as Synesius calls them, to undermine it without, and raises
mutinies within. Not a heresy, but he hammers it; not a schism, but he
raises it; not a sword, but he draws it; not a rebellion, but he beats up the
drum. INIMICI EJUS, Gods enemies, are the Devil and his accomplices, who say of
Jerusalem, the place of his rest and delight, down with it, down with it, even
to the very Psalm. 137 7.
ground.

We know now where to rank his disciples, our enemies this day, who have
already shaken the pillars of one Kingdom, and if God, rise not up, will ruin
all: Whose religion is rebellion, and whose faith is faction: whom nothing can
quiet, but a Desunt vires, a want of strength. Poor souls! they are willing to
suffer for the holy cause; they are obedient to Government, loyal to their
Prince, true to their Country; that is, They are very willing to suffer any
thing when they can do nothing. They will not strike a stroke, not they; not
indeed when Authority is too strong for them, and has bound them hand and
foot: But if some wished opportunity unshackle them, if these cords fall from
them, and they are once loose, then these dead men arise, and stand up upon
their feet, and make up an exceeding great army. They were before as Ezekiels
dry Bones, very dry; but when some Ezekiel. 37. 2.
fair opportunity, as a gale of wind, has breathed upon them, behold, they
live; Live? I, and come to the field, and fight against that Authority under
which they lay before as quietly as if they had been dead. And where can we
rank these but amongst the enemies of God? They saw the Ark in its resting
place, the Church reformed and flourishing, settled and established by the
religious care of three glorious Princes; They beheld their holy Father the
Pope every day more and more in disgrace amongst us; and I am half persuaded,
had it not been for the turbulent and irregular zeal of some few amongst us,
who think they never love Religion till they toy and play the wantons with it,
his Honor had ere this lain in the dust; For when were the skirts of that
Church more discovered, when was her shame more laid open to the world by many
amongst us, who for their great pains have no better reward then to be called
his Shavelings? This they saw, and their heart waxt hot within them, and at
last this fire kindled which is now ready to consume us. Before they whispered
in secret; now they speak it on the housetop: before they hushed up their
malice in silence; now they noise it out by the drum; Enemies to the Ark,
enemies to the Church, enemies to Government and Order, enemies to Peace; which
particulars make up this entire sum, INIMICI DEI, enemies to God.

But now what if we see RELIGIONIS ERGO written upon their designs: and that
this Rebellion was raised, and is upheld, for the cause of God and Religion?
shall we then call them Gods enemies, who fight his battles, who venture their
lives for the common cause, for Christ's Vicar, for Religion, for the Church,
for God himself? (...), All they intend is good. Nihil male, sed rem sacram
facio. So said Cillicon; I do no evil; I do but sacrifice, when he betrayed a
City. Let us rise up in arms let us cut the heretics throats, let us destroy
them that they be no more a Nation: It is no harm at all, but an acceptable
sacrifice to God, Sed quid verba audio, cum facta videam? what are words, when
we feel the smart of their blows? All this will not change their title, nor
blot their names out of the Devils Calendar, out of the number of those that
hate God. For a man may be an enemy to God, and yet do some things for Gods
sake. And it is too common a thing in the world sub religionis titulo evertere
religionem, to cry up Religion when we beat it down. The Father well said. Many
good intentions are burning in Hell, Multa non illicita vitiat animus; It is
true indeed: The mind and intention may make a lawful action evil, but it
cannot make an evil action good. Propose what end you please, set up Religion,
the Church and God himself, yet Treason and Rebellion are sins which strike at
his Majesty. No enemies to those who stroke us with one hand, and strike us
with the other; who dig down the foundation, and then paint the walls. We may
observe, when Reason and Scripture fail them, they bring in the Church at a
dead lift; and when they are put to silence by the evidence of the Truth, then
they urge the Authority of the Church, and make this word to be like Anaxagoras
his M^ne in Aristotle, to answer all Arguments. The Church is their scarre-sun
by which they fright poor silly souls from their faith. The Church must make
good Purgatory, Transubstantiation, Invocation of Saints, etc. And indeed this
is the best and worst Argument they have. And as they make it an Argument for
their grossest errors, so they have learnt to make it an excuse for Treason,
for Rebellion, for Murder. And to the Church they are enemies, because they
love the Church. Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum; Such heart and life and
blood does the fair pretense of the Church and Religion put into wicked men: so
desperately do they fight against God under his own colors; No sin, I will not
say venial, but meritorious, drawn on for the advantage of the Catholic cause.

But for all these glorious pretenses, enemies they are, and Haters of God,
and, to bring in the third appellation, wicked persons, not sinners of an
ordinary rank, but gyant-like sinners, who fight against God with a high hand.
Now there is a great difference, says Hilary, inter impium and peccatorem,
between a Sinner and a Wicked man: For every wicked man is a sinner, but every
sinner is not a wicked man; Et carent impietate, qui non carent crimine, and
they may be guilty of sin who are not guilty of Impiety. The justest man alive
falls seven times a day; but this fall is not a rising against God, not
contumelious to his Majesty. But the wicked make sin their trade; nay, their
Religion, Deum non ex Dei ipsius professione, sed ex arbitrij sui voluntate
metiuntur, says the same Father; They measure God, not by those lines by which
he is pleased to manifest himself, but by their own perverse will. They entitle
his Wisdom to their fraud, his Justice to their rebellion, his Truth to their
treason. He could not have given us a better mark and character of these men.
What pretend they the Holy cause, the Honor of God, the Liberty of Conscience,
the promoting of Religion; and these pretenses make the fact fouler, and their
rebellion more abominable, because they thwart the plain definitions, and the
evident commands of God, and break his Law under color of doing his will. Nec
minoris est impietatis, Deum fingere quam negare; It is as great impiety and
wickedness to frame a God unto our selves as to deny him, to feign a God who
will applaud sin, countenance murder, reward rebellion, and crown treason. So
that, to conclude this, these men may well bear all these titles of Enemies, of
Haters of God, of wicked persons; If there were ever any such in the world,
these are they.

But to drive it yet a little more home; There is not the like danger of
enemies when they are severed and asunder as when they are collected as it were
into one mass and body, not so much danger in a rout as in a well-drawn army.
Vis unita fortior. Let them keep at distance one from another, and their malice
will not reach to the hurt of any but themselves; but being gathered and knit
together in one band, their malice is strong to do mischief to others. The
rulers were gathered together against the Lord and against Psalm. ^
his anointed. Paquine renders it fundati sunt, were founded: Before they were
but as pieces scattered here and there, but being gathered gathered together
they have a foundation to build on. While the vapors are here and there
dispersed upon the earth, they present no appearance of evil; but when they are
drawn up into the air, and are compact, they become a Comet, and are ominous
and portend shipwracks and seditions, and the ruin of Kings and
Commonwealths. And such a Comet hangs over us at this day in which we see many
thousands are drawn together, not by virtue of the stars or any kindly heat
from heaven, but by an irregular zeal and a false persuasion that they can do
God no better service than to destroy us. Before they were gathered together in
mind and resolution; but that was but as the gathering together of a heap of
stones in a field: now they are knit together as in a building: And now we may
cry out with the Prophet: Thou shall arise, and have mercy upon Sion: for the
time to have Psalm. 102. 13.
mercy upon her, yea, the appointed time, is come. When God's enemies, when
they who hate him, when the wicked are gathered together, then is the time for
God to arise. And so I pass from their part, which is to gather themselves, to
God's, which is to arise and scatter them. EXSURGAT DEUS, Let God arise.

By this Rising of God we may perhaps be induced to conceive that God does
sometimes sit down and sleep, and not regard us; that he is willing his people
should suffer, and that his enemies should wash their feet in their blood; that
he lets loose the raines to the wicked too long, and makes not that haste
which he promises to help the oppressed. But this were to make him like the
heathen Gods, who did meridiari, sleep at noon. Which was the reason the
Gentiles never entered their Temples at that hour of the day, for fear of
waking them. No; He that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep, but is
awake at all times and hours and moments unto all the world. And the reason is
manifest; Non habet in se diversitatem sui quicquid est simplex, says Novatian
well; God is a most pure and uncompounded Essence, and therefore not capable of
any diversity in himself; not awake to day and asleep to morrow; not fitting
now, and rising anon; but everlastingly present to all the world. From him no
cloud or darkness can shadow us, no secret grot or cave hide us. He has (...),
as the Greek Father speaks, an eye which cannot sleep. He sees all things ad
nudum and lucidum, naked and plain, even when they are veiled over with the
darkest night. Why then is God said to arise? St. Hilary gives the reason, Per
corporalem significationem spiritualis instruitur. We must upon this corporal
and sensible expression, build up a Spiritual sense, and not so much consider
God as our selves. He does neither sleep nor arise, nor forget nor remember,
nor depart nor draw near, but secundum nostrorum meritorum differentiam, but
fits himself to the different quality of our works. When our enemies consult
together against us, and are ready to prevail, then to us he is asleep: When he
breaks them to pieces like a potters vessel, then he is risen. When we offend
him he is absent; and when we repent, and fulfill his will, he is present with
us. Whilst we are his servants, and obey him, his friends and love him, nemo
officiosior Deo, none more officious and more active to help us than God; but
when we dissemble with him, and call him Father, but honor him not, non est
praevaricator suae perspicaciae; Though his forbearance makes us believe he
sees us not, yet he is no doubter and prevaricator, nor will he betray his
omniscience. His sleep is his patience, which he shows both toward the
righteous and the wicked. For God is not slack in rising, as some count
slackness; not slack to the wicked, for vengeance hangs over their head; not
slack to the righteous, for salvation is at hand. To the one he is as asleep to
heap coals of fire upon his head, to leave him without excuse: to the other he
seems not to be risen, that being exercised under the cross they may awake him,
and long and cry for deliverance. Hoc est paululum unde pendet aeternitas; On
this little space of his seeming rest depend eternity of punishment to the one,
and eternity of peace to the other. God has these pauses and intervals in all
his proceedings, in his punishments, and in his deliverances; and he uses a
kind of deliberation, and works as it were by the rule. When God would build up
Jerusalem, he promises that a line should be stretched forth upon her: Zech.
1. 16.
And when he would destroy the Idumaeans; he threatens, Extendetur super eam
mensura, that he would stretch out upon it the line of confusion. When he Isa.
34. 11.
will destroy, and when he will build, he stretches out a line. Which is a
metaphor taken from Building: And it shows that he does not suddenly lift up
his hand to strike, nor stretch it forth to help, but applys the lines,
prepares his instruments, works by line and measure, and takes as much leisure
time in destroying, as artificers do in building; he waits and expects that his
Patience may make way for his Justice on the one, and magnify his Mercy and
Goodness on the other. How long did the Lord endure the old world, even an
hundred and twenty years, while the Ark was a preparing. The Amorites? till
their wickedness was full? How long did ne bear with his own people, first the
ten Tribes, then the other two; even till there was no hope of amendment, till
the Prophets cried out, NOAH It is desperate. Now the reason of this his delay,
of this his not rising at that instant we expect, is to make it manifest to the
world that his ways are not as our ways. Therefore many times he presents
himself in a shape contrary to our expectation, and does those things which
bear a resemblance of some repudiancie to his known and declared will, as it
were on purpose to put our Faith and Constancy to a trial, whether we will take
him to be our God or no, and worship him as well in his thunder as in his still
voice; or else to besiege and compass-in the wicked and obstinate offenders, to
shut them up in their own net, to bury them in the pit which they have made, to
strike them through with their own sword, and as they have trifled with his
judgments, so to deal with them as that they shall not easily know how or when
they are led to destruction, or not know it till it be too late. For many times
the wrath of God comes upon them, as the Psalmist speaks, when the meat is yet
in their mouths, when they feed sweetly upon their hopes and dream of victory
and triumph. Thus he who promises to love and defend his children as with a
shield, sometimes he handles them as if he never loved them, or had left off to
love them, or would not hear and help them; and he stands as it were at a
distance from them, though even at this distance he is nigh to them that fear
him. Again, though he have threatened to rain fire and brimstone upon the
wicked, yet many times he delays, and makes as if he would not punish them;
nay, he seems to cast a look of favor upon them, delays not the blow only
that it may fall the heavier, but many times gives them those rewards which are
promised to godliness, fills their garners, makes them mighty in power,
crowns them with happiness; and gives them their hearts desire; but then, in
this great security: upon the sudden, when their prosperity has befooled them,
when they are ready to conclude they are therefore good because they are
temporally happy, he falls upon them, and makes that which was their triumph
their ruin: and now he strikes them at once for all; strikes the tabret out of
their hand, infatnates their counsels; makes them see that they are the poorer
for their riches, the weaker for their power, the baser for their honor; and
leaves them to their captain the Devil, who always leads in the forefront of a
rebellion; and then how fearfully and horribly are they consumed and brought to
utter desolation? Yet a little while, and the wicked Psalm. 37 10.
shall not be. Nor is this unjust with God. For he does not tell the wicked
that this little while is theirs, and that they may do what they please without
fear of punishment. But the wicked abuse this his long-suffering and
indulgence, sport in this little while, though the end be death: Which should
have been looked upon as an invitation to repentance. Therefore this stay, yet
a little while, before God arise, this his Patience; has its effect answerable
to the disposition and temper of those on whom it is showed; a bad on the
repentant, and a good on the penitent sinner. For as God is said in Scripture
to laugh at the destruction of those who run on in their evil ways, so he may
seem in a manner to mock their security with his proceedings, and to use the
same method in punishing which they do in offending. They defer their
repentance, and he defers his punishment. He has them in a line, and when they
are run on to the end of it, he pulls them on their backs. It is the nature of
Delay in other things to keep back and hinder proceedings which fail many times
and sink to the ground in the very pause; For not to do a thing seasonably is
to rob our selves of the faculty and power of doing it at all: But in Gods
punishing of the wicked it is otherwise; Gravitate supplicii moram pensat, He
supplies and makes up the delay in punishing with the smart of the blow when it
lights. His wrath like wind, shut up long in the caverns of the earth, at last
breaks forth in a tempest. His Patience makes way for his Justice. Though he
seem to be asleep, and not to see what is done by his enemies, yet at the
appointed time he will not fail an inch. Plures idcirco Domino non credunt,
quia saeculo iratum tamdiu nesciunt, Many men think that God observes not what
they do, because he presently thunders not from heaven, nor sends into the
world what the Tyrant wished for in his days, some strange and unheard of
calamity. Many men run on in their sin, because God sends not a fire into their
bones to make them sensible of his displeasure. But de artifice non nisi
artifex. Ignorance of God is the cause why we judge so corruptly of his
Providence and Justice. Sometimes he displays it before the sun and the people,
in the open destruction of the wicked; sometimes it works invisibly; and we can
no more find it out then the way of an arrow in the air or of a ship in the
sea: And this peradventure we may esteem a sleep: but whether secretly or
openly, he does at last make it evident that he has set banks and prefixed a
time which his enemies shall not pass. Though they work never so secretly,
though they make Religion a veil to cover and mantle their designs, yet he will
find them out, and strike them to the ground, even in those Meanders and
Labyrinths which they made to hide themselves in. And when they are risen, and
think they stand strong, and can never be moved, in an hour when they think not
on him, nay in an hour when they think he has been with them in their armies
and fought their battles, and been their Lord of Hosts, he will arise as a man
out of sleep, and make his sword drunk in the blood of his enemies. We may pray
for it, we may prophesy it; EXSURGAT DEUS, etc. Let God arise, and his enemies
shall be scattered, they also that hate him shall flee before him. And so I
pass to the effect or end of Gods Arising, DISSIPABUNTUR INIMICI, His enemies
shall be scattered, etc.

And we need not doubt of event. For when God arises, there arises Power and
Wisdom, in respect of which all the strength in the world is but weakness, and
all the wisdom in the world but foolishness. A look of his is able to disperse
all the Nations of the earth: What then is his Rising? In St. Hieromes time the
Sun was darkened by a Tempest, and men presently thought the world was at an
end; and so it is with the wicked. When God begins to look up, they dive under
water like ducks at every pibble that is thrown. What then will they do when he
shall speak in thunders and rain down hailstones and coals of fire upon them?
Look forward, and you shall see their end; They shall be scattered; They shall
flee; They shall vanish; They shall melt away. What did Sennacherib get by
advancing his banner against the City of the Lord? Even this, to preach by his
statue, Let him that looks upon me, learn to fear God. What did Acts 12. 23.
Herod get by casting Peter into prison? He was smitten by an Angel, and eaten
up of worms. What did Pharaoh gain by flinging the children of Israel into the
river? He brought him into his Court who deprived him of his crown and life.
The wicked are ensnared in the work of their own Psalm. 9. 16.
hands, says David. For this, says Basil, is not only inflicted as a
punishment, but it is the very nature of Sin, to make a net and dig a pit for
it self.

What gained those hellish Traitors in the time of the Virgin Queen, and in the
time of that King of peace, King James? I am almost ashamed in this place to
tell you: Nothing but an halter and everlasting ignominy and shame. Let the
wicked be never so wise, yet there is a wiser than they; and let them be never
so strong, yet there is a stronger than they. Do you yet doubt whether God's
Rising be visible in the execution of his wrath upon his enemies? Behold then
his creature up in arms with him. There is a spiritual writ of outlawry gone
out against them; and every man they meet, every stone in the streets, every
beast of the field is ready to become their executioners. When God rises up,
every creature is a soldier; an Angel overcomes the Assyrians, an army of
Frogs and Lice overrun Egypt, Haylstones from Heaven destroy the Canaanites.
The powder flasheth in the faces of the traitorous pioners. Infelix exitus
Haereticorum, The unhappy end of Heretics is not so good a note of the Church
as the Cardinal would make it; but sure it is an evident mark that God is risen
up, and shows the EXSURGAT in Capital letters. Many glorious examples we have
of God's Rising of old in Humane and Divine Histories. As the Apostle speaks,
the time would fail me to speak of his leading his people out of Egypt, his
bringing them again from captivity, and the like. How many millions of his
servants has he delivered, how many of his enemies has he destroyed, whose
names notwithstanding are no where recorded? It was an observation of the
Junior Pliny, Facta, dictaque illustrium virorum alia majora, alia clariora.
All men have not gained credit in the world according to their desert. Some
things of no great worth are very famous in the world, when as many things of
better worth are less spoken of, and perchance lie altogether buried in
obscurity, caruerunt quia vate sacro, because they lighted not on such who
would transmit them to posterity. But God is the same yesterday, and to day and
for ever; the same in the preservation of his people Israel then, and the same
in the preservation of his servants now; the same in these his Risings which
have left no mark or impression behind them, and the same in those which are
writ in the blood of his enemies; Adjutor in opportunitatibus, an helper in
time of need; a God who when we are fallen lowest, and when our enemies are
even treading us down under their feet, if we trust in him, will up and arise.
For, in the next place, if we weigh it well, it cannot be otherwise, the
parties being so opposite, God and the wicked, that they cannot both subsist
together. Either God must be disarmed; or his enemies be scattered. If then God
arises, the dispersion of the wicked is a kind of emanation from him. For they
cannot stand in his sight. And you may observe it; They seldom gather together
till they are half persuaded there is no God at all. Again, the strength of the
whole is not only from the union, but from the parts, and such parts there may
be as you can never collect and draw together so as to make the collection
strong, but at last, though it has been artificially wound together, it will
fly to pieces: And therefore, when a greater power appears, it must needs be
broken and scattered. What parts have smoke? But thin, and vanishing ones.
Vides magnam molem: habes quod videas, non habes quod teneas, says the Father:
We may see as it were a mountain of smoke: we may see it, but we cannot hold
it: It may be terrible to the eye, but we cannot grasp it in our hand. And
commonly such are the congregations and collections of the wicked. They are but
as Wax, hard in show, but inclinable, in respect of the materials it is made
of, to melt: They are like smoke, humida, non solida magnitudine, of some bulk,
but of no solidity, ready to vanish and fly asunder. Their very consultations
are but as smoke, the parts of them we see will scarce hang together. Lastly,
their very gathering together is one cause of their Scattering; as plants
naturally breed that worm which destroys them. Do the wicked gather together
against God and his Church? This collection is one degree and approach to
scattering and dissolution. For when their thought is as high as the Crown,
their Head deserves to be as high as the Gallows. It is now but a lump of Wax?
anon, having felt the heat, you cannot discern the form that it had. It is but
smoke; and its very elevation is its dissolution: Quanto sit superior, tanto
facilius disperit; The higher it is raised, the thinner it grows, and the
sooner it vanishes: You see it lifted up, and anon you see it not at all. So
then, to conclude all; Gods enemies may gather themselves together, but they
shall be scattered: they may stand out against him in some show of opposition,
but at last they shall flee: like Wax, their consultations may have some form
and shape but at the fire of God's Exsurgat, at his Rising who is a consuming
fire, they shall melt and be spread abroad and dilated, amd receive no other
Impression but that of God's wrath. And we may make it our Prayer, or we may
prophesy; Thus let God arise; and so let thine enemies perish, O Lord: but let
them that love him, be as the sun when he goes forth in his might.

That we may prophesy, it is most certain. For Prophetia vox Domini, says
Tertullian, Prophesy is the voice of God. Nay, without any Divine inspiration
we may foretell the destruction of the wicked, as a thing as certain as if it
were done before our eyes. They have their destiny in their name. If enemies to
God, they must be scattered and perish. If this counsel or this work be of
men, it will surely come to naught, said Gamaliel that great Doctor of the Law.
It Is true, Gods enemies shall perish, but not whilst they are ours, unless we
make it a Prayer as well as a Prophesy. For God many times raises up those
whom himself will at last rise against, to punish their sins who profess his
name. O Assyrian, the rod of mine Anger, and the staff in their hand is mine
indignation. I will send him against an Hypocritical Nation, and against the
people of my wrath will I give him a charge, to take the spoil, and to take the
prey, and to tread them down like the mire of the streets, As if he had said, I
will send the Heathen, that know me not, to punish my people in Jewry, who call
upon my name. I will send the superstitious Papist to whip the hypocritical
Protestant. I will make a rod to whip my people; and when that is done, I will
burn it. And therefore, that God may scatter the wicked whilst they are our
enemies, we must not be too bold to prophecy till we have fallen on our faces
before God, and tendered these words as a prayer for our selves, and for our
distressed brethren in Ireland. And this is our duty as we are brethren, and
members of that body which is one, this God commands, that we do good unto, and
pray for all sorts of men, but especially those of the household of faith.
(...), was in the Ancients (...), part of their Letany, as it is of ours. They
prayed for men diseased, for prisoners and captives, for men in persecution.
And they prayed (...), with great earnestness and intention. Pete, quaere,
insta: petendo and quaerendo crescis ut capias. Let us put up our petitions,
let us renew them, and press them again and again, let us multiply them every
moment, till we come to the growth to be fit to receive that which till we pray
for, till we and our distressed brethren be rid both of our enemies and of our
fears. And are our Prayers of such force as to chase away our enemies? Yes St.
James says they will prevail much, if they be fervent. For as our enemies are
only nostris vitiis fortes, made strong by our sins, and armed as it were
against us with our iniquity; as they fight against a nation, not so much with
their own sword, as with the luxury and pride and wantonness of that nation,
(all which are our sins and our enemies weapons) so non gladiis pugnamus, sed
orationibus; non telis, sed meritis, says Ambrose; we fight against them not
with sharp swords, but with strong supplications; not with weapons, but with
alms and fasting, with sighs and groans. And as when we sin we put deadly
weapons into their hands, so when we repent we shall disarm them. And indeed it
is Repentance which kindles this heat, and makes our prayers fervent: which
otherwise will be but so many sins to help our enemies. Without Repentance our
Prayers are indeed but the sacrifice of fools. For what more foolish and
ridiculous quam quod voto volumus actu nolle? then to pray for that which we
will not have? to cry for help against our enemies, by our continuance in sin
to increase their number? cry, Help, Lord; how long shall the wicked prevail?
and yet to help them more by our transgression, then we do God by our
contribution: to call upon God to fight for us, when we fight against him: to
desire peace, when we are the only incendiaries? to fight it out, and pray for
a blessed Commonwealth, and yet not be willing to reach forth so much as the
little finger to uphold it? Certainly this noise will never awake God; nor can
we think he will be raised up with words, with empty, flattering, deceitful
words; with words, as Job speaks, without counsel. No: If we will have our
prayers make a noise to awake God, we must drop our tears upon our prayers,
which we drop out of our own substance, as it were the blood of Martyrs, says
Anastasius. And Blood, we know, will cry and be loud. Non sileat pupilla oculi
tui. Let not the apple of thine eye cease or be silent. And then we must feed
our prayers with fasting. This does nourish our Devotion, as a woman does her
child with the teat. God has an ear to harken to our Fasting. Ostendit se Mosi
jejunii collegae, says Tertullian, He shows himself presently to Moses his
copartner in fasting. And after this we must adorn them with our Alms, our
free will offering, our Contribution to the work. For can we pray for that
which we will not forward? And then as our prayers are heard, so shall our alms
come up before God, and with an holy importunity urge and provoke him to arise;
for in the midst of so many Prayers, of so many Sighs and Groans, of so many
Tears, and when our Charity speaks, whose voice is shriller than the tongues of
Men and Angels, God cannot rest, but will hear from the Heavens our prayer and
supplication, and maintain our cause. He will cloth us with Salvation, and our
enemies with shame; that we may enter his House with joy, and his Courts with
Praise; that we may sit every man under his own vine and under his own
fig tree, and may make our lives a continual holyday, singing praises to the
God of our deliverance. This duty let us so perform here that after we shall
have finished our course we may be admitted unto the quire of Angels, with them
to praise God for evermore

We will add but one word to bring it home to our present occasion, And it will
apply it self. This is a day of Thanksgiving, and here is a feast of
Thanksgiving; A day of Thanksgiving for our deliverance from our outward fraud;
A feast of Thansgiving for our redemption from our spiritual enemies. Let us
offer up therefore sacrificium eucharisticum, a pay-offring, or sacrifice of
payment; let us pay to God Confession and Thanks for our deliverance and for
his mercies in both. Let us, as Jacob exhorts his Sons Genesis 43. 11. take of the
best fruits of the land, of the Music and Melody of the land, as the word
signifies; let us bring with us the fruits of the spirit, Gal. 5. 22. Love,
Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith; let us bring forth
fruits meet for Repentance, meet for these blessed mysteries, which will be as
Musicks, even those songs of Sion which God is most delighted with. For if
there be a blessing even in a cluster of grapes; what songs of praise are due
to him who is the true Vine, and has given us Wine to make our hearts glad,
pressed blood out of his very Heart, that we might drink, and be nourisht up
unto everlasting Life? Let us then praise him for our deliverance this day;
praise him, and not be like them out of whose snare we have escaped; not
imitate their actions whose ruin we tremble at; but praise him by our Meekness
and Gentleness, by our Patience and Obedience to lawful Authority. For what
praise is that which is breathed out of the mouth of a Traitor? If we be as
ready to spoil others as our enemies were to devour us, our Harp is but ill
strung, and our songs of Thanksgiving will be quite out of tune. Let us double
our praises, and magnify God for that which is presented to us in the
Sacrament, our deliverance out of Hell, the destruction of our worst enemy,
Sin, and our last enemy, Death. Here is that Red Sea in which that spiritual
Pharaoh and his Host were overthrown. And what is our Praise? To speak good of
his name; This is not enough: we may do this, and crucify him: We must praise
him by obedience, by love, by sincerity, and by a lively faith; This is indeed
to eat of his Body which was broken for us, and to drink of that Blood which
was shed for remission of Sins. For he that truly believes and repents, as he
is sick of sin, so he is sick of love, even of that love which in this
Sacrament is sealed and confirmed to us. He is ever bowing to Christ's scepter;
he is sincere, and like himself in all his ways; he makes his Faith appear in
the outward man, in Godly lips and in liberal Hands; he breaths forth nothing
but devotion, but Hallelujahs, Glory and Honor and Praise for this great love:
And so he becoms Peniel, Genesis 32. 30. as the face of God, as the shape of
Christ, representing all his Favors and Graces back upon Him, a pillar
engraven, with the bowels of Christ a memorial of his love Thankfully set up
for ever. It is usual with the Fathers to make the Ark a Type of Christ, his
Word as the two Tables, his Discipline as Aarons Rod, and the Sacrament of his
Supper as the Pot of Manna. EXSURG AT CHRISTUS, Let Christ arise, who is a
brighter image of God then ever the Ark was. Let us take him up, but not upon
profane Shoulders, lest we die. First, let us be Priests unto the Lord, without
blemish, not blinded by the Prince of this world, not halting between God and
the World, but perfect men in Christ Jesus, to offer up Sacrifices to the King
of Heaven. When we receive him by a lively Faith, we may say he is risen. To
this end he lifted up himself upon his cross, that we might lift up our Hearts,
and so lift him up again, and present him to his Father: Who for his sake, when
he sees him, as the Ark, lifted up, will bring mighty things to pass; will
scatter our Sins, which are our greatest enemies, and separate them from us as
far as the East is from the West. And though they be as the Smoke of the
bottomless pit he will drive them away; and though they be complicated and
bound together as wax into a kind of body, he will melt them, and deliver us
from this body of Death. For what Sin of ours dares show it self when this
Captain of ours shall arise? Let God arise; that is the first verse of this
Psalm; that is our Prayer: And let us conclude with the Psalm; in Thanksgiving
and ascribe the strength unto God, saying, His excellency is over his Israel,
to deliver them from their Enemies, and to deliver them from their Sins, and
his Strength is in the clouds. O God, thou art terrible in thy holy places. The
God of Israel is he that gives strength and power to his people, against the
machinations of Men, and against the wills of the Devil; against sinful Men,
and against Sin it self. Blessed be God. And let all the people say, AMEN.

The Fifteenth SERMON.
Genesis III. 12. And the man said, The Woman whom thou gave to be with me, she
gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
WE have here the antiquity of Apologies: we find them almost as ancient as the
World it self. For no sooner had Adam sinned, but he runs behind the bush.
No sooner had our first parents broken that primor dial Law, as Tertullian
calls it, which was the womb and matrix of all after-laws, but they hide
themselves Verse. 8.
amongst the trees of the Garden; and, as if they had made a covenant and
agreement, they jointly frame excuses. The Man casts it off upon the Woman,
and in effect upon God himself; The Woman gave it me, and Thou gave me the
Woman; and thus he lies down, and sleeps, and is at rest. The Woman removes
it from herself upon the Serpent, The Serpent beguiled me, and I did eat. So
that now, Verse. 13.
God having made inquisition for the fact, neither Adam nor Eve are returned,
but the Serpent; nay indeed God himself, who makes the Inquiry, is charged as
a party and accessory; The Man did eat because the Woman gave, and God gave the
Woman: and Adam thinks himself safe behind this bush. And therefore as Adam
hides himself from God, so does God return his folly upon his own head, and
seems to seek him as if he were hid indeed, Adam where art thou? in a kind of
ironie he acts the part of an ignorant person, he calls as at a distance,
and seems not to know him who was so unwilling to be known. Or, if we take
Tertullian's interpretation, Adv. Marcion. l. 2.
we must not read it simplici modo, id est, interrogatorio sono, UBI ES, ADAM?
as a plain and easy and kind interrogation, WHERE ART THOU, ADAM? sed impresso,
and incusso, and imputativo, ADAM, UBI ES? but as a sharp and smart demand, as
a demand with an imputation, ADAM, WHERE ART THOU? that is, jam non hic es,
Thou art not here, not where thou wast, not in paradise, not in a state of
immortality, but in a state of perdition, in a state of corruption, never more
open and naked then in the thicket and behind the bush. This was not quaestio,
but vagulatio, as it is called in the XII Tables. All the thick trees in the
Garden could not conceal Adam, and keep him from the eyes of his God; but thus
God was pleased to question his folly with some bitterness and scorn. It is the
first question that was ever put to Man. And we may be sure all is not well
when God asks questions. His Laws, his Precepts, his Counsels, yea, his
Comminations, are all delivered per rectam orationem, by a plain and positive
declaration of his mind: HOC FAC, ET VIVES, Do this and live; Luke 10. 23
If thou eatest of the forbidden fruit, thou shall dic the death. What he
commands Genesis 2. 17.
to be done he supposes will be done; and never begins to ask questions
till our Disobedience questioneth his Law: Then he proceeds against us ex
formula, in a kind of legal and judiciarie way. When the Angels fall, he
calls after them, How art thou fallen from heaven, O Lucifer, Isa. 14. 12.
son of the morning? and when Adam is in the thicket, he seeks him, Adam,
where art thou? A question, one would think, of force to plow up his heart, and
to rend it in pieces, that so his sin might evaporate and let it self out by an
humble confession; a question sufficient, one would think, to fill his soul
with sorrow, horror and amazement. But though Adam were now out of the
thicket, he was behind the bush still, He striveth to hide himself from God
when he is most naked, and speaks of his Fear, and of his Nakedness, but not
at all of his Sin, I heard thy voice, says he, in the garden, and I was
afraid, because I was naked; and I hid my self. He Genesis 3. 10.
was sensible, not of the breach of the Law, but of his nakedness: It was the
voice of God that frighted him, not his transgression. We commonly say, Suam
quisque homo rem been meminit, that every man has a good memory for that
which concerns him. Only Sin, which is properly ours, and whereof we are the
proprietaries, to which we can entitleneither God, nor the Devil, nor any other
creature but our selves, we are unwilling to own and to call ours. Ours it is
whilst it is in committing; on it we spend and exhaust ourselves; we prostitute
our wills, we give up our affections, we sell our selves, all the faculties of
our souls and all the parts of our bodies; we woe it, we wait for it, we
purchase it: But when it is committed, we cast it from us, we look upon it as
upon a bastard issue, we strive to raize it out of our memories; we are afraid
when we are deprehended, we deny when we are accused; when we are questioned
our to answer is an excuse, Nolumns esse nostrum, quia malum agnoscimus, Ours
we will not call it because we know it to be evil. One would think that Excuse
were the natural offspring of Sin; or rather, that Sin and Excuse were twins.
Omne malum pudore natura suffundit; No sooner has Sin stained the soul, but
shame dies the face with a blush. The Philosopher will tell us that, shame is
nothing else but (...), fear of just reprehension; which to avoid we seek out
many inventions: We run behind the bush; and when the voice of God calls us
from thence, we make a thicket of our own, a multitude of excuses, where we
think our selves more safe then amongst all the trees of the Garden. Behold
here the first sin that ever was committed, and behold our first Father Adam
ready with an excuse as soon as it was committed. God came unto him, not in a
sire devouring before Psai. 51. 3. Genesis 3 8. 1 Cor. 4. 21.
him, nor in a mighty tempest round about him, but in the cool of the day he
comes not with a rod, but with meekness: he inviteth him to mercy, and
prompteth him to repentance; he asks him, Adam, where art thou? not out of
ignorance, as if he saw him not; but as a remembrance, that he might see
himself. And when he cannot extort from him so much as a bare mention of his
sin, but only of his fear and his nakedness, which were indeed the bitter
effects of it, he comes nearer to him, and is instant with him, as if he would
dictate to him, and bespeak him to confess, and put a form of words into his
mouth; Have thou eaten of the tree whereof I commanded v. 11.
thee that thou should not eat? A question so plain, so keen, of such an
edge, that it was able to have cleft his heart in twain, and let his sin out at
his mouth by an humble confession. What was it but as the Hand writing upon the
wall? and sure now it cannot be but Adam's countenance is Dau. 5 5.
changed, his thoughts troubled, his joints loosed, and his knees smiting each
other. Against this battery what hold can prevail? But oh the Sinfulness of
Sin! oh the mighty powea of sin; which so stupifieth the heart, and so fills
it with it self, that it feels it not, which transformeth an heart of flesh
into brass or marble, that no hammer can malleate it, no sword can pierce it,
no influence from God himself can mollify it! In ipso peccato impudentiam
discimus, and ab ipso, In sin it self we learn a kind of impudent
remorselessness, and we learn it from it. These two are contrary, says St.
Chrysostom, Sin and Repentance. In Sin we see shame and confusion; in
Repentance, hope and confidence: but the devil has changed and inverted this
order, and has placed upon Sin boldness and confidence, and shame upon
Repentance. Adam here was not ashamed to commit sin, but he is ashamed to
confess it; and therefore he makes an apron for his sin, as he had done for
his body; but he was never more naked then in his fig leaves: And the man said,
The Woman whom thou gave to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did
eat.

My Text then, ye see, is not an Answer, but an Excuse, and therefore will not
so easily admit a methodical division. For in these ambages in the turnings and
windings, in the mazes and labyrinths of Excuses, what order can we find? But
though we cannot orderly divide this excuse, we will dissect and anatomize it,
and make some use of our Father's sin. God may seem sometimes to have been more
ready to discredit his Saints then to honor them, in that he sets down
oftentimes and records their faults, but wrappeth up their repentance in
silence. The story of Noah is shut up Genesis 9.
with his drunkenness. After the relation of Lots's incest we hear no more Genesis
19.
of him. After the story of Solomon's idolatry, it follows immediately, And
Solomon slept with his Fathers. Adam no doubt did repent; yet we 1 Kings 11. 43
see his story concluded with his punishment. Nor may we think that this was
done by chance, but, as the Apostle speaks, all these things are written 1.
Cor. 10. 11.
(...) for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come. As
therefore they who come to see dead bodies cut up, although they purpose not to
learn Anatomy, yet by that sight go away informed, what manner of substance
the Heart, the Spleen, the Liver are of; so by dissection of this Excuse of
Adams, and by view and inspection as it were of the very entralls of our
Progenitors, we may read our own disease, we may learn to search and examine
our own hearts, and find that our (...), and constitution is the very same with
theirs, that we resemble them not only in their fall, but also in their excuse,
and that we are as skilful artificers to few fig leaves together, to apologize
for our sins and to extenuate them, as ever our first father was. The lines
then by which we are to pass are these. First we will anatomize and disect this
excuse of Adam's: Next, we will look into our selves, take some notice of our
own hearts, and of those excuses which we commonly frame; and then, to make an
exact Anatomie-lecture, we will lay open the danger of the disease, that we may
learn to avoid what was fatal to our Parents, and though we sin with Adam, yet
not with Adam to excuse our sin. Of these in their order.

And the Man said, The Woman, etc.] I told you this was no Answer, but an
Excuse; For indeed an Excuse is no Answer. An answer must be fitted to the
question which is asked; but this is quite besides it. We find indeed ambages,
a circuit of words, which the Philosopher calls (...), because they run round
as it were in a circle, and never point in a direct line to the matter in hand,
never present it with what the Question expects* but something else in stead
of it. The Question here is, Have thou caten of the forbidden tree? The Answer
is wide from the purpose, an accusation of the Woman, yea of God himself; The
Woman whom thou gavesl to be with me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat.
In civil Courts Patronus negat, defendit, transfert, minuit, deprecatur, says
the Orator; It is usual and commendable for him who takes upon himself to be
an Advocate either to deny the fact, or defend it, or translate it, or
extenuate it, or put it off; and he who falls short of this act, deserves
not the name of a Patron. But in the court of Conscience there is no room for
this act: Here every man must be not his own advocate but accuser and judge.
For when God asks the question, makes inquisition for blood or any other
sin, to extenuate the offense is to aggravate it, to put it off is to draw it
closer on, to defend it is to augment it. There is no answering of God, when he
questioneth us, but by acknowledgment.

But to proceed orderly in our Dissection; We find the Man does not deny, but
in plain terms confess that he did eat. And COMEDI, I have eaten, by it self,
had been a wise answer: but it is COMEDI, with* MULIER DEDIT, I did eat it, but
the Woman gave it, a confession with an extenuation: And such a confession is
far worse than a flat denial. I did eat were words that might have proved as
sweet as the rivers of paradise, had it not been for the poison of the excuse.
But Adam's last words Genesis 41. 4.
are lost in the former, as the lean and ill-favored Kine in Pharaoh's dream
ate up the fat ones. Deny indeed the fact he could not. For as God had built
him up in his own image and likeness, so he had raised up within him (...), a
natural tribunal, his Conscience, and made him thus far a God unto himself, as
not only to discern evil from good, but also to search the very inwards of his
own heart, (...), etc. says St. Chrysostom; all men, of what rank soever,
though they sit not in the throne of justice, though they be not Judges and
Magistrates, though they have no executioners, nor prisoners, nor gives, nor
bolts, yet they judge and condemn Sin in themselves and others, and that by the
common principles of Discourse and Reason, and by that secret verdict and
sentence which every man carries in his own breast. The first man that
condemns a Sinner is a Sinner himself; Se judice nemo nocens absolvitur; in
himself he bears about him a Court and Seat of justice from which no appeal
lies. His reason is his judge, his Conscience is his accuser, himself his own
prisoner: The terrors of an afflicted Conscience hang him up and crucify him
every day, though no foreign authority arrest him. For as the shadow follows
the body, says Basil, so does Sin the Soul; and whithersoever we go, it
presents it self before us. No sooner do we reach out our hand to the Apple;
no sooner is our eye full of the adulteress, 2 Pet. 2. 14. Jam. 1. 15.
no sooner has Lust conceived and brought forth Sin, but presently verberamur
tacito cogitationis nostrae opprobrio, as St Ambrose speaks; our own thoughts
are as whips and scorpions to scourge us; our conscience strikes us with
amazement and horror when no man pursues us, she plougheth up our soul, and
makes deep furrows there, laniatus and ictus, as the Historian speaks,
stripes and wounds, when no other hand is lift up against us. But as Judges
would see more clearly and judge more uprightly if they were not blinded with a
bribe, so would the Conscience speak more plainly, if we did not teach her
broken and imperfect language, to pronounce Sibboleth for Shibboleth, to leave
out some letter, some aspiration, Judge. 12. 6.
some cicumstance in sin. But to speak truth, the Conscience cannot but speak
out to the offender, and tell him roundly that he has broken God's law. But as
we will not hearken to Reason when she would restrain us from sin, so we slight
her when she checketh us for committing it; we neither give ear to her counsel
before we eat, nor to her reproof after we have eaten; we observe her neither
as a friend nor as an enemy. Adam's conscience told him he had broken the
command, had eaten of the forbidden fruit and must die; but the shame of what
he had done, and the fear of what would follow, made him as deaf to his
conscience after his fall as he was before, as unwilling to acknowledge his sin
as to prevent it; and therefore he seeks to palliate and color over what he
could not deny, he faltreth in his language, and instead of a confession
renders nothing but an excuse, an excuse which indeed is nothing.

Now to dissect and examine the Excuse; We shall find that Adam deals like an
unskilful Physician, qui pro morbo extinguit hominem; He removes not the
disease, but destroys himself, and by applying a remedy worse than the
disease makes the disease incurable. His Apology upbraideth him, and he
condemns himself with his excuse. For first, MULIER DEDIT, The woman gave it
me, weigh it as we please, is an aggravation of his sin. We may measure Sin by
the tentation: It is always the greatest when the tentation is least. A great
sin it would have been to have eaten of the forbidden fruit, though an Angel
had given it, what is it then when it is the Woman that gives it? Why should
the Woman prevail over the Man? the weaker over the stronger vessel? He was
made her head, and was to rule over her. His Duty says St. Chrysostom, was
not only to have refused the woman's offer, but also, to have showed her the
greatness of the sin, and to have kept her from eating; not only to have saved
himself, but to have plucked her also out of the fire. But for Strength to
yield to Weakness, for the Head to be directed by the Body, for him to put
himself in subjection who ought to command, for him to follow to evil who
should lead to good, was to invert the order which God had constituted. What a
shame do we count it for a man of perfect limbs to be beaten by a criple? for a
son of Anak to be chased by a grasshopper? for Xerxes 's army which drank up the
sea, to be beaten out of Greece by three hundred Spartains? Certainly he
deserves not power who betrayeth it to Weakness. The Woman gave it me, then,
was a deep aggravation of the Man's transgression.

Again, it is but, The Woman gave it. And a gift, as we commonly say, may be
either taken or refused; and so it is in our power whether it shall be a gift
or no. Had the man been unwilling to have received, the Woman could have given
him nothing. Nunquid obsecravit? number disseruit? number decepit? says the Father.
Did she besiege him with her entreaties? did she use the battery of discourse?
did she cunningly undermine him with a fallacy? No, it is but dedit; she only
gave it him. The Orator will tell us, Necessitas est magnum humanae
infirmitatis patrocinium, that Necessity is the best Plea that humane weakness
has for the misery that befalls us: But it is too common a thing, as
Tertulian says, licentiam usurpare praetextu necessitatis, to make Necessity a
pretense for our liberty and licentiousness in sinning. At this door enter-in
Covetousness, Intemperance, Revenge, Pride, which we might easily keep out,
even with one of our fingers. Nusquam est necessitas, nusquam violentia, sed
electio and voluntas: Here was no necessity, no violence. It is but DEDIT, she
gave it him, and he was willing to receive it. Oh how are the mighty fallen in
the midst of the battle! how is Adam fallen in the midst of his strength! He
who had the Graces of God encompassing him about as a ring, who had his
Understanding richly adorned, and his Will obedient to his Understanding, who
had an harmony in his Affections, and an Heaven in his Soul, who had the
Angels for his guardians, and God for his strength, who was himself a kind of
God upon earth, and had dominion over all the creatures surrendreth up all at
the sight of a gift, a gift which he might have refused, and which he was bound
to refuse. (...), says the Plato de Log.
proverb, The Gods themselves have not strength enough to strive against
Necessity; but he is weaker than a man who yields where there is no
necessity: The Woman gave it me, then, is but a weak apology.

Further yet, What was the gift? was it of so rich a value as to countervail
the loss of Paradise? No: it was DE FRUCTU ARBORIS, the fruit of the tree. We
call it an Apple. Some would have it to be an Indian Fig. The Holy Ghost
vouchsafes not once to name it, or to tell us what it was. Whatsoever it was,
it was but fruit, and of that tree of which Man was forbidden to eat upon
penalty of death. Quasi vero rationis aliquid Genesis 2. 17.
haberet haec defensio, says a Father; As if this defense had any show of
reason in it, when he confesses that he preferred this apple, this slight gift
of the Woman, before the command of God, The Woman gave me of the tree, and I
did eat. Here are two, God, and the Woman; the Gift, and the Command; the
Apple, and Obedience. To hearken to the Woman, and to be deaf to God; to
forsake the command for the gift; to fling off obedience at the sight of an
apple, is that which shows Adam's sin in its full magnitude, and yet is
taken-in here for an apology. But perhaps this fruit may be of high price,
this apple may be an apple of God, with this glorious inscription upon it,
ERITIS SICUT DII, if ye eat it, ye shall be as Gods: Who would not venture then
to touch upon such hopes? who would not eat an Apple to become a God? It is
true, if this had not been the Devil's inscription, whose every letter is a
lie, and whose greatest gift is not worth an apple, whose kingdoms of the world
and glory of Mat. 4. 8.
them are overbought with a thought. Mala emtio, says the Orator, semper
ingrata est, quia semper exprobrare videtur domino stultitiam; An evil bargain
is an ey-sore, because it always upbraideth him with folly who made it. And
such a bargain here had our first father made. He had bought gravel for bread,
wind for treasure, spem pretio, hope for a certainty, a lie for truth; an apple
for paradise. The Woman, the Gift, the gift of an Apple, these are brought-in
for an excuse, but are indeed a libel.

Further still, to aggrandize Adam's fault, consider how the reason of his
excuse does render it most unreasonable. Why does he make so buisy a defense?
why does he shift all the blame from himself upon the woman? Here was no just
detestation of the offense, but only fear of punishment. The fruit of the tree
had been pleasant to the eyes and taste, but MORTE MORIERIS, Thou shall surely
die, was bitter as gall. He would offend Genesis 3. 6. Genesis 2. 17.
with the woman, but with the woman he would not be punished. For love of her
he did eat; but now he has eaten, see how he loves her. Behold, the Lord
comes with a fiery sword to take vengeance for his sin! Does he oppose himself
to the danger? does he stand between the sword and his wife? does he urge her
weakness? does he plead for her? does he call for the blow on himself? No: She
gave, and let the blow light upon her. Pernitiose misericors, and pernitiosius
crudelis, says Bernard; He had been too pliant and kind to sin with his wife,
but now most cruel when he should be merciful. It was too much mercy to join
with her in the sin, but cruelty without mercy to leave her in the Punishment.
And here is a sign that Adam is fallen indeed, even fallen from the high degree
of a Lord to the low condition of a Servant; who fears not to offend, but to
be punished; would break the command at pleasure but that Death is the best
reward that follows. To a good man Punishment appears not in so horrid a
shape as sin: for punishment is but the evil of passion inflicted for the evil
of action, and of the two the evil of action is far the worse. The lips of an
harlot are far worse then the biting of a cockatrice: Theft is far worse then
the whip: Yea, to sin, as Anselm says, is far worse then to be damned. For
there is a kind of justice in punishment which is not sin. (...), Neither God
nor Man will deny but that it is most just that he who sins should suffer
for his sin. Omnis pana, si justa est, peccati paena est, says Augustine. But
for sin punishment were not just. We may bespeak Adam in the style of the
imperial Law, ipse te subdedisti paenae; thou have brought thy self under
punishment, and deservest to have it doubled for shifting it off to thy wife.
He had taken possession of Paradise upon condition, and had made a contract
with God: And the Scholiast on the fifth of Aristotle's Ethics will tell us,
(...), There is in punishment a kind of giving and receiving; in which the
nature of all contracts does consist. He who receives by theft, (...). The
Latin phrase is, dabit paenas, he must give punishment. Adam receives an
apple, and he must give paradise, yea his life, for it. We have said enough to
show that Adam did but pavementare peccatum, as St. Augustine speaks, parget
and plaster ever his sin, and did (...), allege that for a cause of his
transgression which in truth was none. But,

In the last place, that which makes his apology worse than a lie; and
renders his excuse inexcusable, is, that he removes the fault from the Woman
on God himself; Not the Woman alone is brought in, but MULIER QUAM TU DEDISTI,
The Woman whom thou gave me, she gave me of the tree, and I did eat. Which
indeed is a plain sophism non causae pro causa: That is made a cause which is
not a cause, but an occasion only. It is a common axiom, Causa causae est
causa causati, That which produces the cause, produces also the effect of
that cause: And it is true in Causes and effects essentially coordinate. But
here it is not so, God indeed gave Adam the Woman: but he gave him not the
Woman to give him the Apple Dedit sociam, non tentatricem; He gave her for a
companion, not for a tempter: He gave her not to do that which he had so
plainly forbidden. The true cause of Adam's sin was in himself and in his own
will. It was not the Woman, which God gave him, but the Woman which he gave
himself, who gave him the fruit: God gave him a Woman to be obedient to him,
not to command him. God gave him a Will to incline to his command, but not to
break it. Whatsoever God gave him was good: The Woman was good, the Fruit was
good, his Will was good, the Command was good; but he gave himself a Woman who
was a seducer, fruit which was poison, a will which was irregular, and the
command he made his ruin. And now he who affected to become like unto God,
does desire also to make God like to himself; he who would be made a God,
makes God a man, and brings him in as guilty of the transgression: And so he
added to his guilt by defending it, ut culpa ejus atrocior fieret discussa,
quam fuit perpetrata, says the Father: His sin was greater being excused than
it was when first committed. To exalt it to the highest, we may well call it
Blasphemy. For as we may blaspheme by giving that to the Creature which is
proper to God, so may we also by attributing that to God which is the Creatures
only. To worship an Angel, or a Saint, is contumelious to God; to make God an
Angel is blasphemy; what is it then to make him a Man? what is it to make him a
Sinner? I know nothing that Adam could call his own but the transgression.
There is some truth in the TU DEDISTI; for his Wife God had given him: So
Paradise was God's gift, and his Body God had created him. But if we bring-in
his Sin, then TU DEDISTI is blasphemy: For God gave him not that, nay God could
not give it him; but he must father it who was the father of us all.

To recollect all, and lay before you these bella tectoriola, these excuses, in
brief. What if the Woman gave it? The Man was stronger then the Woman, and Lord
over her. What though it were a Gift? He had will to refuse it, his hands were
not bound, nor his feet put into fetters; there was no chain of necessity to
force him. But then it was but an Apple: and what was all the fruit in Paradise
to the loss of his obedience? What was the Devil's promise to God's threatening?
how unjust and cruel was he to his wife, in transferring the fault upon her?
Lastly, how blasphemous was he against God, in imputing his very gift unto him
as the only cause of his sin? If the Woman seduce him, must it be with a Gift?
If a Gift will prevail, must it be no more then an Apple? Must an Inscription,
a Promise, a Lie deceive him? and must he buy the false hope of eternity with
the certain loss of Paradise? If he sin with Eve, why is he unwilling to be
punished with Eve? And why does he dispute with God, and darken counsel by
words without knowledge? We may well cry out, Adam, where art thou? In a thicket
Job 38. 2.
amongst the trees, nay, amongst the leaves. For all excuses are so, even
leaves, nay, not so good shelter as leaves: for they do not cover, but betray
us. Adam increases his shame by endeavoring to hide it. Mulier quam dedisti,
is not an excuse, but an accusation.

And now I wish that the leaves of those trees among which Adam hid himself had
cast their shadow only upon him. But we may say as St. Ambrose does of the
story of Naboth and Ahab, Adami historia tempore vetus est, usu quotidiana;
This history of Adam is as ancient as the World; but is fresh in practice, and
still revived by the sons of Adam. We may therefore be as bold to discover our
own nakedness as we have been to pluck our first father from behind the bush.
We have all sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression, and we are as
ready to excuse sin as to commit it; that we may seem to take this at least
from Adam, as Pelagius thought we do all other defects, only by imitation. Do
we only excuse our sin? No; Many times we defend it by the Gospel, and even
sanctify it by the doctrine of Christ himself. Superstition we commend for
Reverence, profaneness for Christian liberty, indiscretion for Zeal,
will worship for Obedience: Nay, does not Rebellion come toward us under the
grave habit of Religion, with a Sword in one hand, and a Bible in the other; as
if God himself had decreed to set up these men of Belial against his own
ordinance, and the word of God were powerful not to demolish imaginations, but
Kingdoms. The Orator tells us, that honesta verba moribus perdidimus, by our
evil manners we have lost the proper and native signification of many good and
honest words, so have we also almost lost the knowledge of our Sins in words, in
borrowed titles, and assumptitious names. And hence it comes to pass that
neither our Virtues are as they appear; nor our Vices appear to us as they are,
but we look upon our defects without grief, and applaud our false virtues with
joy, our feigned Temperance, our adulterate Charity, our mock-Fasts, our
superficial Mortification, our spurious Humility, our irregular Devotion, our
Pharisaical Zele, our Obedience with a sword drawn and ready to strike: Nor are
we content alone to be deceived, but we affect it, and sub nomine religionis
famulamur errori, we talk of God, but worship our own imaginations, and sub
velamento nominis Christi adversus nomen Christi militamus, we fight against
Christ even under his own colors. This disease of Adam's runs through each
vein and passage of our soul, by which we are still unlike ourselves, like Adam
indeed in Paradise, but then when he was in the thicket, and like unto him out
of the thicket, but with an excuse in his mouth. We may observe, that many
things in themselves not commendable do yet help to make up our defects, and
one vice serves to set out another. Impudence promoteth Ignorance. For do we
not see many whose boldness is the greatest part of their learning, and whose
confidence is taken for judgment and wisdom? Good God! what cannot a brow of
brass, a sad countenance and a forced deportment do? This Quintilian makes one
reason why amongst the vulgar sort Ignorance many times bears the bell, and
is more amiable and gracious than Knowledge. And may we not in like manner think
that that peace and quietness we have at home in our own breasts, and that
approbation we gain abroad, is due; not always to our virtue, but ofttimes to
our whorish and impudent looks, not to that constant tenor and equality of
life which Reason prescribes, but to this art of apologizing, to our manifold
evasions and excuses; which, if we look nearer upon them, are of a fouler
aspect then those sins they color and commend.

To come close home therefore, we will stay a little, and draw the parallel,
and show the similitude that is betwixt Adam and his sons. We shall still find
a Mulier dedit to be our plea as well as his. Some Woman, something weaker then
our selves, overthrows us, and then is taken-in for an excuse. Omnes homines
vitiis nostris favemus; and quod propria facimus voluntate, ad naturae
referimus necessitatem. says Hierom to Amandus, We all favor ourselves, and
our vices too; and what we do willingly, we account as done out of necessity of
nature. If we taste the forbidden fruit, we are ready to say, The Woman gave it
us. Again, it is some gift, some profer, that prevails with us, something
pleasant to the eye, something that flattereth the body and tickleth the
fancy, something that insinuates it self through our senses, and so by
degrees works upward, and at last gains power over that which is (...), and
should command, our Reason and Understanding. Whatsoever it is, it is but a
Gift, and may be refused. Homo potest peccare; sed, si nolit, non facit, says
St. Augustine; Man may fall into sin; but if he will not, he does not. What
though it be pleasant? I may distaste it. What though it flatter? I may frown
upon it. What though it be Honor? I may look down upon it. What though it be
Wealth? I may cast it upon the waters, or fling it into the sea. What if
Eccles. 11. ^.
the Devil say, All these things will I give thee? If we will not reach out
Mat. 4. 9.
the hand, they are not a gift. No insinuation, no flattery, no smiling
tentation, no argument, no rhetoric is of more power and activity then the
Will, which may either take or refuse the gift as it please. Further, as it is
something presented in the manner of a gift which overcomes us, so commonly it
is but an Apple, something that cannot make us better, but may make us worse;
something offered to our Hope, which we should fear; something that cannot be a
gift till we have sold our selves; nor be dear to us till we are vile and base
to our selves; at the best but a gilded temptation, an Apple with an
Inscription, with an ERITIS SICUT DII, upon it, with some promise, some show,
and but a show and glimpse, of some great blessing; but earthy and fading, yet
varnished with some resemblance of heaven and eternity. Look upon those gifts
which are most welcome unto us, and which we run after as unwilling to stay
till they be proferred, and ye shall find an ERITIS SICUT DII upon them. There
is upon Honor such an Inscription; For Honor either makes us God's, or at
least makes us think we are so. There is the like upon Wealth: for when our
chests are full, how do we worship ourselves, and sacrifice to Habac. 1. 16.
our own net! Nay, ye may see it written in the dresses and paint and forehead
of the Harlot: for are not the strumpets smiles the wantons paradise? are not
her embraces his heaven? in a word, it is written upon every thing that is
offered as a gift, and being received is a sin: For when we sin, volumus
Divinam excellentiam imitari, says the Father, we emulate the Majesty of the
Highest, we acknowledge no superior, but would be as Gods, to do what we please.
Lastly, the TU DEDIST I will come in too. For be it the World, God created it;
be it Wealth, he opens his hand and gives it; be it Honor, he raises the
poor out of the dust; be it our Flesh, he fashioneth it; be it our Soul, he
breathed it into us; be it our Understanding, it is a spark of his Divinity; be
it our Will, he gave it us; be it our affections, they are the impressions of
his hand: But be it our Infirmity, we are too ready to say that that is a Woman
too of God's making. But God never gave it. For suppose the Flesh be weak, yet
the Spirit is strong: and si spiritus carne fortior, nostra culpa infirmiora
sectamur, says Tertullian; If the Spirit be stronger than the Flesh, it is our
fault if the weaker side prevail. And therefore let us not flatter our selves,
says he, because we read in Scripture that the flesh is weak; for we read also
that the Mat. 26. 41.
spirit is ready, that we might know that we are to obey, not the flesh, but
the spirit. Of all discourses those of our own infirmity prove many times most
dangerous. For this indeed is the Woman which gives us the Apple. If we
blaspheme God's name, it is our infirmity; if we revenge our selves, it is our
infirmity; if we steal, it is our infirmity; if we taste of forbidden
pleasures, it is our infirmity: when our greatest infirmity is to talk so much
of infirmity, and still to alledg it as an excuse of our faults. Inevery sin we
commit we renew this ancient story, and Eve continually overcomes Adam. Nay
further yet, as Adam excused himself by Eve, so do we excuse our selves by
Adam; we lay all our sins on his shoulders, and hide all our actual
transgressions within the folds of original corruption. When God comes to
question us, and to ask us, Where and In what state we are, we cannot but be
guilty and conscious to ourselves of sin; we cannot but say that we have eaten,
and done that which was forbidden: But then nolumus esse nostrum, quia malum
agnoscimus, though the sin be ours, we are unwilling to own it because of its
deformity, We carry Sin about us; Nay, says Luther, unusquisque infernum in se
habet, every man has an Hell within himself, and therefore he casteth-in this
water, these cold excuses, to cool and allay it.

And thus ye see what a near resemblance and likeness there is between Adam and
his posterity, that we are so like him in this art of apologizing, Ut sit tam
similis sibi nec ipse, that we cannot easily tell whether had most skill to
paint Sin with an excuse, the Father, or the Children. Adam behind the bush,
Adam with a Mulier dedit, is a fair picture of every sinner; but it is not easy
to say that it does fully express him. But now, to draw toward a conclusion,
that we may learn exuere patrem, to cast off the old man, and to avoid that
danger that was fatal to him, we must remember that we are not only of the
first Adam, but also of the second; not only of the earth, earthy, but also 1
Cor. 15. 47. 49.
of the Lord from heaven; and as we have born the image of the earthy, so we
must also bear the image of the heavenly: We must remember that we are born
with Christ, that we are baptized and buried with Christ, and that we must rise
with Christ; that the Woman was given to be in subjection, the Flesh to be
subdued by us, and the World to be trodden under our feet; that we must not
count these as enforcements and allurements before sin, lest we take them up as
excuses after sin; that we must not yield to them as stronger than ourselves,
that we may not need to run to shelter ourselves under them in time of trouble.
A strange weakness it is to talk of Weakness when we are to sight: for this is
to yield before we strike a stroke; and no wonder, si vincantur, qui jam victi
sunt, if they fall by conquest who in their own opinions are already overcome.
And as great weakness it is when the Woman has prevailed, and we have given up
our strength to infirmity, then, out of that to draw an apology, from whence
by resistance we might have raised that virtue which would have crowned us with
honor and glory. It was the Woman, says Adam: It is my Melancholy, says the
Envious; it is my Blood, says the Wanton; It is my Appetite, says the
Glutton; It is my Choler, says the Murderer. But God gave Adam a wife, not a
tempter: and God gave an appetite, not Gluttony; natural tempers and
constitutions, not Envy, not Luxury, not Revenge. And the Envious should
clear-up the cloud of Melancholy with the light of Reason, the furious Gallant
purge his Choler, the Wanton quench the fire in his blood, and make himself an
Eunuch for the Kingdom of heaven, and the Glutton (...), Mat. 13 12.
wage war with his appetite, put a knife to his throat, and beat down Prove. 23.
2. Cor. 9. 27.
his body with fasting and abstinence. Beloved, if this care were general and
serious, we should not hear Adam complain of Eve, nor should we complain of
Adam, nor make our Infirmity an apology for sin, nor our Weakness to resist
temptation a temptation to those sins which increase our weakness. God sends
us into the world as the Romans did their armies against Carthage, not to
return but with conquest. If we fail and be foiled, it will be in vain to urge
and plead our Infirmity. It is the perverseness of the will, says St. Ambrose
that damneth the wicked; but no necessity of nature nor infirmity of the flesh
can excuse them. God indeed gave the Woman to Adam, but dedit in adjutorium, he
gave her him to be an helper: So there is not any thing which God has given us
that of it self can hurt us. There is no natural appetite or inclination in
man, say the Schools, which may not be drawn up to a virtuous act: There is no
fuel, no spark, in our nature which may not be improved and fixed up at last as
a star in the firmament of the soul. For every inclination is from God, and
therefore is good, and tends to good. My inclination to Anger may end in true
Christian Fortitude; my inclination to Sorrow may be perfected in Repentance;
my inclination to meats, in Sobriety and Abstinence. If the Woman had been
given to Adam to have given him the Fruit, he might have tasted, and not dyed;
and if our natural inclination did necessitate us to the act, we may say it,
and be no liars, that we have no sin: What pretense then can we find, what
excuse can we possibly frame, when we break God's command? That Sin does
insinuate? A Christian has a charm. That it is invisible, and so insensible?
Faith unfoldeth it. That our nature is weak? Christ does strengthen us. That
there is a Woman with an Apple in her hand, many incitements to sin? There are
more and stronger to goodness. There needs no instructour to teach us, says
St. Basil, no Orator to persuade us, to hate a loathsome disease; and by the
common principles of Reason we commend Justice and Temperance, and condemn that
which is evil. (...), There is, says he, in the soul of Man an aversness from
evil, which he never learned, but brought with him into the world. But then
what if Evil look well, and speak well, and appear in some glory? We have light
enough to discover that imposture. For the Fruit with the inscription there is
a Morte morieris. If the World flattereth, God threatens. If Nature incline,
grace is a bridle. If the Devil suggest, the Angels are our guardians. If he
fetch his circuit and compass to see where he may foil us, they are ready to
pitch their Tents round about us. What speak we of Temptations? They are
officina meritorum, a shop to build good works in. If Temptation cloth it self
with Lust, I may make it Chastity and Temperance. If it smile in a piece of
gold, I may make it poverty of spirit. If it cringe to me in his knee that
honors me, I may shadow it with humility. Our Passions which have quandam
mulieritatem, a kind of womanishness in them, and are many times as froward and
perverse as any of that Sex, yet may be made useful and serviceable, cum illud
quod in illis foemininum est, virile facimus, says the Father, by turning
their effeminacy into true manhood; by making my Fear a Sentinel to warn me of
danger, my Anger a Magistrate to punish my sin, and my sorrow, a penetentiary
to water my couch with tears: nay, cum illud quod in illis ferinum, est divinum
facimus, by making that Divine which was bestial and brutish in them. And
indeed, wherein can we more nearly resemble God then in the destruction of sin?
and this we may work by help of our passions. This fleshly part of ours God
has given us; but dedit sociam, he gave it for a companion, not an enemy.
Nyssene will tell us that the Soul may set it in tune, as a Musician does his
Harp and Lute, and make such an harmony as shall be very delightful in the ears
of God. And a friend also we may make it to exalt and promote us. It may help
us to a Confessors place in Heaven by the confession of the tongue, it may
procure us a Virgin's place by chastity, and crown us with Martyrdom by dying
for Christ. Nemo non in cansa Dei facere potest quod in causa sua quotidie
facit. We are prodigal of our blood and of our life, if our Lust or some
quarrel call for it; why should it then be so difficult a matter to employ and
spend it in the cause of God? If we shall search the Scripture to improve our
knowledge, if we shall earnestly beg of the God of grace to inflame our Love,
let the Woman tempt never so much, we shall not hear her. Let our natural
endowments be what they will, he that does little amongst us shall do much, and
he that does much shall do much more. And for our enemies which we so fear; and
which we bring in as an excuse of our cowardice, one of us (as Deuteronomy. 32. 30.
it was said of the Israelites) shall chase a thousand of them, and if they
Deuteronomy. 28. 7.
come out against in one way, they shall flee before us seven ways. Nor shall
we ever so forget our selves as to palliate our offenses, and when God and our
Conscience, or our Conscience, which is our God, shall call us to account; put
them off upon Adam, as Adam did here upon Eve: There shall never come a MULIER
DEDIT, or a TU DEDISTI, The Woman both done this, or, Our Flesh has done this,
or, God has done this, into our apology: Nor will we hide our selves under any
Tree but that whose leaves are to heal the Nations, nor run unto any Rock but
the Rev. ^^. ^.
holes and sides of the Rock Christ Jesus.

To shut up all, and conclude (for I fear I have trespassed) my advice shall be
first that of Arsenius the Eremite, Impera Evae, and cave serpentem, and tutus
eris; tutior autem si arborem non inspexeris: Command Eve, and beware of the
Serpent, and thou shall be safe: but, if thou will be out of the reach of
danger, do not so much as look toward the forbidden Tree. Let thy Reason take
its place, and hold dominion over thy Will: Look not upon the Wine when it is
red, nor upon Beauty when it smileth, Prove. ^^. 31.
nor upon the Apple when it is pleasant to the eye, but fly all occasion and
appearance 1 These. 5. ^2.
of evil, and hate Sin even in a Picture: And this, that thou may not sin.
But in the second place, if thou have sinned, if thou have tasted of the
forbidden fruit, if thou have meddled with the accursed thing, then, as Joshua
speaks to Achan, My son, give, I pray thee, glory to the Lord Joh. 7. 19.
God of Israel, and make confession unto him. Run not behind the Bush, study
not apologies: make not the Woman, which should help thee to stand, an excuse
of thy fall: nor think that paint, or curtains, can hide thy sin from him whose
eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the Sun, and Eccl. 23. 19.
in whose besom thou art, even when thou runnest into the thicket of excuses.
No: Give glory to God, that God may seal a pardon to thee: Open thy sin by
confession to God, and the mercy of God will hide it; Condemn it, and judge thy
self for it, and thy excuse is made, thou shall never be judged for it by the
Lord: Lay it open before the Lord, and he will blot it out for ever. Excuse can
make but an imaginary Saint; and such Saints shall houl in utter darkness: But
Confession makes us glorious in his sight who cannot be deceived: It makes
our head fit for a Diadem: It lifts us up when it casts us down, makes us
appear lovely in out deformity, and by condemning absolveth us, (...), (as the
Greek Fathers were bold to speak) making the Judge even ashamed of our shame,
working in him compassion, that his bowels yern at our sighs and groans, that
he makes haste and falls upon our necks, and embraces us, cancelleth Col.
2. 14.
the handwriting that was against us; and seeing our sins lie open before him,
he covers them with his mercy, forgiveth them, forgets them, as if they
had never been; and finding us thus humbled under his hand, with his hand he
lifts up our heads, and crowns them with glory and immortality.

The Sixteenth SERMON. PART. I.
Luke X. 5, 6. And into whatsoever House ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
House. And if the Son of peace be there, your Peace shall rest upon it: if not,
it shall turn to you again.
IN the first verse of this Chapter we are told that the Lord appointed other
seventy also, and sent them two and two into every city and place: Which was
their Mission. And he sent them to preach the Gospel of Peace: Which was their
Commission. And that they might not start aside or faint in the way, he tells
them beforehand of wolves and enemies to peace: Which was their Praemunition
against all assaults. 1 He sends them. 2 He endues them with power, 3 He
forewarnes them; Go your ways: be, ver. 3.
hold, I send you forth as Lambs among wolves, Though you be Lambs, innocent
and weak, though you meet with wolves, ravening wolves, who will tear you to
pieces, yet Go your ways: though you meet with enemies to peace, yet wish
peace unto them. Though you shall meet with some who will not receive you into
their House, yet provide neither Gold nor Silver, Mat. 10 9.
Let not any cross accident retard you; Let not the disposition of those you
are sent to change and alter yours; Let not the sight of the Wolf fright you
from the innocence of the Lamb, Look not upon the event; consider your Duty, be
the event what it will, either fair welcome, or foul contempt. Be they Sons of
peace or enemies to peace, yet say unto them, The Kingdom of God is come nigh
unto you. And into whatsoever House you enter, first say, Peace be to this
house.

In these words we may discover, 1 A fair intimation, or Prediction rather of
what would befall the Disciples in the course of their ministry, That some
would receive them and some would not. 2 We may take notice of their Letters of
credence, or Commission, in these words, Into whatsoever House you enter, first
say, Peace be to this House; Where two things are observeable; first the
Message, secondly the Order of delivering it. The Message is Peace; and it must
be delivered (...) first; first say, Peace be to this House. 3 We may find an
Encouragement, that they faint not in the way, and upon every rub look back,
and take their Hand from the plow if the Harvest, the Event, answer not their
expectation: for If the Son of peace be there, it shall rest upon it: If not,
if you meet with those who at the very hearing of Peace do bend themselves to
war and opposition, your salvation shall not be lost; but your Peace, your
neglected and scorned Peace, (...), says St. Luke, shall bow it self back and
look toward you, (...), says St. Matthew, it shall return to you again. Or
thus; Here is first a Praediction of what should befall them; Secondly, an
Injunction; In which we consider, 1 Salvation, Peace be to this House; 2 The
Order of it, (...), first speak peace; 3 the Persons whom they were thus to
salute; not only the sons of Peace; but wheresoever they enter, this must be
their form. They must wish Peace to the Sons of Peace, and to the Enemies of
Peace, to all they met with. Where two sorts of men are decypherd, the one by
the name of the sons of peace, men of a peaceable disposition, fitted and
prepared for the message of Peace; the other placed in opposition to them. And
last of all here is a Promise, that their Peace shall rest upon the one, and
return from the other. So that he who forbid them to carry a Staff, has given
them a Staff to walk with, which shall uphold them in all their ways, a
Promise full of comfort. For whether their Peace rest or return, the Disciples
have encouragement to do their office, to wish Peace to every House
whithersoever they come.

First, We must take notice of the Intimation or plain Prediction rather of
what would befall the Disciples in their embassage. And this Christ foretells
them again and again. Ye shall be hated of all men for my names Mat. 10. 22.
sake; Ye shall be hated of all Nations, They shall deliver you up to the
Councels, Mat. 24. 9.
and scourge you in their Synagogue; And they shall put you out of their Mark.
13. 23.
Synagogue. Behold I have soretold you all things. In the former Chapter, where
he sends his twelve Apostles, and in this, where he appoints other seventy
also, as he endued them with power to do miracles, and authority over all
Devils, so does he also arm them with the foreknowledg and praemeditation of
those evils, which would affront them in the way, and might slacken and retard
them in the performance of their Duty, ut eo minus perturbent venientia, quo
magis fuerint praescita, says Gregory, In that being Darts foreseen they
might lightly pass by, and being shown before they came, they might come wit
less pomp and terror; that by foreknowledg of them, they might have power also
over them, to cast them out, as they did the Devils.

And good reason there was that our Savior, who knew their he(...), and what
was in man, should prepossess them with the thought of what was likely to
ensue. For the Disciples having received Legative authority from Christ, and
being armed with the power of working miracles and casting out devils, might
well have fed themselves with Hope of fair weather, and of welcome
whithersoever they enterd, and with a high conceit that all men must needs vail
and submit to them, who had power to subdue even the devils themselves. For can
Flesh and Blood stand out against that name through which Hell it self is made
subject? A conceit than which nothing could have been more pernicious; it being
incident to most men to bury all Thought of their Duty in the remembrance of
their power and dignity; to dream of kingdoms, when they should be up and awake
to do their office; and so at last they strip themselves of all succor and ly
naked and open to those injuries and calamities which must needs take off their
courage and slug their obedience, because they come unlookt for, and so
surprise them in a pleasant dream. What? Christ's ambassadors to be sent
without purse or script, to speak and wish Peace to that House which will not
give them welcome, to tell men of a Kingdom, and be shut out of doors? to cast
out Devils, and find men as malicious as those Devils they cast out? to cure
diseases, and for a reward to receive a wound? this is Durus sermo, a hard
saying, to men in authority, to men who go about doing good, who carry health
and blessings along with them whithersoever they go; I say, a hard saying; who
can bear it? a saying not well digested, but wondered at to this day. We pray,
but thou hear not: We fast, but thou regardest it not: We give our Bread,
and receive a Stone: We pipe, and no man danceth: We mourn and no man
lamenteth: Our Patience is derided, our meekness is trod under foot, our
humility is scorned. Do we not many times say in our hearts with those Mal. 3.
14. It is in vain to serve the Lord: There is no profit in keeping his
ordinances: But this is to forget the Things which our eyes have seen. This is
to forget God, and what he has told us. For he has told Deuteronomy. 4. 9.
us before, that Prayer and Fasting and Alms have their End, when they have not
their end. Prayer may be heard and accepted, and not Granted; for to obtain is
not the only end of Prayer. Fasting may appease God, and yet not remove the
plague. Thy Alms may be abused and trod under foot, and yet come up before God.
God has presented his Gifts and Graces as glorious as the Sun and Lights; but
he has prognosticated and foretold us of cloudy days and tempestuous weather,
which shall darken and obscure them. He has promised to hear our prayers; but
that he grants them not always, is for our sakes. He has promised to crown
every good deed, but not in this life. Therefore let us comfort our selves when
our expectation is frustrate, seeing nothing befalls us which was not foretold.
Let us consider upon what condition and terms we gave up our names unto Christ;
to do what he commands, though we see no fruit at all; to paint, though there
be no increase. There has no Temptation taken you but such as is common to
man, says St. Paul There has nothing befallen us, which was not 1 Cor. 10. 13.
foretold. Why do we slug and fail in our Duties? Why do we bow under the very
shadow of terrors, and are crest-faln at the sight of that evil which comes
toward us, when we are working of wonders, curing diseases and preaching of
Peace? Beloved, Distrust and Impatience will never tread upon Serpents and
Scorpions, nor pass through the power of the enemy to the end of the Duty.
Hearken not to the found of many waters, but to the voice of the Prophet. Look
not on the grim visage of that evil that haunts you in the performance of your
Duty, but remember the word that Christ has said unto you. He told you of
Contempt, but which should make you Honorable; of Persecution, which should
make you blessed; of Serpents, ^ut such as should not hurt you; of Wolves, but
such as you should overcome with the meekness of a Lamb. Remember what he has
told you; and then into whatsoever House you enter, whether it be the
Habitation of Peace; or House of the wicked; whether it be a House at unity
within it self, or a House divided; whatsoever it be, deliver you your message:
Into whatsoever house you come, say, Peace unto it. Which is the Form
prescribed, or the Salutation, Peace be to this House.

And, Paece be to this House, is a fit Salutation for them to use who were
Disciples and Ambassadors to the Prince of Peace. For, as Tully spoke of a
certain Ambassador, That he did senatus faciem secum afferre and autoritatem
reipublicae, that he brought with him the countenance and presence of the whole
Senate and the authority of the Commonwealth, from whence he was sent, so the
Disciples of Christ were to speak in the stead and person 2 Cor. 5. 12
of Christ, and carried about with them his authority; and therefore they were
to use his language, that form of words which they had heard from him, and that
Salutation which he had put into their mouths. For 1 This was most proper for
him that sent them. Decet largitorem pacis haec Salutatio, says Cyril; from
him who gives peace, who is our Peace, who is the Joh. 14. 27. Ephesians. 2. 4.
Isa. 9. 6.
Prince of Peace, no fitter Salutation than Peace. 2 It is most proper for the
Gospel which they were to preach, which is a Gospel of Peace. This was Christ's
first gift when he was born, Peace on Earth, and (...), his last gift, when he
was to die; Peace I leave with you; My peace I give Joh. 1^. 2^.
unto you. For this he was laid in the Cratch; for this he Hung on the Cross.
This he breathed for, this he labored for, this he wrought out of his very
bowels. And after his resurrection, he comes and stands in the midst of the
Disciples and says unto them, Peace be unto you. And when he had so said, he
showed unto them his hands and his side: As if he had wished them to Joh. 20.
19, 20.
consider at how dear a price he had bought that Peace which we hate, which we
betray to our lust, which we are ready to fell away for a Trifle. That which we
desire, and will not have, or, if we have it, are soon weary of it; that Peace
with others, and which we ourselves break every day; that Peace within our
selves, which we do but talk of; that Peace with God, which we do but fancy,
cost our Savior those marks in his Hands and feet and side, and drew from him
his very Hearts blood.

I know it was a common Salutation amongst the Jews, Go in Peace, or Peace be
with you: And under this they comprised all prosperity whatsoever. But we may
say of them as Jehu did to Joram's Horsman, What had they to do with Peace! and
turn them behind. But our Savior takes it up, and does as it were infranchize
it. He sets it as a Jewel in its proper place; he makes it a Gospel, and puts
it into their mouths who were the Ambassadors of Peace; Who came not with
blackness and darkness and tempest and the sound of a Trumpet; but with an
Olive Branch, with Tidings of all good Things whatsoever. A Salutation proper
to the Gospel; Which the Church of Christ has retained in all ages in their
Liturgies and forms of public Service. Peace be with you was pronounced by
the Bishop or Priest (...), from the highest ascent of his seat or chair; It
was signaculum orationis, as a seal with which they closed up. After the Lords
prayer follows, says St. Augustine, this Benediction from the Priest to the
People, Peace be with you; and the People echo back again, And with thy Spirit.
And as they began, so they ended, with The Peace of God, which passes all
Understanding. PEACE BE TO THIS HOUSE was a fit Salutation then for the
Disciples of Christ.

But we must not here imagine that it was a bare complement, a Salutation, and
no more, like that in St. James Depart in peace; a wish and no more; No, it was
a Prayer as well as a Salutation. The Disciples spoke it not from the lips
outward, but from the very heart, they taught men the ways of Peace, and told
them of a Kingdom of Peace which was at hand, ready to offer it self, if they
would receive it. to wish Peace when we think of war; to say, Peace be unto
you, when our Sword is as nimble as our tongue; to speak peaceably to our
brother, and smite him under the fifth rib, is not Apostolical, nor the
language of the Seventy; but it is the dialect of many Christians in these
later and worst times who lay down all Ceremony in Religion, when all the world
sees that all their religion and the piety they have is but a Complement.

Will you then know the meaning of this Salutation? the words are plain. It is
Peace the Disciples are to wish: And who knows not what Peace is? -- Pacem te
poscimus omnes We all desire Peace; We all talk of Peace. In time of trouble we
howl For her, as Rachel for her Children, and will not be comforted, because
she is not. for her sake, they say, wise men wage war. With her we ly down and
sleep and awake again, because she susteins us. And when she is absent, we see
a Sword hanging but as upon a hair; which will not let us sleep, though our
head be circled with a Crown. It is our daily bread, and our daily speech. We
speak of it, and forget it; we love it, and neglect it; we extol and break it.
Peace may seem to be like Psyche in Apuleius, a fair damsel, whom all
commended, all admired, yet none would take her to wife. I think I may truly
say for the Many, they know not what Peace is. Some will not behold her unless,
she come with Plenty in her hand, but are at war with themselves and others if
they feel the smart of want. Some, says St. Hierom call Tyranny Peace, and
nothing else; think all the world is out of order, if all hands subscribe not
to their unwarranted demands. Some call Disobedience Peace, and cannot be at
peace but with their Quod volumus sanctum est, when they are let loose to do
what they please. Omri is not at peace unless his Statutes be kept; Zimri is
not at peace till he kill his master; Hamon is not at peace for want of a leg;
Absalom is not at peace for want of a crown. Every man desires peace and every
man breaks it. Every man calls for it, and every man chaseth it away. Every man
would bring her in, and every man proscribeth her. As St. Augustine spoke of
the Donatists; They were the greatest peace-breakers in the world, yet talked
of nothing more than Peace: So that in this noise and hurry for Peace. Peace is
lost, and men seem to deal with her as the African parents did with their
children, whom when they sacrificed to Saturn, they stopped their crying with
kisses, and smothered their noise in embraces, and so did at once kiss and kill
their infants. It was a grave complaint of St. Hierome, non reddimus unicuique
rei suum vocabulum, We are guilty of a strange Misnomer; we do not give every
thing its due name, but call that Peace which is Tyranny, which is
Disobedience, which is Faction, which is Senseleseness and Stupidity, because
we know not the true nature and property of Peace. I may have Peace when other
men are at war amongst themselves, yea, when other men are at war with me, even
the Peace of Conscience, the Peace of a reconciled sinner, which makes all
quiet and still within me, and will stay with me in the strongest wind, in the
Earthquaks, the fire, and will live and dwell within the midst of persecution,
In tumultu secretum invenit, It builds us a chapel of ease, draws out a place
of retirement and a paradise, when the earth is disquieted; and in the midst of
all the busy noise the world can make,

Nor do I here exclude our Peace with men; for that comes within the compass of
this Salutation, because it is a fair branch of the Disciples doctrine* and
must be taken in, if it be possible, and as much as in us lies. If we Romans 12.
18.
be worthy of this Salutation, we may have peace with all the world, though
peradventure our opinions be as distant as one end of the world is from the
other.

Neither do I exclude the external Peace of the Church: No, Blessed are the
peacemakers; and blessed times they are when the Church sings of peace to the
Commonwealth, and the Commonwealth echoeth it back again to the Church. This
is Music, which both Men and Angels are delighted with; Angels, I say, who
being now made one with us, make it part of their joy to see us at unity
amongst our selves. Happy, thrice Happy times when the Poets could sing of the
Spiders making their webs in the Soldiers Helmets and coats of armor! These
then are not excluded, but wrapped up in this Salutation: For all peace is
carried along in this, in the Peace of the Gospel. When the world is out of
frame this establishes the pillars of it, brings every part to its own place,
the Sensual parts under the Rational, the Flesh under the Spirit, the Will
under the command of the Understanding; which is the Peace of the Soul. It
brings the obedience of Faith under the eternal Law of Christ; which is our
Peace with God. It draws with it the Servant under the Master, the Child under
the Parent, the subject under the Magistrate; which is the Peace of a House, of
a Commonwealth, of the World. It makes every part dwell together in unity, it
observes a parity in disparity, an equality in an inequality; it keeps every
wheel in its own motion, every man in his right place, the Master on Horseback,
and the Servant on the ground; and where Impudence incroacheth, it checketh it
with a Friend, sit down lower. It keeps the hands of the ungodly from the
gray hairs of the aged, and the teeth of the oppressor from the face of the
widow. Like an Intelligence, it moves the lesser Sphere of a Family, and the
greater Orb of the Commonwealth composedly and orderly. Peace is the right
order and the harmony of things. A Father calls it an Harp; and it is never
well set or tuned but by the hand of Charity. For all the Peace that is in the
world is derived from this Salutation, from the Peace of the Gospel, which
slacketh and lets down the String of our Self-love even to a Hatred of our
selves, and windeth the string of our Love to our brother to an equal
proportion with the Love of our selves. We must hate our life in this world,
and we must John. 12. 25. Math. 22. 39.
love our brother as our selves. Nay, it lets it down lower yet, to our very
enemies, the sound must reach even unto them. Talk what we will of peace; If it
be not touched and tuned by Charity, it will be but as sounding brass and a
tinkling cymbal: or rather, if it take not its rise and spring from this Peace
here, from the Peace of the Gospel, it will be but a dreadful sound, as Job 15.
21.
Eliphaz speaks, either in the Soul, or in the Family, or in the Church, or
in the Commonwealth.

I am the bolder thus to interpret the Disciples Salutation, because I find it
part of their Commission to say, The Kingdom of God is at hand, which was
indeed to give notice of the Gospel of Peace. This as it commends unto us all
Peace but that which is in evil: (which indeed is not Peace, but a conspiracy)
so especially it inculcates this, by which Christ has made both Ephesians. 2. 14.
one, and broken down the partition wall which was between the Jew and the
Gentile, and that partition wall also which Covetousness and Ambition, Envy and
Malice sets up between man and man; that we may be one in him, as He and the
Father are one. It was the prime care of the primitive Joh. 1^.
Christians to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace. And to this
Ephesians 4. 3.
end they bound themselves by oath, says Pliny a heathen witer, ne furta
committerent, ne fidem fallerent, not to steal, or lie or deceive, or break
their word. This course had the world upheld to this day, we should perhaps
have no reason to complain that Peace has left the earth, or that the Prince
of Peace has not a hole to hide his head in. If men were truly Christians and
had not made a sad divorce between Honesty and Religion, the Disciples
Salutation would not turn to them again, but rest on every House, and on every
Commonwealth, For Christian Religion is the greatest preserver of Peace that
ever was, and has laid a greater horror and a fowler blemish upon Discord and
Dissension then Philosophy ever did when she was most rigid and severe. She
commands us to pray for peace, She enjoins us to study to be quiet, and to
follow Peace with all men, She enjoins us to loose 1 Timothy 2. 2. 1 These. 4. 11.
our right for Peace, and to part with coat and cloak, and all, rather then
with Peace, quale regnum, talis pax; Look upon the Kingdom the Disciples Heb.
12. 14. M^. 4729.
speak of, and you shall soon discern what Peace they wish: Peace with God,
Peace of Conscience; there is no doubt of that. But Peace a so with men: For
this is truly Evangelical, motus aliena naturae pace nostra cohibere, as Hilary
speaks; to place a peacable disposition as a bank or bulwark against the
violence of another rage, by doing nothing to conquer him who is up in arms,
and spends himself and labors in the mine to ruin me. This is the work of
the Gospel, to beat down noise with silence, and injury with patience; To
overcome evil with good: To keep peace between the rich and the poor, by
prescribing mercy to that one, and meekness to the other; between the high and
the low, by prescribing justice to the one, and submission to the other;
between the evil and the good, by threatening the one, and upholding the other.
Thus it levelleth the hills, and raises the valleys, and casts an aspect and
influence upon all conditions, all qualities, all affections of men, that, as
it was prophesyed of the Times of the Gospel, The Wolf may dwell with the
Lamb, and the Leopard ly down with the Kid, a little Child lead Isa. 11. 6.
the Lion; that there may be abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures.

O beloved! did this Salutation take place, did the Peace of the Gospel rest
upon us, our conversation would be more smooth and even, and Salutations not so
rugged and churlish as they commonly are. They would not be so supercilious,
the dictates of our Pride, Stand thou there; or, sit thou Jam. 2. 3.
here under my footstool; They would not be so surly, the expressions of our
Scorn; Who made thee a Judge over us? They would not be so treacherous; This is
he, hold him fast. They would not be so cruel, the messengers of Death; Smite
him, till he dies. They would not be so querulous, the breathings of our Envy;
Why is he made rich? Why is he in honor? Why has he, who came in but now,
as much as I, that have born the heat and burden of the day? But every Family
and every Commonwealth would be fitly joined and compacted by that which every
joint, every part, supplies; every member having its place and subordination
and dependence, which to start from is to loose itself; the rich supplying the
poor, and the poor blessing the rich; the mighty protecting the weak, and the
weak observing the mighty; the wise teaching the ignorant, and the ignorant
hearking to the wise; every man being as an Angel-keeper and a ministering
spirit to every other man, ut quod est omnium, sit singulorum, that that which
is all men's may be every man's; and that which is every man's belongs unto the
whole. And this order, this Peace, will be, if the Disciples Salutation take
place, if the Peace of the Gospel rest upon us. And thus much be spoken of the
Salutation, Peace be unto this house.

We pass now from the Message to the Order of delivering it. It must be done
(...), first; First say. Here we may observe the method of our Savior. He
coming to fight against the Pomp, the Covetousness, the Luxury of the world,
first offers terms of Peace, and instructs his Disciples as God did Moses: When
thou come nigh unto a city to fight against it, then proclaim Peace unto it.
As we read of Tamerlaine, he first hangs out his white flag Deuteronomy. 20. 10.
of Peace, not his black nor his bloody colors. He fights not against us to
destroy us, till we have wearied his Mercy, and stood out too long, (...),
first he tenders Peace: but it is the wickedness of the wicked, the obstinacy
of the Enemy, that draws his Sword. For God does not as Nimrod, destroy men for
pleasure; he does not set them up as a mark, and then shoot deadly arrows at
them; or, as some are pleased to give a bloody instance, strike them dead with
the same liberty that an Huntsman does his Deer: as if an immortal Soul, which
Christ sets at a higher rate than the whole world, were of no more value then a
beast. A foul injury to be laid to His charge who is Goodness it self, and
nothing else but Goodness; a Blasphemy as loud as that which denies him to be
God. He seems rather to carry Peace and War in sinu, in his bosom, as Fabius
did in the skirt of his Gown, and leaves it to our choice, which we will have.
First Peace shows it self, in his love, in his precepts; nay, in his
threatenings and fearful menaces. For ideo denunciat bellum, ne inferat; He
therefore denounces war that we may choose peace. He bends his bow and sets his
arrow in the string, as the Psalmist speaks, that he may not shoot. He opened
the mouth of his servant Noah, a preacher of righteousness, before he opened
the windows of Heaven, and broke up the fountains of the great deep. He Genesis 7.
opened the mouth of his Servant Moses, before the earth opened her mouth to
swallow up Dathan and Abiram, and their accomplices. He does not undermine Numb.
16.
us with double voices and double counsels and a holy dissimulation, as some
call it, crying Peace, when he girds himself with strength, and prepares
himself to battle, saying Peace to that House which he means to level with
the ground: But he sends his Ambassadors, and Peace is the first clause in
their Commission; First they must salute us, before he will strike us; first
wish Peace, before he will furbish his sword. This is (...), In the Job. 40. 9.
first place. But then, if we will have an arm like God, and think to thunder
like him; if we harden our faces against his profer of Peace; then, ob certas
causas, and ob eam rem, as the form runs, for these causes and for this
thing, for our ingratitude and impenitency and rebellion, he speaks unto us by
his Disciples and Ambassadors as the Roman Heralds and Officers at arms did to
the enemies of that State when they denounced war. Quod populus meus nolit
auscultare, bellum indico facioque. See it translated, Psalm. 81. 1^. 1^
Because my people would not hearken to my voice, and Israel would none of me:
Therefore I gave them up to their own Hearts-lusts, and they walked in their
own counsels. But still Peace is first. First God speaks by his Prophets before
he speak by his judgments; First, as it were, he breaths Peace upon us, before
it return and leave us. And the reason of this is undeniable. For Severity in
God seems to be a quality not natural, but casual and occasioned. It is in a
manner constrained, and besides his Nature. For he has but one only property
or quality, says Trismegistus, and that is Goodness. Prior Bonitas secundum
naturam, posterior Severitas secundum causam; says Tertullian against Marcion:
The prime quality in him is Goodness: Severity is later, as being occasioned.
That is eternal, this is adventitious; that is proper unto him, this is but
borrowed; that inwardly flows from him, this is forced from him. First he
created Man, but left him not as the Ostrich does her eggs, upon the shore, but
he took him to himself, and placed him in a place of pleasure: Which was an
Argument of his Goodness. Then he gave him a Law by which to order his steps,
by the observance of which, as the Angels by Jacobs Ladder, he might ascend to
supernatural and heavenly bliss. Hitherto Gods countenance is fair, as the Sun
in its strength. But when Man's folly, by breach of the law, had wrought him
against his Nature into another mould, then his Severity showed it self. And
then as Naomi speaks of herself in the book of Ruth; Call him no more Naomi,
that is, pleasant; but call hin Marah, that is, bitter. For he will deal
bitterly with us. Fecimus, non accepimus severum: He is no more the God that
made us, but he is that God which we have made not a calm and gentle, but a
fierce and severe and angry God. God is a Fountain of Peace, and nothing
issues from him naturally but Peace. Nor does his Jealousy burn like fire till
our refusal of peace do kindle it: He speaks to the Husbandmen by his Servants,
and he speaks to them by his Son, and till they killed him, till they utterly
renounce Peace, he does not come to destroy. First Peace comes out of his
mouth, before his two edged sword. Still the word is, (...), First say, Peace
be unto this House.

I might here enlarge my self; But I perceive the time is past. Let us then
apply this Salutation to our selves. And the best use we can make of it, is, to
look both upon the Peace and the Order of delivering it, and to look upon them
on the right side. I told you that Peace implies Order and Harmony, that it is
as a Harp or Lute, which you must be careful to touch with a skilful hand, even
with the hand of Charity. Otherwise, this Peace may by our neglect raise a war
in our members; We may continue in Sin because Grace abounds, Peace is as the
Sun, which with its beams quickneth and Romans 6. 1.
refreshes and enlightneth all Things: But we may play the wantons in this
Sun, and turn the Peace of God into wantonness: and this first and free
overture of Peace may make us dull and heavy and careless in entertaining it.
God's Alpha may be our Omega; his first may be our last; his early morning
blessings, his dayspring from on high may not win a good look from us, not be
thought of till our declining days, till our Sun be ready to set. And this
will be to look upon Gods offer of Peace ex adverso situ, on the wrong side.
Rather let us run and meet and kiss Peace, woo and embrace and marry it at the
first displaying of its beauty. Let God's first and our first, his offer and
our acceptance, meet in the same moment of time. For why should it, being the
first thing that God does, be the last thing that we Think of: Let us remember
that Mercy rejoices and triumphs over Judgment, but only in this life, when
Peace is offered. As Mercy has her day of Triumph here, so Justice will have
her day too, when that Peace which we now refuse will fight against us. To day,
if you will hear his voice, to day you may hear it. But if that day be once
shut up, God will speak no more. When Jacob awaked out of that pleasant sleep
in which he had seen a ladder reaching unto Heaven, and Angels ascending and
descending on it; he cries Genesis 25. 17.
out, How terrible is this place! On which place a Father tells us that he did
stupere propter magnam misericordiam Dei, that he was amazed and afraid at
that great mercy of God which was shown unto him. And indeed Gods overtures of
Mercy and Peace have their terror as well as his Judgments. there is mercy and
Peace with God, that he may be feared. In this life of ours Psalm. 130. 4.
(which is but as a dream in respect of that beatifical vision we shall have of
God hereafter) we see a Ladder as it were reaching up to Heaven, and all Gods
blessings and promises, as so many Angels, ascending and descending upon it:
And God is in the midst of them; for we may find Heaven in these. Et quam
terribilis! How terrible is this place! Here is Templum Spiritus, the Temple of
the Holy Ghost: for by these he instructs us. Here is Ara Misericordiae, an
altar of Mercy; And what does God require at our hands but to offer up
ourselves a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable unto him, even upon this
altar of his Mercy; When he speaks, to say, thy servant hears; to follow
Peace at the first sight of it, to rise at the first call. We may indeed fly
from Gods Justice to his Mercy; But if we fly from his Mercy, if we reject
Peace, what asylum, what sanctuary can we find? It is Peace: Fly not from it.
It is offered first: Make speed, haste, and stay not; stay not with any fading
vanity from that Peace which makes way for Glory and Honor and everlasting
Peace.

The Seventeenth SERMON. PART. II.
Luke X. 5, 6. And into whatsoever House ye enter, first say, Peace be to this
House.

And if the Son of peace be there, your Peace shall rest upon it: if not, it
shall turn to you again.


THE Salutation has already sounded in your ears; Peace be to this House; even
all manner of Peace; but especially the Peace of the Gospel, the Peace of the
Prince of Peace, that Peace which passes all understanding. This the Disciples
of Christ here do breath forth in every place, to bring along with them to
every House. And this is to be done (...), in the first place; it being the
method of our Savior first to offer terms of Peace; not to question us before
he invites us; not to war against us till we have renounced peace; not to
strike us as enemies, till we cast him from us, and will not be his Friends.
This have we dilated upon at large. Now this Peace is a great benefit. This
Salutation is worth our best welcome and acceptance. Peace be unto this House,
is that which in a manner builds the house; it is the foundation of the
foundation, that which makes it compact and at unity with it self. Yet that
befalls this Peace which does all other benefits of God: Like to the Sum and
Rain, it shines and falls both upon good and bad; sometimes upon unthankful
persons, who, when God speaks of Peace, are bent to war, and somettmes upon
those who sing praises to the God of Peace for evermore. Sometimes it falls
upon a Son of Peace, whose heart is fitted and prepared, who listneth and
harkens after it; and there it rests and multiplies, and brings forth the
fruits of Peace in all righteousness and holiness. The Text says, (...), it
shall rest upon him, as upon its proper place. Sometimes it falls upon a
stubborn and perverse heart, a heart hardened against Peace; and then it seems
to fall away and be lost, because it finds no entertainment nor rest there: But
yet though it fall here, it is not lost. For (...), it shall turn back again to
those who sent it. And this is the high prerogative of this Peace; it will
either rest, or return. This is the crown and rejoicing of all those who bring
glad tidings of Peace; their PAX DO MUI HUIC, their Salutation, can not be
lost. It is but first saying, Peace be to this House: And if the Son of Peace
be there, your Peace shall rest upon it: if not, it shall turn to you again.

In these words are discovered to the Disciples, First, two sorts of men they
should meet with in the discharge of their duty; some that were sons of peace,
others that were not. Secondly, the nature or property of the Salvation; On the
one sort it will rest, from the other it will return: And that the Publishers
may not think it lost, it will return to them again. For, we may consider, 1 a
Prediction, that their Salutation, though it be Peace, will not find welcome
with all, but only with the sons of Peace; 2 an Encouragement, that for all
this they may not be afraid of their Message, afraid to say, Peace be to this
House; For whither it rest, or not, return it will to them again. Upon the sons
of Peace it will rest, and so rest as not to leave them: and if it meet with
those on whom it cannot rest, it will look back, and return to the Disciples
again. But for our more plain and orderly proceeding, and for your better
instruction, we will draw up all, and bound our discourse within the compass of
these three positions; 1 That as at the first preaching of the Gospel, so
always there will be this difference, of Good and Evil; of Sons of Peace, and
Enemies to Peace; of Willing and Obstinate hearers of this Message. 2 That this
Peace will rest on none but those who are fit to receive it. 3 That though it
do not rest, yet it is not lost but will return to those who publish it. And
with these we shall exercise your Devotion at this time.

In the first place, that a difference there will always be, of Good and Evil,
not only in the world, but also in the Church, not only amongst those who have
not heard of the name of Christ, but among those also who have heard the
Salutation of Peace sound in their ears, our Savior himself has showed us in
the parable of the Good seed and the Tares, and of the Draw-net; which being
cast into the Sea draws of every kind, Puto me non timere dicere, says St.
Augustine, alios sic esse in domo Dei ut sint domus Dei; Mat. 13, 47.
alios sic esse in domo Dei ut non pertineant ad compaginem domus. It is no
rashness to say that some are so in Gods Church that they are Gods Church, and
others are so in the Church that they are not so much as a part of the
building. Some are sons of peace, and some there are on whom Peace cannot rest:
Some there are to be amended and brought to repentance, as Peter; some to be
suffered and born with, as Judas; and some who lie hid and unknown to the world
till that great day of manifestation, till the day of gathering the Corn from
the Tares; till that day of separation, of severing the Goats from the Sheep.
Boni nusquam soli sunt nisi in coelo; and mali nusquam soli sunt nisi in
inferno, says Gregory; the good are never alone, but in Heaven, and the bad
are never alone, but in that place where they are tormented together. The Earth
as it is placed in the midst between Heaven and Hell, so is it a common
receptacle both of those who are citizens of Heaven, and of those who are to
have their portion with the Devil and his Angels.

Nor does this proceed from any decree of God, but that of Permission. For
nothing is more contrary to the Will of God, than Sin. Yet the Permission of
sin is a positive act of his Will: For God decrees to permit it. For as he
made Man upright, so he made him also mutable, so that he might incline to
either side, either embrace evil, or resist it. And though we cannot say that
by the Providence of God it comes to pass that some men are evil: (for he
speaks peace to every man) yet the providence of God orders and directs the
actions of the wicked. He circumscribes them in their time and duration, that
they last no longer than his Wisdom shall think fit. He bounds them in their
increase and greatness: Hitherto they shall go, and no further. He directs and
limits them from that object to which they are carried to something else, and
makes them serve, not to that end which the Sinner proposes, but to that which
he himself has set up Out of that Sin which the Sinner commits to satisfy his
lust, will God manifest his glory: Upon his Unrighteousness he will build up
the glory of his Justice. By that sin which was a Tempest to beat down and
overthrow, will God establish his Church; and by those evil men whom the Devil
places as thorns and pricks in the eyes of the righteous, will God try and
purge his chosen ones. In a word, God makes not Sin, but he makes it useful and
advantageous. And to this end he suffers and permits this mixture and
composition of Good and Evil, he suffers the Tares and the Corn to grow
together till the time of the Harvest. Qui semel aeternum judicium destinavit,
non praecipitat discretionem, says Tertullian; He who has appointed and
ordained a day of separation, does not make that separation until that day. And
this he does, not only to magnify his Justice and Wisdom, which out of so
great darkness can draw wondrous light, and can ex malis faecundare bona, make
use of Sin as the Husbandman does of Dung to manure and fatten his ground, that
it may bring forth a more plentiful harvest; but for other reasons also, which
Christ has laid open in his Gospel.

I. To show his patience and longanimity toward sinners, who fight against
him, toward those who are offended with his Salutation, that they may yield at
last, and become sons of Peace. For the long suffering of God is Salvation,
says the Apostle. He does not say it works, or 2 Pet. 3. 1^.
brinketh forth, but positively, it is Salvation: It is for this end, and if it
be not hindered it will produce this effect. That we prolong our days on earth,
that we number more sins than days, nay then hours, than minutes, is not from
any want of knowledge in God, that he sees us not; or from want of strength,
that he cannot put the hook into our nostrils; but from his patience and
longanimity, who gives us many times the longer life, that we may at last recall
ourselves, and turn back unto him. Non ille perdidit potentiam, sed malos
reservat ad paenitentiam; He has not lost his power, but he keeps evil men to
the day of repentance. (...), He first exhorts, then promises, then threatens,
then chides, then prepares his deadly weapons, then puts them up again; and
then again he threatens; but he never strikes till he has opened an effectual
door, and made a way for us to safety. As he is Lord of hosts in regard of his
strength, so he is in this respect also, that as an Host or Army he comes on
but slowly, by degrees in his march, and makes a show before he strikes; nec
accedit ad decretorium stilum nisi plus sit quod timet quam quod damnat; He
does not bid battle, till there is no hope of reconcilement. Nor does he
punish, till that be more which he fears than that which he blames. He makes no
end of his suffering till he sees there will be no end of Sinning.

II. Gods suffers this mixture of Evil with Good, that the evil may be reformed
by the Good. For as he is able out of stones to raise up children unto Abraham,
so by the sons of peace he gains more children unto peace, there proceeding a
kind of virtue from their good example, as there did from Christ's garment to
cure those who were diseased. Aristotle in his Problemes makes a question, Why
Health does not infect as well as Sickness; Why men grow sick many times by
unwary conversing with the diseases, but no man grows well by accompanying the
healthy. And indeed it is so with the healthiness of the Body: It has no
transient force on others. But the strength and healthiness of the Mind carries
with it a gracious kind of infection; and common experience teaches us that
nothing profits evil men more than the company of the good. How many Saints may
the holy conversation of one man beget? How many Martyrs has the patience and
silence of one man brought to the stake? How many Evil men have lost themselves
and their evil in the company of the Good? We must not therefore make the
separation before the time. For we may be in Societate impiorum, in the company
of evil men, but in solitudine vitiorum, in respect of their evil be alone. We
may be with them in participatione sacramentorum, says Augustine, in the
participation of the same sacraments, but not in consensione factorum, in our
consent to their evil deeds. We may be like the Ark of Noah, in the deluge, yet
not drowned; like Mose's Bush in the fire, yet not burnt. We may carry about
with us (...), as Plato calls it, a kind of charm and spell, which may slumber
our turbulent affections and those motions which are so ready to subvert our
Reason, that we may be near enough to them to help them, but yet at such a
distance that no poison which is breathed from them shall hurt us. I Please all
men in all things, says St. Paul, all men, even evil men, not by fashioning
himself to them, 1 Cor. 10. 33.
but by reforming them to the copy of his own innocence. For what says
Tertullian? Numquid Saturnalia celebrans hominibus placebat? did he please men
by celebrating the same heathenish idolatrous Feasts with them? No; but by
gravity and patience, by modesty and integrity. Again, I was made all things to
all men. Numquid idololatris idololatres? What? was he 1 Cor. 9. 22.
made an idolater to idolaters, a heathen to heathens, and a carnal man to
carnal men? No; there was no such friendship between St. Paul and evil men. He
was not drawn by them, but made it his industry to draw them unto him: He made
not himself like unto them, but made them like unto himself: He pleased evil
men, but it was to make them good. And in this manner licet convivere, commori
non licet; We may live with evil men but we may not die with them,; We may
possess the world with them, but not their error. And this is it by which we of
the reformed Churches justify our separation from the Church of Rome. We do it
not as the Donatists did of old, and our Separatists now a days, only to avoid
the communion of bad men, but to free our selves from a necessity of joining
with bad men in their impieties. We go not from them, but from their dangerous
errors. We divide not our selves from them, (for our hearts desire is that they
may repent, and be saved) but from their superstition. And thus to divide our
selves is no Schism, but Christian animosity. And in this case we say with
Cyprian, Pereant sibi solis qui perire volunt; If they will perish, let them
perish to themselves alone.

III. God suffers this mixture of Good and Evil men not only for the
reformation of the Evil, but also for the benefit of the Good. For mali bonis
prosunt, says the Father; Evil men may prove advantageons to the good. They
may awake many glorious virtues in them which otherwise would be but as the
seed in the ground, not yet in the ear and blossom. Plutarch has written a
Book How togather profit from an enemy, How to make our selves better by them
who would make us worse. But Christ in the Book of his Gospel has taught us
yet a more excellent way, How to improve our Virtue by other men's sin; How to
increase more and more in good by the very sight of evil; How to make those
sins which press others down to Hell as a Scale and Ladder to lift us up to
Heaven; so that we may make friends not only of the unrighteous Mammon, but
even of unrighteous men, to lift us up unto those everlasting habitations. Some
men there are who for want of skill in this book and through ignorance of this
art put upon themselves a strange behavior, and at the very thought of wicked
men are so troubled and transported that they forget they are men, and subject
to the same infirmities; that they forget they are Christians, who should work
a cure upon them, and not murder them. You may behold them angry and fierce,
cruel and bloody, breathing forth nothing but curses and exsecrations. As with
a Sword in my bones my enemies reproach me, whilst they daily say unto me,
Where is thy God? says David, Objurgant Psalm. 41. 10.
quasi oderint; their very reprehensions are Swords, and their exhortations the
expressions of their hatred. With James and John, those Sons of Thunder, they
are ready with their Domine, vis dicamus ut ignis descendat; If it were in
their power, they would call down fire from heaven to destroy them Luke 9. 54.
as Elias did. To put off all bowels of compassion with them is to put off the
Old man: So that, if we rightly consider it, they are greater Sinners than
those they condemn; and it may be said to them as the one Thief said to the
other, Do you not fear God, seeing you are in the same condemnation? Thus it is
with evil men; They grow worse and worse, by that which should better them; and
their ungrounded Zeal consumes not them, but their Charity. But he who is a Son
of Peace has learnt that thriving art, to be richer for other men's poverty, to
raise himself higher and higher at the sight of his brothers fall, to make
others sin the occasion of many virtues in himself, to say unto himself, There
they are fallen, that I may look to my steps. And here his Circumspection shows
it self. He had broke the Law; and my eyes shall gush out with rivers of water.
In those tears his Piety is resplendent. He is sore wounded; but I will power
oil into his wounds. Here his Charity stretches forth her hand, even that
Charity which shall hide a multitude of sins. Thus by the Wisdom and providence
of God, Sin, which brings forth Death, may bring forth life; and the wicked
many times are turned from the error of their way at the sight of those virtues
which shine in glory at the sight of their Sin. In a word, the Good are made
manifest by the Evil, and the Evil may be converted by the Good. Still this
difference there will be in the Church; and the Salutation here is directed to
both, both to the Sons of peace, and to those who will not receive it. Into
whatsoever house they go, the Disciples must say, peace be unto this House.
And, so much be spoken concerning the Difference of the Persons.

We come now in the second place, to the Nature and Property of the Salutation,
That it will rest on none but those who are prepared to receive it. Peace will
rest on none but on a Son of Peace; on him who is worthy of peace; who is
docile, and not averse from it, who is willing to hear of it. For, as Pothinus
the Bishop of Lions, being asked by the President of the place, Who was the God
of the Christians? made no other reply but this, (...), You shall know, if you
be worthy; so may we say of this Peace, They who are worthy, who are fitted and
prepared, shall receive it. And if you ask on whom it will rest, I answer, It
will rest on them that love it. Where is the place of my rest, says God; The
Isa. 66. 1.
Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool. All these things has my
hand made. But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and of a
contrite spirit, and trembles at my word. He that created all things, and made
the Heaven and the earth, will not choose out of these his seat, but leaves them
all, and will rest no where, but in a contrite and broken heart, which divides
and opens it self; and makes a way to receive him. And certainly, as we see in
Nature, we cannot put any thing into that, which is full already, no more will
peace enter that heart which is filled with Satan, with malice, and with the
very gall of bitterness. The Gospel will find no place in that Soul which is
already filled and praepossessed with prejudice against the Gospel. Into a
malicious Soul Wisdom shall not enter, says Wisd. 1. 4.
the Wiseman, Or, if it do enter, it shall not dwell there; not dwell there, as
a Lord, to command the Will and Affections; no not as a friend, to find a
welcome for a time; but be thrust out as a stranger, as an enemy. What is the
place for peace to rest in? Not in a Nabals heart, which is as stone; Not in
the Wantons heart, which is as a troubled Sea; not on the Fool, who has no
heart, whose conscience is defiled and judgment corrupted by many evil and
vicious habits, ubi turpia non solum delectant, sed placent, who does not only
delight in that which is opposite to this Peace, but approves it as that
without which he cannot be at Peace. No; the spirit of Peace and the unclean
spirit may seem in this to agree: They will not enter the House before it be
swept and garnished. Ill weeds must be rooted out before you can sow good corn.
Every valley must be filled, and every mountain and hill must be brought low,
all that inequality and repugnancy of our life must be taken away, and all made
smooth, and even. For as the Prince of peace, so Peace has a way to be
prepared before it will enter. What is the reason that all the seed which the
Sower sowed brought not forth fruit? Because some fell in stony places, where
there was not much Mat. 13.
earth, where the Soul did not sympathize and bear a friendly correspondence
with the Word, as good ground does with the seed; and some fell by the
way-side, which was never plowed nor manured, and the fouls of the air, those
sly imaginations which formerly prepossessed the Soul, devoured it up. Nothing
can be well done when the mind is already taken up with something else. What
room for the Gospel in the Jew, who makes his boast of the Law? What room for
Religion where it is accounted the greatest piety to be profane? What room for
Righteousness when we rejoice in impiety? When the Prince of this world has
blinded our eyes with covetousness, ambition and lust, what room is there for
Peace? Non magis quam frugibus, terra sentibus and rubis occupata, as the
Orator speaks; and they are the very words of our Savior; No more than there
is for good corn in the ground which is full of briars and thorns: (...);
Whither do thou cast thy seed, thy good precepts, says the Philosopher to
one that read a lecture of Philosophy to a scornful person. Thou flingest it
into a foul and stinking vessel, which corrupts every thing it receives, and
takes no savor from it, but makes it relish of it self. Lord, what a rock is a
prepossessed mind! What an adamant is a Stubborn and perverse heart! How harsh
and unpleasant is this Salutation of Peace to those who are hardened against it!
How Stoical and rigid and peremptory are they against their own Salvation!
Obstrepunt, intercedunt, ne audiant; They are so far from receiving the
Salutation, that they are troubled and unquiet at the very name of Peace, and
desire they may not hear that word any more. The complaint in Scripture is,
They will not understand, and The ways of Peace they will not know. Experience
will teach us, that it is too common in the world to stand stiff upon opinion
against all evidence whatsoever, though it be as clear as the Day. And it is
the reason which Arnobius gives of the Heathens obstinacy, to whom this
Salutation of Peace was, but as a fable, Quid facere possumus considerare
nolentibus secumque loqui; What can we do, or say, or how can we convince them
who will not be induced once to deliberate and consider, nor can descend to
speak and confer with themselves and their own reason? A little leaven
leaveneth the whole lump; and so does a prejudicate opinion the whole mind of
man: All our actions and resolutions have a kind of taste and relish of it.
Whatsoever comes in to strengthen an anticipated conceit, whatsoever walks
within the compass of our desires or lustful affections, we readily embrace,
and believe it to be true, because we wish it so. But if it thwart our
inclination; if it run counter to our intendments, though it be Reason, though
it be Peace, though it be a manifest truth, though it be written with the
Sunbeams, we will not once look upon it. It is an easy matter, says
Augustine, to answer a fool; but it is not so easy to satisfy him. It is easy
to confute, but not to reform him. For his Folly barreth him from seeking the
means of understanding: and when light is offered, it shuts up his eyes, that
he cannot receive it. We have many domestic examples of this obstinacy (and I
wish they were not so near us) of men who may be overcome, but cannot be
persuaded; who will not yield to any strength of reason, nec cum sciant id quod
faciunt non licere, no, not though they cannot be ignorant that the course of
their life runs with more violence and noise than is answerable to the Peace of
the Gospel; who know what they are, and yet will be what they are. And these we
meet with quocunque sub axe, in every place, in every corner of the earth.
These multiply and increase every day. For it cannot be but the greatest part
of men will be the weakest. We have troops and armies of these; and the
regiment consists of boys and girls, and women led away captive by their
ignorance and lusts. And if there be aged men amongst them, you may soon
discover that their greatest wisdom is their gray hairs. And will Peace rest
upon these? It will rest as soon in a whirlwind, or in St. Judes cloud without
Water, or in St James wave of the Sea tossed up and down with every wind. But I
forbear, for I list not to be too particular. We read in our Books, of one
Timotheus an excellent Musician, that he was wont to require a greater pay from
those who had been taught by others before, than from those who came unto him
rude and untaught. And his reason was, Dedocendi officium gravius and prius
quam docendi; That it was a greater task to unteach them what they had already
ill learnt, and a necessity to be done before he could teach them his skill.
Beloved, it is so with those who are to instruct others in the way of Peace:
Geminatur onus; Whatsoever their reward is, their burden is doubled. It is not
only enough to say, Peace be unto this House, but they must cleanse and purge
the house, that Peace may enter. It is not enough only to salute, but they must
make way for the Salutation. The Jew must be untaught his beggarly elements and
rudiments of the world, before he can be taught and instructed for the kingdom
of Heaven: His Ceremonies and the Law must be rased out, before he can be the
Apostle of Cbrist, before the Gospel of Peace can be written in his heart. The
Gentile must be untaught those lessons which even Nature is ashamed of, before
he can receive the doctrine of Grace. The Carnal man must learn to crucify the
flesh, before he can become spiritual. False principles must be destroyed,
before you can build up true ones in their place. Whilst we please our selves
in the errors of our life, whilst we rejoice in our selves, and, as the Apostle
speaks, measure our selves by our selves, we are not fit for this Evangelical
Salutation, Grace be to you, and peace, from God our Father, and the Lord Jesus
Christ. No, These strong holds must be pulled down, these imaginations cast to
the ground, and every high thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of
God, every thought must be brought into captivity 2 Cor. 10. 5.
unto the obedience of Christ. Scio quibus viribus opus sit, says St.
Augustine, I know what power it must be that must persuade proud men that
Humility is a virtue. And I know what power it must be that must persuade a
carnal man that there is no peace but where the spirit fights and overcomes the
Flesh. But non aliter haec sacra constant; This Salutation will not pass where
this preparation is not made. This Peace will not enter into that Soul where
there are tumults and thunders, noise and destruction. Never did any plant grow
up and flourish in the field of the Church which was not ramus propendens, as
Nazianzene speaks of his Father, a branch or bough hanging over and looking
that way. Nor does Gods saving Grace bring Peace, till his exciting and
preparing Grace has made a way for it. When we are Sons of Peace, when we have
some title to the inheritance of Peace, when our hearts are hammered and
softened and subjugated, when we are willing hearers, then this Salutation is
brought home to our doors, and Peace will enter, and rest upon us. If the son
of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon him; if not, it shall return to
you again. And so I pass to my last Position; That though it do not rest, yet
it shall not be lost, but shall return to those that publish it.

The word is spoken, the Salutation past, Peace be to this house; On the sons
of peace it will rest; but on others it will not. And this is enough to take
the word out of the Disciples mouths, and stop the message: for there is in
every one of us (...), a kind of flitting humor, which will not hold out long,
but faints and falls to the ground at the sight of some gross event which may
fall out. What? plow the winds, and sow the rocks? bring Peace to them who will
not receive it? bring it thither where it will not rest? Who would willingly be
employed in such a Message? For all this the word must be spoken, and the
Salutation given: And that no groundless fear may seal up the Disciples lips,
they are told that even there where the Salutation will not rest, it is not
lost, but will return again; as David Psalm. 35. 13.
spoke of his prayer for his malicious enemies, Though peradventure it do not
prevail, yet it will return into their bosom. And this is it which stays and
upholds us in the performance of all the duties of our life, the Assurance that
nothing that we do is lost. Commonly, upon a pretense of doing little Good, we
affect a kind of intempestive prudence and unseasonable discretion in
performing that little good we do; which shows it self in us like the Sun in
winter, long ere it arise, and quickly gone. We are unwilling to bear the
Salutation; and at the first rub and opposition we are weary of it. If all be
not Sons of Peace, we will no longer be preachers of Peace: But this Return of
the Salutation adds spirit and courage to us, and makes us venture into every
house, even into his who is an enemy to Peace. First then, for our comfort,
lost this Salutation cannot be. For every good deed pays it self in the very
doing. And therefore says the Orator, Interest omnium recte facere; It
concerns every man to do his duty; and when he can reap no other fruit, to
content himself with the very doing of it. Do not say the Word is cast away
because it met not with a son of Peace. It cannot be spoken, and cast away: For
when it is spoken, all is done. Fac quod debes, and eveniat quod vult; it is an
Arabic Proverb: Do that which thou should, and let the Event be what it
will. In the second place, to do our duty is all that is required at our hands.
We are but to plant and water: the increase is from another hand. We can but
say, Peace be to this House. It is not in our power to make it rest there. Laus
imperatori victo; A skilful and wise Captain may deserve high honor and
commendations, though he fall before his enemy, and an Orator may be famous for
his eloquence, though his Client be condemned. The Philosopher in his Topics
will tell us, (...); It is not exacted from an Orator that he persuade, but
that he frame those arguments and motives which are persuasive; nor of a
Physician, to heal those who are ill affected, but to prescribe those medicines
which are sovereign. If the earth be brass, we cannot say the dew of Heaven
has no virtue: nor, if we put out our eyes, can we say the Sun does not shine.
Son of man, says God to his Prophet, if thou warn the wicked, and he turn not
from his wicked Ezekiel. 3. 19.
way he shall die in his iniquity, but, thou have delivered thine own Soul.
There is the Return of his Prophecy. Whether the Salutation rest, or not, it
does not vanish, Numquid consecrata perdimus? For can we think that lost which
we consecrate to God? Still the Apostles incense smells even when it is out. We
are unto God, says St. Paul, a sweet 2 Cor. 2. 15.
savor in them that are saved. That we doubt not of. But it follows; and in
them that perish: For neither Death nor Hell can take away the sweet and
fragrant smell of this incense. Though many that heard St. Paul, did wax wanton
against Christ, though many had their consciences 1 Timothy 5. 11.
seared with an hot Iron; though many made shipwreck of their Faith, 1 Timothy 4.
2.
yet St. Paul is bold to proclaim it to the whole world, I have fought 1 Timothy
1. 19.
a good fight, I have finished my course. All that is required at our hands is,
that we speak the Word, though we be not heard. For though we speak, and be not
heard; yet no other thing befalls us, than what befalls our Lord and Master,
who knows and sees that his Sunshine and Rain is every day abused; and yet the
Sun becomes not as a Sack, nor the earth as brass: Who calls, and calls aloud,
and again and again to those deaf Adders which will not hear: Whose providence
many times watches over those who deny his Providence, and in a manner cast
him out of the World. And therefore as he says, Demus, etiamsi multa in
irritum demus, Let us give, though we give many things in vain; so let us speak
the word, let us preach the doctrine of Peace though the event prove not
answerable to our hopes.

For, in the third and last place, in vain it cannot be, though it be in vain;
and lost it cannot be, though it be buried. Though it find not the effect to
which it was principally ordained, yet an effect it will have. Aut fiet in
illis, aut de illis; It shall be accomplished either in those to whom it is
spoken, or upon them. For it is not the Disciples word, but the Masters; and
when it is gone forth out of his mouth, it shall not return unto him void, it
shall not fall to Isa. 55. 11. 1 Samuel ^, 4. 1^.
the ground, Quicquid condidit virtus, coelum est, says the Poet; Whatsoever
is done by the hand of Virtue, is as lasting as the Heavens. But that which we
do at the command of our Master, in the name and person of Christ, is more
lasting than the Heavens; Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my words shall
not pass away: Luke 21. ^^*
The Heavens shall be gathered together as a scrowle, but one iota or title
shall in no wise pass from Gods word. That Word which we contemn and tread
under our feet, shall rise up again, and rise up against us. That Word which we
laughed at, is still in being, and shall appear again to make us cry and howl.
That Word for which we stoned the Prophets and killed those that brought it,
shall be quick and active and vocal to condemn us. That Word for which Micah
was smitten on the face, shall make that face as the face of an Angel. That
Word which brought St. Paul unto the block, shall return and bring him into
Heaven, and put a crown upon his head. Whether it meet with honor or
dishonor, with stripes, with imprisonment, with persecution, with death,
(...), it will certainly return again. Cast thy Eccl. 11. 1.
bread upon the waters, says Solomon; for thou shall find it after many days,
even find it there where it might be thought to perish and be lost. The wiseman
seems to allude to the nature and property of some Rivers, which when they have
run on sweetly, and watered some few Provinces, hide themselves under the
earth, and at last break forth again, and rise and appear in other coasts. Cast
thy bread, venture all thy dutys, upon these waters, which though they seem to
run out of thy sight, and to bury themselves in the bowels of the earth, though
they be covered over with calumnies and disgraces, with misery and affliction,
yet will break forth and have their course again, and bear thee before the Sun
and the People to the land of the living. To shut up all in a word; Publish
Peace, and whether thy Salutation meet with a son of Peace, or an enemy of
Peace; whether it be entertained with reverence, or rejected with scorn;
whether it meet with a prepared heart, or a heart of stone; whatsoever the
event be, thy labor is not in vain in the Lord. For though it seem to be lost,
yet it will return again. It will return to thee in this life with an
olive branch, with peace of Conscience and joy in the holy Ghost. Nor will it
leave thee so; but when thou art dead, it will follow thee to those new
heavens, and that new earth, wherein dwells righteousness and peace and joy
unspeakable for evermore.

The Eighteenth SERMON.
Romans XI. 20. Well: because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand
by faith. Be not high minded: but fear.
MAN being a reasonable Creature, one would think he should need no other
conduct to lead him in his way to bliss than the light of those precepts which
are most reasonable. Be not high-minded. Why should we? but fear. Why should we
not? the one posting us one till we bulg on the rocks, the other warily
steering our course till we are brought unto the Haven. What need there any
more incitements to the fulfilling of a Law then Knowledge of it that it is
just, and faculty and ability to perform it? Indeed good reason it is that our
Reason and Will should incline to that which is reasonable, but, Man as he is
endued with Reason so is he also with Passion, by which he becoms (...),
various and manifold and mutable in his ways. Nullum morosius animal, nullum
majori art tractandum, could the Philosopher say; No creature more froward and
headstrong, none more intractable, than Man. And therefore God also condescends
in mercy, and is (...), various and manifold in his instruction, teaching us to
avoid those evils which bring desolation on our Souls, not only (...), by his
written word, but (...), by the examples of other men, so visible that we may
run and read them. He has painted out every Sin with the very blood of the
offender. He has beat out the teeth of oppression in one, whipped Idleness in
another, Stricken Pride in a third: So that Sins are not better known than the
Punishment of Sins, nor Gods Precepts more remarkable than his Judgments. Now
all these things happened unto them for ensamples, and are written for our
admonition, on whom the ends of the world are come. And as Clemens speaks of
the pillar of salt into which Lots 1 Cor. 10. 11.
wife was turned, (...), that it was not a mere heavy and lumpish Statue, but
had life and activity enough to season and preserve us from recidivation; so
may we say, of all the fearful and terrible examples of Gods wrath in
Scripture, they are not only the marks of his Justice, but the characters of
his Love, silent Sermons, but of more efficacy many times than those that we
preach: Our blessed Apostle here presents us 1 Pet. 3. 1.
with one, and that the most remarkable we find; not the cutting off of some
wicked person from the city of the Lord, but the casting away of a whole
nation, even the Israel of God. The Israelites were Gods peculiar nation,
cul^'d out of the whole world, like Gedeon's fleece, full of the dew of
heavenly benediction when all the world was dry beside. To them were committed
the oracles of God. They had the Law and the Prophets: Romans 4. 1.
Illis apud Deum gratia, says Tertullian, they were in great favor with God,
that God taught them by word of mouth. God taught them by his Wonders, and by
his Prophets, and by those many Ceremonies, which were as pictures, says
Melanchthon, and ocular Sermons, praenunciativae observationes, says St.
Augustine, so many prophecies of Christ. By these they might have been prepared
and qualified for the receiving of the Messiah. But these high Prerogatives,
which should have levelled their minds, and carried them on in an even course to
the fullness of time when their Redeemer should come, wrought a contrary effect,
and swelled and lifted them up to the admiration of themselves, that they could
not stoop to entertain (...), a Messiah so poor and naked and inglorious as
Christ. Fiducia patrum inflati, says Tertullian, they were puffed up with the
conceit that Abraham was their Father, that God had raised up many famous men,
amongst them. Quasi naturalem jactabant se habere justitiam, says Augustine.
They thought righteousness came to them by kind, and was derived unto them from
the loins of their glorious predecessors. Well, says the Apostle, for all
this, for all they were branches of the good Olive Tree, and did partake of the
root and juice and fatness thereof, by which they might have grown up, and been
transplanted into the Paradise of eternity, yet (...), they were broken off,
and scattered and dispersed, and coeli and soli extorres, driven about the
earth, banished from their own country as well as from Heaven, made the scorn
of the world, and the contempt of nations, not suffered to stay so much as in
the borders of their own land. (...), No man must dwell with them under the
same roof, (...), or in the greatest sickness or extremity take Physic of
them. None must wash in the same bath, not talk with them. It is a Canon of a
Council in Trull. They are shut out, says Crusius, from the City in a place
called Pera, by an arm of the Sea, nor are permitted to come to Constantinople
to traffic but by ship. In a word, they are become a Proverb of obstinate
impiety, so that when we call a man a Jew, we think we have rayled loud enough.
Our Apostle comprehends all in this one word, (...), they were broken off; or
if this will not serve, (...) will. They were not only branches lopt off, but
cast away. A sad exsample, and now fresh and bleeding in the eyes of V. 15.
those primitive Christians in quos gratiam transtulit Deus pleniorem, on whom
God had powered forth more plentiful and abundant Grace, who had been cut out
off the wild olive, and grafted contrary to nature into the good V. 24.
olive tree. And the most fit and opposite example it was they could look upon.
What better spectacle for the Church than the Synagogue, in whose ruins and
desolation she may read the dangerous effects of spiritual Pride and
Haughtiness of mind, and thence learn not to insult, but tremble. Therefore our
Apostle has drawn the picture of her ruin with this. Impress or Motto, NOLI
ALTUM SAPERE, Be not high minded, but fear. In which words you see we have a
negative precept, Be not high-minded, and a positive and affirmative, but fear.
The first is a Caution, the second a Prescript. The first gives us notice of a
dangerous disease, Haughtiness of mind: the second presents us an antidote,
Fear. For as spiritual Pride may cut us off, with the Jew, from the favor of
God, so Fear is a (...), a preservative, Be not high-minded; It cut off the
Jew: But Fear, that being grafted into the good Olive thou may grow and
blossom and bring forth fruit and flourish for ever. Of these in their order.

(...), Noli altum sapere, is good counsel; and I find it often given in the
writings of the learned, to men of lofty eyes, who exercise themselves in great
matters and in things too high for them, men of curious speculation, Psalm. 131.
1.
(...), as Nyssine speaks, who being busy in the pursuit of things out of
reach, unhappily pass by and oversee those more necessary things which are at
hand; qui omittunt quod possunt videre, dum quod non possunt intuentur, as
Hilary; who loose the sight of those truths which are visible and easy, whilst
they make too steady a gaze on those which are past finding out; with the
children of Ben^amin, learning to fling stones at a hairs breadth, and yet not
able to see (...), the wide and open and effectual Door of Faith. A Judge. 20.
16.
disease indeed very dangerous, and which strikes and hinders us in our
spiritual growth. But this is rather (...) than (...); and not so opposite to
our present purpose and the intent of the Apostle. The Malady here aimed at is
an overweening conceit of our own worth, whether in respect of the knowledge of
divine truths, or the practice of those virtues which are commended to us as
the marks and characters of men in the favor and love of God. A disease mortal
and fatal to the Jew; and to which the Christian was most obnoxious. He was
newly come out of the valley and shadow of Death into the land of the living,
and by the others fall and loss was entitled to great riches, as our Apostle
speaks, V. 12.
and therefore he was more subject to this Disease of Haughtiness of mind. For
the Orator will tell us, Nihil insolentius novitio divite; Men suddenly graced
with favors and prerogatives are most insolent* and proud. And the Philosopher
in his Rhetoriques says, that men raised from the Dunghill to great fortunes
and riches have commonly all the vices of rich men, and more.

And now that we may open this malady; we will search and inquire the cause of
it, and see what it is that lifts up the mind to this dangerous pitch; what it
is that swells and puffs us up, and makes us grossos, and grossi cordis, as
Parisiensis most properly though barbarously speaks, that makes the heart of
man grosser and greater than it self; as in Italy they have long time had an
art to feed up a foul 'till they make the Liver bigger than the body. What is
there in Christianity that naturally can have this operation? We confess it is
from heaven heavenly, (...), as Synesius speaks, deriving its pedigree from
God. We read of rich glorious promises; of royal prerogatives; of truth and
peace and mercy which came by Jesus Christ: But all these are like the
Physicians (...), to purge and cleanse us from the gross and corrupt humors,
rather than full diet, to feed us up to that bulk that we are not able to weild
and move ourselves in any order. The Gospel is from heaven; but we are of the
earth, earthy. These Prerogatives are grants, not rewards. And Truth and Mercy
are not the work of our hands, but the purchase of our Savior. Quanto magis
lumen gratiae respicimus, the more steadfastly we look upon the throne of grace,
Tanto magis nos ipsos reprehendimus; says the devout Schoolman. The more light
we have, the more we see our own wants and impotency, and so become the more
vile in our own eyes. Let 2 Pet. 1. 5, 6.
us join Virtue with Faith, and with Virtue Knowledge, and with Knowledge
Temperance, and with Temperance Patience, yet none of these, not all these, of
their own nature can produce any such effect as to make us be in love with our
selves, or to raise us to that height as to overlook not only our selves, but
our brethren. Were these virtues truly ours, or being ours did they appear to
us in their own native shapes; they would discover unto us that the way to
happiness is as the eye of a needle through which it is impossible for men of
gross and overgrown conceits to enter. The cause then of this disease is not in
the Gospel, or in the Riches of the Gospel, but in our selves, who are willing
to be deceived; and in the Devil, who is totius erroris artifex, as Tertullian
calls him the forges of all error and deceit. For as God, whose very essenee is
Goodness, does in mercy manifest that Goodness out of Sin it self; So the Devil
who is (...), that Wicked one, abuses Good unto evil; and when he cannot drive
us to despair by reason of our sin, he takes another course, and makes us
presume upon conceit of our righteousness. Take Virtue in its own shape, and it
seems to call for fear and trembling, and to bespeak us to be careful and
watchful that we forfeit not so fair an estate for false riches: But take it as
from the Devils forge, and then, contrary to its own nature, it helps to blind
and hoodwink us, that we see not the danger we are in, how that not only the
way but our feet are slippery. It unfortunately occasions its own ruin, whilst
we, with Nero in Tacitus, spend riotously upon presumption of treasure. The
Schools teach us that Evil could not subsist if it were not founded in Good:
How true this is in general I discuss not; but experience makes it plain that
not only that Good which but appears so, which smiles upon us in an alluring
pleasure, or glitters in a piece of Gold, or cringeth to us in his knee, that
honors us, but also verum and plenum bonum, as St. Augustine calls it, that
which is fully and truly Good, not only precious Promises and high
Prerogatives, which of themselves cannot make us good, but Piety and Patience
and Holiness do swell and puff us up. That Good which makes us good, which
names us good, is that by which we are made evil; And all this proceeds from
our own wilful error and mistake: for Pride is the daughter of Ignorance, says
Theodoret. Were we not deceived, with false visions and apparitions, it were
impossible that either our eye should be haughty, or our neck stiff. The
Philosopher will tell us that objects present themselves unto us like those
(...) or Mathematical bodies which have many sides; and they who see one side,
think all are like it, or the very same. We see the Gospel ex uno situ, but on
one side, or, as Seneca speaks, ex adverso, on the wrong side. We see it
pictured in glory, but not in vengeance* It appears to us in a shape of mercy,
not as it carries fire before it to consume us* We behold Christ as a Savior,
not as a Lords We entertain Prerogatives as prerogatives, and no more, and
never look on the other side where the obligation is drawn. We comtemplate
Virtues as the work of our own hands, but are blind to those imperfections
which they bear in their very forehead. Nay, our Sins present themselves before
us, but colored and painted over with the prerogatives of mercy and
forgiveness. We consider our selves as Branches grafted in, but cannot see the
Tu excideris, that we may be cut off. We consider our strength, not our
weakness. But could we totum rerum conceptum exhaurire, take-in the whole
conceit of our ways, and apprehend our actions in their full being and
essence, without those unnatural shadows and glosses, our minds would be as
even as the Sea when no wind troubles it, and not raise those bubbles which are
lost in the making, nor those raging waves which foam out nothing but our
shame. But being thus lightened of our burden by error, every puff of wind lifts
us up, above our sins, above the mutability of our nature, above ourselves, and
above God himself. A Prerogative, which is but a breath; an appearance of
Virtue, which is but a shadow; our own conceits, which are vainty, set us in
our altitude where the hand of Mercy cannot reach us, but a hand of Vengeance
hovers over us, which, when it strikes, tumbles us headlong into an amazing pit
of horror, and leaves us struggling with our distracted thoughts under the
terrors of the Law, of Death and of Desperation. Will you see then spiritual
Pride in its full shape and likeness? You must then conceive it blind, yet of
perfect sight; deaf, but of a quick ear, deceiving, and being deceived; happy,
and most miserable; quick to see the least appearance of goodness, but blind to
the horror of sin; a continual listening to the promises and prerogatives of the
Gospel, but deaf to the Thunder of the Law its own parasite, happy in conceit,
but indeed most miserable; entitling us to heaven, when it is but a wind, which
at once blows us up, and kindles the fire of Hell. Strange contradictions! but
such are we made up of when we do (...), think highly of our selves; when we
remember what we are, not what we may be; and not what we are in whole, but in
part; joining together Weakness and Stability, Sin and Security, Mutability and
Assurance, than which nothing is more contrary, more dissonant; as in a strange
dream, where however the parts of it are incohaerent and contrary one to the
other, yet the dreamer thinks that all cleaves well enough together.

And now having showed you the true cause of this disease of Haughtiness of
mind, we will in a word point out at one evil effect which naturally issues
from it, and but one, because the rest we must necessarily touch upon when we
prescribe the Remedy. This is most proper here, because our Apostle most
points at this; and we find it and tu excideris. This V. 22.
Haughtiness of mind does not only hinder the progress, but even the
continuance of Goodness: It does not only slug and retard us in our course of
piety, but it also criples us that we can walk no more: It does not only wither
the branch, but it also cuts it off. St. Paul speaks plainly, The Christian may
fall, as the Jew; and, if he continue not in Gods goodness, he also shall be
cut off. When we have gone but a sabbath days journey with the Jew in the ways
of holiness; when we have done but quod dictum est antiquis, what was said to
them of old; when we have absteined but from those sins which even a Jew would
hate, and performed those duties only which will keep us from the lash of the
Tongue, do we not begin to raise and canonize our selves? But if we forgive an
enemy; if we do good to an enemy; if we fast a day, and give our provision to
the poor; if we do any thing which Christ commanded with an Ego vero dico, then
straight, with Absalom, we raise up a pillar to ourselves, and we write upon
it, NUNQUAM MOVEBOR, We shall never be moved. A Cup of cold water shall answer
for our Oppression, an Alms at our door for the fraud in our shop, our
frequenting of Sermons for our neglect of Prayer, our Liberality to some
factious Teacher for our Sacriledg to the Church, an open Ear for a profane
Heart: And all is now quiet within us; we seem to walk on the pavement of
Heaven, (...), to fly in the air, and from thence to behold our brethren (who
have more piety with less noise) as grasshoppers, as worms, as wretches, as
nothing in respect of our selves. When our Hypocrisy has edg enough to cut us
from the Olive, our spiritual Pride keeps us in: When the least of our
numerous backslidings are a fearful presage of eternal perdition, upon one good
deed, upon one good intention, upon one good thought, nay upon a mere mistake
of all, we build the Assurance of our Salvation. I deny not but that a good
Christian may not only have confidence, but may attein to that perfection as to
assure himself that God will so guide and protect him that he shall never fall.
Yet this is very rare, and peculiar to those happy Souls who enjoy it. But to
make it a question, Whether every man ought to be assured of his Salvation, I
think it, at the best, most unnecessary. And this Nature, and common Experience
will teach us. Should I ask whether every man ought to grow, to be in health,
to digest, I cannot think but that you would judge it a ridiculous question,
seeing Nature it self has secretly taught us to eat and to drink with
temperance and sobriety, and then Growth and Health will naturally follow. You
cannot but apply it your selves. For Assurance of Salvation is no voluntary
thing, to be taken up at will, upon command, but the natural issue of something
else, of Faith and Obedience, of Holiness of life and conversation: Let us but
believe and keep an upright conscience, let us join together Piety toward God,
and Honesty toward men, (which can never be severed) and Assurance will as
certainly follow as Growth and Health upon Diet taken with Sobriety. Talk what
we please of Assurance, it is not duty, but the effect of all the performances
of life. We are no where commanded to be assured, but we have diverse precepts
and commands to make our election sure. Yet we see with what eagerness of
spirit this question has been kept afoot, and how ready those are to talk of
Assurance of whose Salvation, Statu quo sunt, Charity it self would make a
doubt. Tenemur esse certi; We are bound to be assured; that is the Doctrine.
And the Use is, Many men make it an Article of their Creed, to which they
subscribe with hands full of blood, oppression and fraud. And I am verily
persuaded that in those who most boast of it, it has no better ground than this
spiritual Pride and Highness of mind. For let them cry it up as long they will
for an article of their Creed, their own evil ways do make it heretical. And
one day they will find it true, that that Doubting out of Humility, which is
raised from a diffidence in our selves, may find heaven-geats wide open, when
bold Presumption shall be shut out of doors; that it will concern every
Christian not to be too bold and confident, but to search his own heart, and to
try and examine his way, to look narrowly into his life and conversation (...),
as Pelus. speaks, with ten thousand eyes, and (...), clear and free from all
perturbation; (...), thrice every day to take a survey of his words and
actions, as the Pythagoreans used; when he is in his best estate, compassed
about with the graces of God, in this his health and cheerfulness, to take
Saint Paul's prescript here, (...), TIMERE, to fear, nay, (...), SUPERTIMERE, so
Clemens renders it, in this depth and uncertainty of Gods judgments, to assume
and exact, absolute, perfect fear, a fear beyond all fear: Which is the Remedy
here prescribed, and comes next to be handled.

Now to make way to our ensuing discourse, we may guess what the nature of Fear
is by Hope. For Fear and Hope are hewed out of the same rock, the common matter
out of which they are framed being Expectation. For according as the thing is
which we expect, so are we said to hope or to fear; if good, we call it Hope;
if evil, we term it Fear. As Hope is nothing else, but an expectation of some
good to come: So Fear has its beginning from the apprehension of some
approaching evil. And as Heat and Cold, though contrary qualities, yet are
never solitary without admistion of either with the other; so is it with Hope
and Fear; they are both mixed and blended together in us. Seldom is any Hope so
strong as to be without some tincture of Fear: Seldom any fear so strong as to
admit of no mixture of Hope. For if they be alone and in excessu, they loose
their names. Hope without Fear is no more Fear, but Confidence; and Fear
without Hope is no more Fear, but Despair. All this we find in natural Fear.
But Divines have taught a fourfold Fear, a Civil fear, a Filial fear, a Servile
fear, and a fear of Cautelousness and Circumspection; all which have their
several use; but I take the two last to be most proper to my Text. For what
greater enemy to spiritual Pride than Wariness and Circumspection? And what can
make us more watchful to look about us than the Fear of some evil approaching;
which is a Servile fear? You see in this parable of the Natural and the Wild
Olive Tree St. Paul advising the new engrafted Gentile not to wax proud against
the Root, makes Fear a remedy; Be not high-minded, says he, but fear. And he
presently gives the reason; v. 21.
For if God spared not the natural branches, much less will he spare them. Fear
then of being cut off, which is a punishment no less than Damnation, if St.
Paul's reason be Good, is the best means to repress in us all proud conceit and
Highness of mind.

And first, in a matter of so great an alley as is our Union with Christ no
care and circumspection can be enough. Here qui cavet ne decipiatur, vix cavet
etiam cum cavet, our greatest diligence will fall short, and we are scarce then
weary when we are most circumspect. And the reasons are plain; and, if we will
but animos advertere, take the pains to observe it, we need not draw them from
any other common place than our selves. The first is an Overeasiness to
persuade our selves that we are in account and favor with God. For men, we
see, are generally more apt to presume then to despair. Every day yields us
examples of the one, few of the other: If Despair has killed her thousands,
Presumption, we may be sure, has killed her ten thousands. It is the
observation of Aristotle in his Rhetoriques, that old men commonly, in regard
of their long experience, are very jealous and wary, but young men (...), apt
to nourish and to entertain great hopes. And St. Basil, at large expressing the
humors of young men, tells us, when they get them alone by themselves, either
in the night, or in some solitary place, (...), they frame unto themselves
strange Chimaera's, vainly supposing themselves to live in some glorious
fashion, that they are Lords of countries, yea favorites to Kings, yea, that
they are possessed of Kingdoms; and which is more, they knew these to be but
Meteors and vain speculations, yet through extremity of folly they please
themselves as if they did really enjoy them. A dangerous humor where it has
footing and very expensive of time, being the issue of nothing but Melancholy
and Idleness. Just so it fares with us in our conceits of the things of God as
Aristotle says it does with young men in regard of things of this world; we
love our selves well, and therefore in regard of our little experience are very
apt to entertain such aerie and vain speculations. We are very willing to
conceive our selves to be highly beloved of God, to be possessed of the Kingdom
of Heaven. We hear not of a reward but its ours, no crown but we lay hold on
it. If St. Paul be in the third heaven, we are above. If Mary have an
exsultation, we have a Jubilee. And we are fully persuaded that it is so, as if
it were so indeed. With this conceit many run on, and think themselves well
when they are in the very mouth of dangers, as the Syrians, being blinded,
thought they went toward Dothan till they found themselves in the midst of
Samaria. 2 King. 16. 20.
This is the difference, says Theodoret, between the Sickness of the body and
the Diseases of the mind; In the one we are sensible of our grief, we cry out
and complain, Ocius Archigenes; and in all haste we send for the Physician; but
in the other we are stupid and senseless, we start back at the mention of a
Physician, (...), we are more afraid of Physic than of our disease. We admit
of miserable comforters, that will flatter us to Death; and rather than we will
want flatterers, we take the office on ourselves, nec magis aliena adulatione
perimus quam nostra; nor could we die so soon if we were not our own Physicians.
Thus having upon Presumption some especial favor with God securely run out the
course of our days, and misspent that time in vain imagination which might
profitably have been spent in the work of our Salvation, we draw near unto our
end; and before our breath departs, these thoughts perish, and instead
thereof we hear nothing but wailing and bitter lamentation.

A second reason to move us to this Fear of Jealousy and Circumspection, is the
Uncertain knowledge we have of the quality of our Works. For in our best
intentions there may be imperfections which we know not. We may take that to be
good which is evil, and mistake on both hands. I may come short or fail in the
matter, manner, or some circumstance. My Devotion may be irregular; my Patience
stupidity; my Zeal, rage. O quam honesta voluntate miseri sunt! says
Lactantius; With what good meaning do many poor souls do evil! When the Ark of
God was shaken, Uzzah laid his hand upon it to save it; and no doubt he thought
he did God good service in it: yet we see what reward his unseasonable
well-meaning brought him: He was smitten in the place that he died. Who can
tell how often he offends? says David, Who can tell how many of these sly
insinuating 2 Samuel 6. 7. Psalm. 19. 12.
Sins creep into his actions? The best plea we can make in defense of our
actions, if we err, is but this, That we have done it honesta voluntate, with a
very good meaning. And therefore the Church of Rome, though she stiffly
maintains that we are justified by works, yet notwithstanding propter
incertitudinem, for this uncertainty, confesses we can place no trust or
confidence in them. In this present world, though we have the day to walk in,
yet we meet with many mists and fogs, through which we cannot perfectly see the
danger we are in; and therefore, like men benighted, we must take the more care
to our steps. We must not think that all is safe and well with us, but work out
our salvation with fear and trembling.

To this we may add a third; and that is, The Over-ripe conceit and too speedy
apprehension of our sufficiency and growth in the duties of Christianity. We
are very apt to flatter our selves, and conceive that, when we are but newly
set forth, we are at our journeys end. All excellency and perfection in
Christianity we can put off to others that have more time to learn it, and
commorari in eo quod novimus quam discere quod nondum scimus melius putamus,
and we had rather dwell upon little than trouble our selves in the obtaining of
more. The Jew is content with his Ceremonies, and the Christian with his
outward Profession, but less significant than they. And all this proceeds
from a carelessness and indifferency in the ways of godliness. This is
certainly a great hindrance to our studies in Christianity. (...), Opinion is a
great retarder of proficiency. Many had won more ground, had they with Job
feared their own works, been jealous of their ways, and circumspect in their
walk, had they had that holy Jealousy and Mistrustfulness which is inseparably
joined to this Fear of Covetousness and Circumspection.

But indeed this Fear is most requisite in respect of those enemies of our
Souls which are ever in readiness to surprise us; which being more subtle than
strong, could never overcome us but by our own weapons. They are many indeed,
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, John. 2. 16.
every passion, every vain object: but these could never prevail against us, if
this Fear did keep us awake. For let us weigh it well, and we shall find that
it is not the strength of our adversaries, nor their multitude, nor yet our own
weakness, which strikes us to the ground, but want of that cautelousness and
circumspection which we should use: Dyed Abner as a Fool dies? says David
lamenting over Abner, thy hands were not bound, 1 Samuel 3. 33, 34.
nor thy feet put into fetters: but as a man falls before the wicked, so
fallest thou. This is the case of many Christians: Their hands are not bound,
nor their feet put into fetters: no outward violence, no strength of the enemy,
but only their own unwariness has overthrown them. I should be loath to make
the Devil less devil than he is; yet I may be bold to say that many men are cut
off by themselves and their own folly, when the Devil bears the blame. And
St. Chrysostom gives the reason for me: For if there were any enforcing
necessity in the Devils temptations, then in good reason all that are tempted
must necessarily yield and miscarry. And in one of his Epistles to Olimpias,
considering, how careless Adam was, and open to admit of counsel so weak and
forceless, he concludes, (...), that he would have fallen if the Devil had not
been. No marvail if he surprise us when he finds us asleep in our watch. He
does no more than Iphicrates did to his Sentinel whom he found fast asleep,
Tales relinquit, quales invenit. He strikes us through with his Spear, and
wounds us to death, and leaves us but as he found us in a dead sleep, to sleep
for ever. Satana nullae feriae: The Devil is ever in arms. But if we stood upon
our guard and were ready to resist, he could never hurt us. So necessary a
thing is this Fear of Cautelousness and Circumspection, that if we had no other
defense or buckler but this, yet we could never be overthrown. Matter timidi
raro flet, A wary and fearful child seldom brings sorrow to his mother; and a
careful and fearful Christian can never be cut off.

And therefore to keep this Jealousy awake in us, the Apostle awakes one Fear
with another, the Fear of Circumspection with the fear of Punishment: He sets
up a NE EXCID ARIS, a fear of being cut off, to bring on the other. For
naturally fear of evil works, a Fear of Jealousy and Circumspection: and this
fear of Cautelousness ushers-in that fear by which we may call Abba, Father.
For seeing evil before us ready to seize upon us, we begin to advise with our
selves how to avoid it. (...), says Aristotle; Fear brings us to Consultation.
Call the Steward Luke 16. 3.
to an account, and he is straight at his QUID FACIAM? What shall I do? When a
King goes to war, (and War is a bloody and fearful trade) Luke 14. 31. Luke 16.
4.
the Text tells us, (...), he first sits down, and takes council. Fear is the
mother of Advise: and Consultation dies with Fear. When we presume, Counsel is
needless; and when we despair, it is too late. Alexander was as bold a leader
as we read of in any history; yet the Historian observes, That upon some great
hazard his confidence was changed to pensiveness and solicitude: Ipsam fortunam
verebatur; He began to mistrust that fortune which had formerly crowned him
with so many conquests. It is even so with Christians: For the most part we
boldly venture on in the ways of dangers: but when the bitterness of Death
shows it self, or the fond face of a Ne excidaris is set before us, our courage
fayls, and we begin to mistrust that security which thrust us forward in the
ways of evil, and made us bold adventurers for Hell. There be three things,
faith St* Basil, which perfect and consummate every consultation (...), First
we consult, then we establish and settle our consultation, and last of all, we
gain a constancy and perseverance in those actions which our consultations have
engaged us in. And all these three we have from this servile Fear. Did we not
fear, we should not consult: Did not Fear urge and prick us forward, we should
not determine. And when this breath goes forth, our counsels fall, and all our
thoughts perish. The best preservative of a Branch now grafted is a Ne
excidaris, the sight and fear of that knife which may cut him off. For this
servile Fear, though it has got an ill name in the world, yet is of singular
use; and for want of it many branches have been cut off and cast away. How many
go to Hell in a pleasant dream! How many have been cut off because they never
feared it! How many has a feigned and momentany assurance destroyed for ever!
Cheerful they are, rejoice in the Lord always: no Law concerns them; no curse
can reach them; if it thunder, they melt not; and if the tempest rise, they are
asleep: as for Fear, it is not in all their ways: And this they make a mark
and infallible note of a Child of God. Timor Capitalis and Diabolicus; Fear is
deadly and diabolical. A pleasing error, this; but very dangerous. For, alas!
this Joy may be but an abortive, begot by the conquest of some few temptations;
this Cheerfulness may be an incantation; This Assurance, insensibility; and
this Security, stupefaction. For as the Historian observes of men in place and
authority, Cum se fortunae committunt, etiam naturam dediscunt; When they rely
only upon their greatness and authority, they loose their very nature, and turn
savage, and quite forget they are men; in like manner it befalls these
spiritualized men, who build up to themselves a pillar of Assurance, and lean
and rest themselves upon it. They loose their very nature and reason; they
forget to fear, and become like those whom the Philosopher calls (...), madmen,
because their boast was they did not fear a thunderbolt.

For conclusion then, Take comfort, thou disconsolate Soul, whosoever thou art
that art stricken down into the place of Dragons, and art in terror and anguish
of heart. For this Fear of thine is but a cloud, and it will distill and drop
down in blessings upon thy head. This Anxiety is a benediction, and will keep
thee from falling, when the Presumption of others shall lay them on the ground.
Thy cloud is more clear than their Sun, thy Fear better than their Confidence,
thy Doubting better security than their Assurance. Timor tuus, securitas tua.
Thy Fear of being cut off will keep thee in the olive green and flourishing;
thy Fear of being cut off will end in expectation of eternal life. Though thy
ship be rent, thy tackling cracked, and thy mast spent, yet thou shall at last
thrust into shore, when those proud sailors shall shipwreck in a calm. There
is no better symptom that thou shall never be cast away than this Fear that
thou must be cut off. For whatsoever the beginning be, this Fear does commonly
end in righteousness and peace and joy in the holy Ghost.

The Nineteenth SERMON.
ACTS XII. 5. Peter therefore was kept in prison; but prayer was made without
ceasing of the Church unto God for him.
WHEN the Devil draws his sword, he flings the scabbard into the fire; and
though he strike not, yet he has it always ready in his hand. It was already
dyed in the blood of James the brother of John, v. 2. and now he strives to
latch it in the sides of St. Peter also. We call this the Book of the Acts, or
Doings of the Apostles. But indeed it is a history of their Passions and
Sufferings, every page opening almost some new scene, and presenting some part
of their Tragedy. Chap. 2. 13. they are marked for Drunkards. Chap. 4. 3. Peter
and John are laid hold on and put into prison; they are threatened and silenced,
v. 18. Peter and the rest are beaten, Chap. 5. 40. Stephen is stoned, Chap. 7.
Persecution rages, Chap. 8. 1. Paul is laid wait for, Chap. 9. Then had the
Churches rest throughout all Judaea and Galile and Samaria; and were
multiplied, v. 31. For, as it is reported of the Island of Rhodes, that scarce
there is any day so cloudy but at some time or other the Sun shows it self, so
it fares with the Church of God. The blackness and darkness of persecution
never so obscureth her but at some time or other she shows her self: But it is
but as the Sun peeping out of a cloud, ready to be taken in and darkened with
another. Let Peter come up to Jerusalem, Chap. 11. and he is accused for being
at Caesaria, and they of the Circumcision contend with him for his Sermon to
the Gentiles, v. 2. But this was rather an offer then a blow: for all was laid
and ended in a Gloria Deo, v. 18. They held their peace, and glorified God. But
here in this Chapter he is stricken home by the hand of a Politician; of Herodes
Agrippa, who being now restored to his Kingdom by Claudius the Emperor, did
strive to establish it with blood. He vexed the Christians, to please the Jews:
and had they all had but one neck, he would have cut it off at one blow. James
already was sacrificed to their malice: Which bathing it self with pleasure in
his blood, bespake the Tyrant cruelly to offer more. He proceeded farther
therefore, and took Peter also, v. 3. But he sacrificed him not, because of the
feast: for then were the days of unleavened bread, says the Text. But to make
all sure, he puts him in prison; and to make the prison sure, he delivers him
to four quaternions of soldiers to keep him. Where he lies shackled with two
chains, quasi sepulcro inclusus, says Calvin, buried before he was slain.
Peter therefore was kept in prison, etc.

These words present unto us the true face of the Church militant; One member
suffering, and all the members suffering with it; St. Peter in chains, and the
Church on their knees; he ready to be bestowed for the Church, and the Church
emptying her bowels and compassion on him; St. Peter suffering, the Church
praying. Though they cannot help him, yet they will pray for him; and they will
pray for him, that they may help him. Though they cannot break the prison, they
will weary heaven, and pray (...), without ceasing. And this makes up a
glorious harmony, the groaning of a prisoner tempered with the prayers of the
Church. These ascending together, and coming up to heaven before God, commonly
bring down some Angel from thence.

Now these two, St. Peter and the Church, divide the Text into two parts, which
we call St. Peter's Passion, and the Churches Compassion. In the first we
consider Peter's Imprisonment, and the Causes of it, or the Motives which
induced Herod to shut him up. In the second the Churches Compassion. Observe
that it was not only in the inward man, true and hearty, but also expressed
outwardly, and made vocal in prayer, which was first public of the whole
Church; secondly; (...), earnest and importunate, and without ceasing. Peter
therefore was kept in prison, but prayer was made without ceasing of the Church
unto God for him. Of these in their order.

And a Prison one would think were not a fit place for St. Peter. We should
rather look to see him in his Chair. For he had the Keys committed to him, and
a Commission to feed Christ's sheep. Will God suffer this great Light to be
confined, and this Pillar to be shaken with the storms of persecution? Shall
he who was to teach and govern the Church now stand in need of the prayers of
the Church? Where is the providence of God? may some say. Why; certainly even
in this, that he many times suffers his best Saints and his selected servants
to be beat upon by the waves of affliction, and to feel the lash of
persecution. Ordinis haec res est in hac allegorica Aegypto, ut Pharaoh incedat
cum diademate, Israel cum cophino, says Sidonius; It is a common sight in this
Egypt of the world to see Pharaoh with his diadem, and Israel with a basket;
Herod on his throne, and St. Peter in prison. And all this is, says St. Basil,
(...), by Gods own ordering and dispensation. For what is a prison to St.
Peter, where he had not now been had not the Spirit entered with him? You will
say, says Tertullian, it is domus Diaboli, the Devils house, for Villains and
Ruffians. Conculcabit in domo sua; He shall trample him under his foot in his
own house. The Prison has darkness, but he is light: the Prison has chains,
but he is free in fetters. Nihil interest ubi sit in soeculo, qui extra
soeculum est: In this world it matters not where he is confined who is already
out of the world.

We commonly distinguish the ages of the Church into times of Persecution and
times of Peace: and indeed in respect of the visible state of the Church such
times there are: But the Saints of God, the Kingdom of Christ on earth, never
had peace, nor possibly can have. But by the wisdom of God it comes to pass
that that which we call Persecution is indeed the peace of the Church! Fire,
and Sword, and Imprisonment, these build up the Church of God. Perversitas,
quam putas, ratio est; quod saevitiam existimas, gratia est, says Tertullian;
That is good Order which we take to be Confusion; and that which we call
Persecution is Favor and Mercy. Cum Ecclesia in attonito est, Then the Church
enjoys her peace when she is astonished with terrors. We cannot think that St.
Peter lost his peace with his liberty, or that he was a Saint less glorious
because he was in prison. The Church of Rome has given us no less then fifteen
Notes of the true Church, and one we find to be temporal Felicity; but most of
them are but doctae ineptiae, laborious vanities and learned impertinencies.
Had she soberly consulted with this book of Acts, or but with this Text of
mine, she would not have found the least appearance of temporal happiness to
make up a Note with; unless we shall call it a temporal happiness to be beaten,
to be stoned, to be imprisoned. St. Peter here in prison would be a stronger
argument to beat down her State, then the Prayers of the Church to build up St.
Peter a regal Throne. Would ever any man once dream that my Text would yield
any materials for a chair of Supremacy for St. Peter and his Successor? but the
Jesuit by his cunning has framed one; and St. Peter must needs be settled in
it, because the Church here prays for St. Peter, and not for St. James. O
qualis artifex? What a skilful artificer has Ignatius Loyola begot, that would
persuade the world the Church prayed not for St. James, or that her prayers to
help St. Peter out of prison did lift him up into the Chair! But what rubbage
will not these men make use of, who lay hold on a monosyllable, on the little
particle ET, ET PETRUM, he took Peter also? That also has an Emphasis, and
makes Peter higher then the rest of the Apostles by the head and shoulders.
Nay, his very Shadow has some substance in it, and overshadows not only the
sick, but all the world. Thus when TU ES PETRUS will not serve, ET PETRUM is
brought in to help a particle, a shadow, nothing. And when they cannot hew him
a Chair out of the rock, they build one up of sand; where they find no Cedar,
they are content with straws. Indeed they are so busy in raising Peter to
height of State, that they quite forget that he was ever kept in prison, and
therefore they phansy to themselves such a flourishing state as may become a
universal Monarch, and receive him with both his Swords, of temporal, and
spiritual jurisdiction. And now we need not wonder that she brings forth the
Church of Christ like Agrippa and Bernice in the Acts, (...), with great pomp
and train, because we see she makes profession of Religion to gain the world.
Infelicity and Supremacy will not blend together; and therefore to hold up her
Supremacy, she maintains State: and wheresoever she finds the name of Peter,
she seeks a mystery; and if she cannot find one, she will make one. Thus is
Christianity constrained to lacquey it to the World, and become the means of
the greatest secular Pomp that the world has seen. St. Peter, as Erasmus tells
us, was lodged in the house of one Simon a Tanner; at nunc tria regum palatia
non sufficient, but now, says he, three Kings palaces are not able to
entertain the pomp and state of Peter's Successor. When the triple Crown is on
his head, what, think you, can he dream of else then outward pomp and temporal
felicity? Tully tells us of a Musician, that, being asked what the Soul was,
answered it was Harmony; Et i^ says he, difficulter a principiis artis suae
recessit, he knew not how to leave the principles of his own art. Plato's
Scholars had been altogether bred up in Arithmetic and the knowledge of
Numbers; whence deverting their studies to Natural and Moral Philosophy,
wheresoever they walked, they still phansied to themselves something like unto
Number. Just so it fares with these men, who fashioned out the Church by the
World; Difficulter a principiis artis suae recedunt; They cannot leave their
old principles. In the World they are bred, the World they study; and this
follows then in the pursuit of the knowledge of Christ and the Church. They
still fancy something like unto the World, Riches, and Honor, and a
universal Monarchy. What shall we now think of the Church butchered in Abel,
floating in the Ark, a pilgrim in the Patriarchs, captive in Egypt, hiding her
self in the time of idolatrous persecutors? after, of Christ vexed by the Jews,
persecuted by Heathen; and no less by those who professed themselves
Christians, by Arian and haeretical Emperors? What shall we think of St. Peter
in prison here? We shall not see this mark upon him no more then upon Abraham,
Moses, David, Hezekiah, and Josiah, whom notwithstanding the Cardinal brings in
to make temporal happiness a token and note of true professors: Abraham
afflicted with famine in Egypt. forced to forego his wife, and deny her; Moses
exposed by his parents, put in an ark of bull-rushes into the river, after many
difficulties when he came to the very borders of Canaan, forbid to enter in;
David begging his bread, and persecuted by his own son; Hezekiah mourning like
a Dove, and chattering like a Crane; Josiah slain at Megiddo; and St. Peter
fast in chains. This Note was not de fide then. No; it was de fide, and
seriptum est, it is written, and we must make it an article of our belief,
Blessed are you when men persecute you, and revile you. Poverty, and
Affliction, Matthew. 5. 11.
and Imprisonment, and Persecution, are not only bona, but beatitudines; not
only good, but Beatitudes and Blessings. Rubus ardens est sigura ecclesiae,
says St. Hierom; The Church is like the bush which was all on fire but
consumed not. To conclude, we may say of temporal Felicity in respect of the
Church as Tertullian speaks of the unveiling of Virgins in the Church, Id
negat quod ostendit, It denies the Church by showing it.

And thus much may be spoken by occasion of Peter's Imprisonment. In the next
place let us take notice of the Motives which induced Agrippa to keep him in
prison. You may perhaps imagine that Zeal for religion drew his sword, and
hatred of the Gospel. And indeed love of one religion naturally begets hatred
of another; and Love substitutes Hatred as her Captain or Proconsul, to bring
on her forces, and fight against every thing that looks a contrary way, and
opposes what we love. (...), says Nazianzene; It is as a Play or Comedy to a
Jew to see a Christians bloody Tragedy. The Philosopher will tell us that Anger
is always (...), in respect of particulars, but Hatred (...), bent against
some general thing. Evil men hate Philosophy because it speaks truth; but
they are angry with Socrates. The Jews were implacable haters of Christianity;
but their Anger stretches forth their hand against James and Peter. We read
indeed that this Herod Agrippa was Judaeorum studiosissimus, a great lover of
the Jews and of their religion; that he obtained of Caesar for them the freedom
of their religion; that he fenced Jerusalem with new walls higher and larger
then before; that he was very much offended with the Doritae because they had
set up Caesar's statue in the Synagogue. And we see here what reverence he bare
to their feast; seeing to show himself a Jew indeed, he would not till the
feast was past, shed the blood no not of a Christian. We cannot now but imagine
that it was pure Zeal that whet his sword; that he loved Moses better then
Christ; that he would not see the Law abrogated, the Ceremonies destroyed, the
ancient Religion go to the ground. But there was no such matter. For see the
holy Ghost has made a window in his breast, and tells us that all this was
done ut placeret Judaeis, that he might please the people. You would think the
Sword he fought with were of God; but indeed it was of Gideon, his alone. He
had been formerly removed out of his Kingdom, and but lately restored, as we
find by Josephus. and now finding the Jews a headstrong people, impatient of
the yoke, he strives to strengthen his Kingdom by the same art he gained it.
And as before he flattered the Emperor with a great feast of amity, so now he
pleases the people with a feast of blood. Religion may be the pretense, but
the Cause is his Crown and Kingdom. Thus he who is a slave to his Affections
is sold to all the world besides: a King becomes his Subjects parasite. And
when that Power and Wisdom leave him which should uphold his Kingdom, the
strongest pillar for him to lean on is this (...), flattery, (...). He must
flatter those who flatter him. Look now, and see John Baptists head in a
Platter, that they that sat at table might not be displeased. Pilate sends
Christ to Herod; Herod mocks him, and sends him back again: And the same
day Herod and Pilate are made friends together. Pilate proclaims Christ's
Luke 23. 12.
innocence; I have found, says he, no evil in him: But when he is told that he
is not Caesar's friend, at this thunder he is astonished, and gives sentence that
it should be as they required. Darius at the instance of his Nobles flings
Daniel into the lions den. Flaminius at his table beheads a man, to please his
whore, who had never seen that butchery before. Nay, the first sin that ever
was committed was from this source and fountain. So that Hierome states the
fault of Adam, That he ate the forbidden fruit ne contra staret delicias suas,
lest he should cast her whom he loved so much into an immoderate dejection. He
that strives to please another, has lost himself; he squares his actions by
his eye, not by the rule. Quis placere potest populo, cui placet virtus, says
Seneca: He that strives to please the people, is not well-pleased himself with
Virtue. For that art which gains the people, will make the like unto them. If
Herod will please the Jews, he must vex the Christians, and be as cruel as a
Jew. Non probabant nisi quem agnoverint, They approve none but whom they
acknowledge; nor can any please them who is not wholly theirs. When I see thee
famous in the peoples mouth, when the women and the children cry thee up, when
thou can not stir but applause does follow thee, when the people cry aloud,
The voice of a God, and not of a man, do thou think I count thee happy? No; I
pity thee, cum sciam quae via ad istum favorem ferat, because I know the way
that brings thee to the peoples favor is of their own chalking but. They
commend none but they make him their slave. If thou will purchase their breath,
thou must sell thy* honesty. If thou will please them, thou must be factious,
or commit a murder. If Herod will make the Jews his friends, he must be an
enemy to the Christians; The head of James must be stricken off, and Peter must
be kept in prison.

We have now done with St. Peter's part; and in the next place must take notice
of the behavior of the Christians. And you may know them to be Christians by
their devotion and compassion. (...). It is a Divine thing to be compassionate,
a true badge and mark of those who are commanded to be perfect, as their
heavenly Father is perfect. And therefore Tertullian tells us that even amongst
the heathen* Professors of Christianity were not called Christiani, but
Chrestiani, from a word signifying sweetness and benignity of disposition. Is
St. Peter in prison? they are not free. Is he in fetters? their Compassion
binds them in the same chains: And though he alone be apprehended, yet the
whole Church does suffer persecution. For it is in the Church as in Pythagoras
his family which he shaped and framed out unto his Lute: There is 1. (...), an
integrity of parts, as it were a set number of strings; 2. (...), an apt
composition and joining of them together. The parts are (...), coupled and knit
together by every joint, says the Apostle, even by the bond of Charity, which
is copulatrix virtus, as Prispes calls it, that virtue which couples all
together. And then 3. every string being touched in its right place and order
begets a harmony. This was the face of the primitive times, when the very name
of Christianity was accounted as a crime; when the Devil and Judaism and
Heathenism strove jointly to destroy the Gospel in the bud. When cruel Tyran's
spoke nothing but bonds and torments and imprisonment, then Charity broke out
in a pure flame, by which the afflicted receives warmth from each other.
Seldom but they found comfort as soon as imprisonment And if the Churches
keeper forbad a personal visitation, mittcbant libellos consolatorios, says
Rhenanus, upon Tertullian; their hearts were enflamed with compassion; and that
did soon dictate an epistle of comfort. That too much Chirity, as Eusebius
calls it, lib. 7. of the Christians in Alexandria, when the pestilence had
spread its contagion in that city, may in these times of ours, which has
fulfilled the Apostles prophecy, 2 Timothy 3. 1. move us to wonder, though not to
imitation. The Pagans, says he, forsook their friends, though of nearest
alliance, upon a fit of shivering, or a pale look; when the Christians did
diligently minister to their sick, though they ran into the mouth of danger;
and to save their friends lives endangered their own; yet they presumed their
compassion might style it Martyrdom. If we now cast a look upon these our
times, we shall scarce find a spark of that fire which enflamed their breasts,
scarce a degree of that heat of Charity. We have strangely degenerated from our
forefathers, and retained nothing of them but the name of Christians. We have
not compassion enough to follow St. Peter into prison.

But in the next place, to make one step further, Compassion, if it be right,
is not an idle but a serious thing, will not rest in the heart, but will
publish it self. If you see it not active in the hand, you shall hear it vocal
in the tongue. It will open the mouth, and pant, as David speaks, and pour
forth it self in prayer and supplications. My Text tells us that prayer was
made by the Church. And (...), says Epiphanius; The prayers of the Church are
the best weapons. The Superstition of the Heathens framed their Auguries, their
Expiations, their Sacrifices, their Oracles, their Omens, their Rings, their
Enchantments, their Supplications, their Triumphs, to keep off misery, to
procure happiness, to begin, to transact, to end public businesses: Christiani
unicum and simplex habent remedium; Christians have not so many remedies, but
one which is more sovereign and powerful then they all. They plied their
superstitions, as they did their Gods: We have but one God, and in all our
miseries but one refuge, our recourse by Prayer unto him.

I will not frame a panegyric on Prayer, but rather commend the Churches
prayer here: 1. Because it was of the whole Church, and most likely met
together in public, as many Interpreters collect. For though private prayer be
of singular use, yet it cannot be of that force which Prayer has when made in
public. St. Chrysostom is peremptory, Thou can not pray so well at home as
at Church: There thou findst many fires to kindle thy zeal, the Example of
others, the Reverence of ceremony, the presence of God, the Place it self.
Coimus quasi manu facta, says Tertullian; We meet together as an army, to
besiege, compass, and invade the Majesty of heaven. God requires not only
private devotion, that thou pray to him in thy closet, but he farther requires
that prayers be made in public by troops and assemblies of men. Such was the
force, says St. Chrysostom upon this place, of public prayer that it brought
down an Angel from heaven, broke St. Peter's chains, opened the prison doors and
the city gates, and led the Apostle to the very place where many were praying
for him.

That which in the second place commends their Prayer is, that it was (...),
instant and earnest. For fervent prayer prevails much, says St. James.
Otherwise, if it be faint and heartless, it is but breathed out into the air,
there to vanish; it is lost in the very making, and like a Glass in the very
blowing, falls to nothing, yea (which is worse) it is turned into sin. We may
think perhaps that it is a great boldness thus to urge the Majesty of heaven:
But we much mistake the God we pray to. He thirsts as it were, to be thirsted
after, says Nazianzene; he loves to be entreated; he commands us to be urgent:
and thus not to be bold, is to be too familiar with him. To think he will hear
us at the first, is to set up an Idol, a God of our own making. For what else
is Idolatry but a mistake of that God whom we choose to serve and worship? God
is a God of state and magnificence, qui solet difficilem habere januam, a God
whose gates will not open so soon as we suppose. We must knock, and knock
again. Though he hear not, we must call till he do hear; and though he open
not, we must knock till he do open. This is that welcome force by which the
kingdom of heaven is taken by violence. This is the way by which God
delights to be wooed and won, to be besieged and conquered* For this very end
does God delay, and does not presently send his Angel. Commendat dona, non
negat, says St. Augustine: His delay is not a denial, but a commendation of
his gift. Thy hunger will make thy meat the sweeter; and thy frequent prayer
will not only obtain, but enlarge thy soul, and make it more capable of that
good which thou do long for. Deus exercet desiderium, quo poscimus capere
quod praeparat dare; God exercises our desire, not to dead and destroy it, but,
as the air does fan a torch, to make it burn the brighter; so does he kindle
thy desire, not extinguish it; and so makes thee fit for that which he intends
to give. By this we learn more and more to stand in awe of his Majesty, to love
his goodness, and our Piety hereby increases, as Heat does by motion and
agitation. We learn to carry God about with us in every contemplation, in all
our thoughts; as he that looks upon the Sun with a steady eye, though he remove
his eye, yet has the image of the Sun presented in every object he beholds. I
might be infinite in this subject: but this one example of the Church is enough
to persuade you that God does not only require modestiam fidei, the modesty of
your faith and private devotion, but the urgency of your public piety, (...),
as St. Luke calls it, an holy impudence, and violent importunity of prayer;
which may look upon the very face of God, and stare upon him, which will take
no denial, but, as the Fathers express it by a strange kind of phrase, (...),
even make God ashamed, and so yield at last, and grant you your requests. When
St. Peter is in prison, when any affliction fetters our brother, we must then
pour forth our supplications, and call up all the forces of our souls, and pray
not coldly and faintly, as if we cared not whether we were heard or no, but
(...), earnestly and without ceasing, as if we would not be denied.

For conclusion then; St. Peter is still in prison. Many a Christian is in
misery and irons; many poor and naked and destitue, quibus causa paupertatis
probitas fuit; the only cause of whose poverty is integrity of life and
conversation; who might have been rich perhaps if they could have been
dishonest; of whom the world is not worthy. Nay, many a soul, and thy own soul
too, is shackled and manacled with many sins and perturbations of the mind,
wallowing in the filth and mire of lust: which is, not to be in prison only, or
to sleep between two soldiers, but in the Platonicks phrase, (...), to be
asleep in hell it self. Here, here is matter for thy Piety to work on; here
pour out thy bowels of compassion; here drop thy tears, the only aqua fortis to
eat these chains asunder: here spend thy devotion, thy intention, thy zeal,
that it may increase, like the Widows oil, in the pouring out, and cast such a
savor on thy actions, ut and opera and ipse somnus sit oration, that every work,
nay, thy very sleep, may be a kind of prayer. You have the example of the
Church here, and of the Church in following ages. (...), was in their (...),
and part of their Letany: They prayed for men diseased, for prisoners and
captives. And they prayed (...), with great earnestness and intention; with
their eyes lifted up, and their arms spread abroad, not only to express the
passion of our Savior, but to manifest also the heat of their devotion. You
have the same encouragement, the same God, much more attentive in hearing then
you are intent in praying; who will hear you when you call; who will hear you
before you call; and upon your earnest and continued prayers for any St. Peter,
for any sick afflicted Saint, for your own souls, will make some light of
comfort shine in the very prison; will call back his destroying Angel, and send
a messenger of comfort unto you, who will take thy soul out of prison, and
deliver it out of the hand, not of Herod, but of the Devil, and from all the
expectation of his evil Angels, and will set thy feet at liberty, to walk
before him in the land of the living.

The Twentieth SERMON.
Psalm. XXXVII. 11, 12. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be:
yea, thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be.

But the meek shall inherit the earth.


THese words, are like the Pillar of the cloud, a cloud Exodus 14. 19. 20.
and darkness to the Wicked, but giving light to the Meek in the night, in the
darkest night that Affliction can make. They are words of terror, and they are
words of comfort: of terror to the Wicked; Why boastest thou thy self in
mischief, thou mighty man? The goodness of God endures Continually. His eye
watches every thought and imagination; it follows thee in all thy ways: and
yet a little while, and his hand will tumble thee down into the pit which thou
have made. And they are words of comfort to the Meek, which now sigh and groan
and cry unto the Lord: as the Souls under the Altar. How long, Lord? how long
do thou not avenge our cause? Rev. 6. 9, 10,
how long shall the wicked triumph? Why, wait on the Lord: ADHUC PAULULUM, yet
a little while, and this night will pass, and the day will break, and you shall
see the Salvation of the Lord. Yet a little while, and the wicked, which
flourish like a green bay tree, shall wither and shrivel and be cut off: He
that thought he had built himself up an everlasting habitation, shall have no
being; and he that made the world his own, shall have no place. And yet a
little while, and the meek, who have not a foot of ground, shall inherit the
earth; and they whose Sorrows were multiplied every day, shall delight
themselves in the abundance of peace. And as these words bring comfort to the
one, and terror to the other, so they plead strongly for the Providence of God
against them both: Against the Wicked, who fight against Heaven it self, and
strive to put out the eye of Gods Providence, and are as bold and daring in
their proceedings, as if God had no eye: And against the Meek; who when God
does but touch them, as Job speaks, thinks he will destroy them; and when he
does but withdraw himself to call them after him, are too ready to forget that
even then his wing of protection is spread over them. For behold, the
providence of God is awake,, when they both sleep; is then working to the end,
when they see it not; is then preparing a sword to enter the bowels of the one,
and a shield to defend the other, when the one thinks he can never be moved,
and the other is in the dust. And though it move along in hidden and obscure
ways, that we can no more perceive it than the passage of a Ship in the Sea,
or of an arrow in the air, yet it always comes home to the mark, and is most
evident in the destruction of the one, and the Salvation of the other. For yet
a little while, and the wicked shall not be, etc.

We shall not need to stand any longer upon descant, or to use any curiosity in
the division of the Text: Which many times is but like the long tuning of an
instrument, which diferreth the Music, and makes it shorter: or as Music, it
is heard, and perhaps delights, and that is all. I never yet loved to put a
tune to Divinity. The Notes which my Text does naturally yield are these three:
First, we may observe Gods Patience and Delay both toward the Wicked, and
toward the Meek; ADHUC PAULULUM, yet a little while, he bears with the one,
and helps not the other: Secondly, his justice on the Wicked, which strikes at
last, though it strike not so soon: For the Wicked himself, NON ERIT, he shall
not be; and for his Place, NON EXSTABIT, it shall not be found. 4. Lastly his
Goodness and Mercy to the Meek: Though they be driven from place to place,
though they have no place, yet HAEREDITABUNT TERRAM, they shall inherit the
Earth. And with these we shall exercise your Christian Patience and Devotion at
this time. And first of the first.

ADHUC PAULULUM, Yet a little while. And a little while is too long to men in
misery. For who would stay so long as to salute Affliction in the way? Who can
think of it, and not be afflicted with the very thought? And yet a little while
is too long to men who make their Strength the Law of unrighteousness. Their
reign is too long, though it be but an hour. But God is not slack concerning
his coming, as some count slackness. Not 2 Pet. 3.
slack to the Wicked: for vengeance hovers over his head: Not slack to the
Meek,: for his Salvation is nearer than he can believe. In this little while
coals of fire are kindling, which must fall upon the head of the Wicked, and
leave him without excuse; and in this little while God is harkening to the
cries and groans of his Meek ones, and even in this stay does make haste to
help them. Upon this little while depends eternity of punishment to the one,
and eternity of peace to the other. Nor can we complain of the delay of that
which will surely come to pass. Beloved, God has these pauses and intervals
and halts in all his proceedings; in his punishments, and in his deliverances.
He seems to study and meditate and use a kind of deliberation. He works as it
were by rule and line. When God would build up Jerusalem, he promises that a
line should be stretched out upon her. And when he would destroy Zech. 1. 16.
the Idumaeans, he threatens, that he would stretch out upon them the line of
Esa. 34. 11.
confusion. So that when he will destroy, and when he will build; he stretches
forth a line. It is a Metaphor taken from Building, which is a work of time and
deliberation. God is not sudden to lift up his hand to strike, nor is he sudden
to stretch forth his hand to help; but, as Builders do, he first fits down, and
thinks, he takes time as it were, he fits and prepares his instruments, he sets
every thing in order, and, as wise artificers do, he works by line and measure;
that he may make good his justice on the Wicked, and magnify his mercy on the
Meek. How long did the Lord endure the old world? even a hundred and twenty
years, while the Ark was a preparing: And then there was a new Era; the Deluge
brake in. How long did he bear with the Amorites? Even till their Wickedness
was full, and ripe for judgment, as corn in harvest is for the sickle? How long
did he forbear his own people, first the ten Tribes, and then the other two?
Even till there was no remedy, no hope of amendment; till the Prophets cried
out HOASH, It is desperate; There is no hope; All is lost. Nor need we wonder
at this his delay, since the reason of it is plain and evident. For God to
manifest to the world, that this ways are not as our ways, but that he walks
in a higher sphere, beyond the reach of a carnal eye, presents himself
sometimes in a shape contrary to our expectation; nay more, does those things
which bear a resemblance of some opposition and repugnancy to his known and
declared will. And this he does as it were on purpose to put our Faith and
Constancy to a trial; to ask us the question, (and his afflictions are but
questions) Whether we will take him to be our God though he change his shape,
and worship him as well in his thunder as in his still voice, and call him
Father in as loud an accent when he strikes us as we do when he favors us. Or
else, on the other side, he does it to besiege and compass in obstinate
offenders, to shut the wicked up in their own net, to bury them in their own
pit, and to strike them thorough with their own sword; and, as they have
sported and trifled with his judgments, so to mock and delude them, that they
shall not easily know when or how they are led to destruction, or not know it
till it be too late, but run on in a merry dance to their ruin and into Hell
at once. God promises to love his Meek ones, and to defend them as with a
shield; yet sometimes he so handles them as if he loved them not, or had left
off to love them, or would not hear and help them; stands as it were at a
distance from them; but even at this distance he is nigh to them that fear him.
Again, though he have threatened to rain fire and brimstone upon the wicked, yet
many times he stays his Pasal 11. 6.
hand, and does not strike; he makes as if he would not punish them, so that
they walk delicately, like Agag, and say, Surely the bitterness of 1 Samuel 15.
32.
Death is past. Nay, often seems to cast an eye of favor upon them, not to
delay the blow, it may fall yet heavier, but (which flesh and blood too often
kindles at, and frets it self) to give them those rewards which are promised to
Godliness. He fills their Granaries; he makes them mighty in power, and to
reign as Kings (and would to God they did reign as Kings, and not as Tyrants)
he crowns them with happiness; he seems to plead their cause as if it were
just, even against his own cause; he makes them stronger than those whom he
commands to oppose them, and as bold and familiar with him as if they had him
in a string. But in this pleasant dream, in this great security, upon the
sudden, when their prosperity has befooled them, when they are ready to
conclude they are good because they are temporally happy, and that they have as
good a title to Heaven as they have to the Earth, (and I fear indeed they have
but as good a claim to the one as they have to the other) in the midst of these
big and triumphant thoughts God falls upon them, and makes that which was their
triumph their ruin. He striks them at once for all; he strikes the timbrel out
of their hands, and in the place thereof he leaves the cup of trembling. He
makes them see that they were the poorer for their riches, the baser for their
honor, the weaker for their power, and most wretched for their happiness; that
their successful proceedings, which they boasted of, were but as a beam darted
from the Sun before a Tempest. And now how fearfully and horribly are they
consumed, and brought to utter desolation. Nor is this unjust with God: For he
comes not in this tempest till their obstinate impiety force him out of the
cloud, where he lay as hidden. He does not tell the Wicked that this PAULULUM,
this little while is theirs, and that they may do what they will in it, even
beat their fellow servants without fear of punishment; that, like Behemoth in
the book of Job, they may drink up a river, and make it their sport to draw up
Jordan, even a whole Kingdom, into their mouth. I dare say there was never any
PAULULUM, never any so little little while, in which God granted such a
Commission. But the Wicked abuse his long suffering and Divine indulgence. They
sport in this little while, they send forth their edicts and make Orders
against Law, and Declarations against the Truth; they teach God himself how to
speak in Scripture, and account that as an applause of their designs which was
but an invitation to repentance. And this is a bold Remonstrance against the
King of Heaven himself.

And therefore this yet a little while, this Divine Patience, has an effect
answerable to the disposition and temper of those on whom it is showed. To them
that make this PAULULUM God's PAULULUM, that make use of this little while as
of a little while, and therefore make haste to be reconciled, it is redemption
and deliverance. But to those who will be Domini rerum and temporum will be
Lords and commanders of this little while, and so let it out to their own Lusts
and ungrounded imaginations, it is but a little while, and soon ends in eternal
destruction. God has them in a chain, and when they have run out their length,
he gives them a check, and pulls them on their back.

The long suffering of God is Salvation. But when men value it not at its ^
Pet. 3. 15.
true rate, nor account it what it is, but make that which is Salvation
something else, even turn it into an Apology for sin, count it an applause from
God himself, and make it a confirmation of their designs, how illegal and
unwarrantable soever; then it is justice with God to kill up in such men all
seeds of Grace, to strike them with the spirit of error and madness, to
withhold his Thunder, and in a manner to dissemble with them, and deceive them;
non dignari irasci, not to favor them so much as to be angry with them; to
take off his jealousy from them, as the Prophet says; that they shall have
eyes, and see not; ears, and hear not; that they shall have (...), as the
Apostle speak, a reprobate mind, and (...), as Theodoret renders it, a
reverberating mind, a heart of marble, to beat back all the words of the wise,
and the word of God it self; to open their ears to one fool, who shall persuade
them to kick against the pricks, and to stop their ears to seven wise men that
can render a reason; to rejoice in the error of their ways; to think to build
up Religion upon the ruins of Christianity, and to purge the Church with
blood; to count it a savory language and the holy tongue to revile their
Prince; to call Discharging of great Ordinance at him fighting for him, and
Murdering of Charles preserving of the King alive; to call them the only Seers
who are blind, and those the truest Prophets, who, like Balaam, will rise up
early in the morning to curse Israel for reward or rather such who are more
like the Ass than that Prophet, who uttered words indeed, but understood not
what she said; or rather indeed not so wise as that beast: for what she spoke
was sense, and full of reason; a language which those of them which I have
heard speak (and those were not a few) I am sure have little skill in; to think
this, and speak this, and do this, and call it the Defense of the Protestant
Religion, as if the Papist were to be carried out upon the Atheists Shoulders;
to do this, and more than I could believe from any witness but my Eye: I say,
It is justice in God to suffer such Giantlike Sinners to do this, and that for
a little while; and in this little while (which was time enough for avoiding
the blow) to whet and furbish his sword, and then to make it drunk in the blood
of these his enemies. It is the Nature of Delay in other things to hold back
and hinder our proceedings. For not to do a thing betimes and in its proper
season is to rob our selves of the faculty of doing it at all. But it holds not
true in Gods Punishing of the Wicked. For gravitate supplicii moram pensat, He
supplies and makes up the delay in punishing with the smart of the blow when he
lights. His wrath, like wind shut up long in the Caverns of the earth, at last
breaks forth in a Tempest. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be;
thou shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be, etc. And so we
pass from the Delay to the Certainty of Gods Justice on the Wicked and of his
delivery of the Meek: My second Observation.

Let all the earth rejoice before the Lord: for he comes, for he comes to
Psalm. 96. 13.
judge the earth, says the Prophet David. Flatter not thy self then that he
defers his coming. For he comes, he comes. He is set out already, and well on
in his journey. When this little while is past, at the appointed time you shall
see him with his sword and his quiver. Plures idcirco Domino non credunt, quia
seculo iratum tamdiu nesciunt; Many men think that God is like unto themselves,
observing their actions no more then they do his commands, because he thunders
not from heaven, nor sends into the world what that Tyrant wished for in his
days, some strange, unheard of calamity. Many run away with the burden of
their sins, and feel it not, because God sends not a fire into their bones. But
the Father will tell us, Malus interpres Divinae providentiae, humana
infirmitas: The weak eye of man may read many lines through which the
Providence of God does run: but we commonly do err in our interpretations:
That gloss must needs be accursed which Flesh and Blood, which our sensual
lusts and affections do bring. Divine Providence is most methodical in those
actions which perhaps to us appear under no other shape but of confusion and
disorder. It consists in the ordering and bringing things to the right end: And
be the way what it will, God leads and drives every thing to that end which his
Wisdom has fitted to it. The meek he leads to bliss; but through many
afflictions; which may form a crooked and uneven, but is the nearest way. The
Wicked tend to destruction, as naturally as a Stone does to the center. Whether
the sky be fair or cloudy, be the passage what it will, yet the Wicked in his
highest pitch thither falls at last. Sometimes Providence displayes it self
openly before the Sun and the people, in the destructions of the wicked;
sometimes it works more invisibly: but whether secretly or openly, day unto day
teaches knowledge, and in the end of their days God will write this truth
with their blood. Though they work never so privily, as it were in a vault;
though they make Religion it self a vault to hide their designs in, yet their
damnation sleeps not; but God at last will find them out, and strike them to
the ground, even in those Meanders and Labyrinths which they made to hide
themselves in. The Philosopher tells us the greatest tempests are not of long
continuance. No whirlwind lasts a day, no not an hour. And as a whirlwind
passes, so is the wicked no more. Prove. 10. 25.
Suppose he here rage, and with his breath kindle those coals which consume a
kingdom; Suppose he dispose of men's goods and lives at pleasure; yet he
passes away as a whirlwind; he drives down all before him, and makes a huge
noise, and presently is not. Suppose he fill up a page in Chronicle; yet what
was before in action, is but now in story. All we can say is, that he was; At
such a time there was a subtle Traitor, a politic Devil. And we may both write
and say it, At such a time there was a whirlwind. What did Sennacherib get by
advancing his banner against the City of God? Even this, To preach by his
statue, Let him that looks on me learn to fear God. What did Herod get by
casting of Peter into prison? He was smitten by an Angel, and eaten up of
worms. What did Pharaoh get by flinging the children of the Hebrews into the
river? He brought him into his Courts who deprived him of his Crown and life.
The wicked is snared in the work Psalm. 9. 16.
of his own hands. This, says St. Basil, is not added as a punishment only;
but it is the very nature of Sin to make a nett and to digg a pit for it self.
The cruel man is his own just executioner; nor is he taken so much in the hands
of God as in his own. What did ever any seditious and turbulent spirits gain in
the work which should be as Hell it self? There is nothing to affright, no
grudging of conscience, no fear, no soruple, no sad reluctance or dejection of
spirit; and this for a little while: But look up anon, and you shall see them
lifted up indeed; their heads lifted up on high, so high, that the ravens of
the valley may pluck out their eyes: A woeful indeed, but a useful spectacle. It
thus bespeaks every passer-by, My son, fear thou God, and the King, and meddle
not with those who are given to change. Prove. 24. 21, 22.
For their calamity shall rise suddenly; and who knows the ruin of them both?
Look upon those sons of Belial who are given to change, who, like Cleon in
Athens, wish for wars and civil tumults, thereby to advantage themselves, and
to sodder up their estates broken by intemperance and prodigious lust; who are
never warm, but when a Kingdom is in combustion. Look upon them, and mark them,
how horribly they are consumed and brought to desolation before the Sun and the
people. Behold Corah and his mutinous conspirators swallowed up alive of the
earth, and going down quick into Hell. Behold Bigthan and Theresh hanging at
the Court-gate. Behold Absalom Numb. 16. Est. 2. Sam. 18.
hanging on a tree with three darts through him. Behold one in a moment, and in
the twinkling of an eye falling down with a shot from a Church, who had
devoured all the Churches in the land, in his thoughts: And in that less then a
moment he and all his thoughts perished. Behold another Sheba receiving his
death-swound in that very field, where he first blew the trumpet. A Northern
army may break in upon the children of Israel; but God tells them that he will
remove this Northern army far off, and drive them into a land barren and
desolate. Nay, but if Religion must whet their sword Joel. 2. 20.
(for how little of the thing it self they have is but too manifest) if they
will by violence enter into a land which is none of theirs, some of them shall
possess it indeed, yet but so much of it as shall make them a grave: Others
shall be captives in it to those whom they threatened to bring into captivity:
And for the rest, no land can be too barren or dissolate for them. I confess it
is not safe to make too bold a descant upon those calamities which
indifferently befall both good and bad; but when they are so remarkable and so
signal, it is not good to neglect them. This I dare commend unto you. In whose
hands soever you see the instruments of injustice and cruelty, think you see
that man digging a pit for himself. When his anger is highest, when the tempest
is loudest, his PAULULUM, his little while, is drawing to an end: and be sure
of it; it will breath it self out whilst it seeks to destroy. Why art thou then
cast down, O my soul? why art thou so disquieted within me? Disquieted, to see
wicked men in arms? which being interpreted, is to hasten to their destruction.
It is not their power, but our ignorance of Gods ways, which casts us down,
and thus disquieteth us: Nihil imperitia impatientius, Nothing is more
impatient then Ignorance: To it every breath is a tempest, every cloud an
inundation, every frown a desention; ADHUC PAULULUM, yet a little while, a span
of time, is a kind of eternity. Why, hope in God, wait on the Lord, yet a
little while, who waits upon thee from thy mothers womb to thy gray hairs:
Possess thy soul with patience under that hand which in this little while is
working thy Salvation. For yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be. It
is a sad theme we are fallen upon, the Downfall of the wicked. We will therefore
withdraw your eyes from Gods Sword to his Mercy-seat, and lead you from the
power of his Wrath under the wing of his Protection, while we consider and
examine the Privilege of the Meek; The wicked shall not be: but they meek
shall inherit the Earth. My last is Servation.

And when all is done, when we have wearied our selves and our imaginations in
ploting for wealth and honor, we shall find that we are as far to seek as when
we first set out; that we have labored for the wind, for that which is not
bread; like those Spirits in Minerals which Cornelius Agrippa speaks of, which
dig, and cleanse, and sever metals, but when men come, they find nothing is
done. Let us therefore learn to seek the price of the world in our own breasts.
And when Policy and Power and all our busy endeavors fail, our very silence
and our Meekness shall purchase for us the inheritance of the earth. Nor need
we take this earth for that new earth discovered by St. Peter, or with others,
for the land of 1 Cor. 4. 3.
Caanan, into which the meekest man on the earth was not suffered to enter. But
we may take it, for ought I see, (and I have St. Augustine and St. Chrysostom
on my side) for this habitable earth, which is divided amongst so many nations
by the sword and violence. And lend but your Patience, and we shall take some
pains to make it good in the very letter.

What is thy Beloved more than other Beloveds? It is spoken to the Cant. 5. 9^*
Spouse. So, what is Meekness more than other virtues? We may say, Here is
Synecdoche speciei; one particular taken for the General, one Virtue for all
the rest. Or the Effect is put for the Cause; because Meekness is one of the
principal and chiefest parts of holiness. But if you will give me leave to
conjecture, the holy Ghost may seem in this Promise at once to show the
condition of the Church, and to comfort her; and because, being laid hard at on
every side, she stands in need of this virtue more than any other, to fit and
fashion the reward to the virtue, to cherish and exalt it in us with the
promise of something beyond our expectation, even the inheritance of the earth.
And indeed what fitter reward can there be of Meekness? What more fit and just,
than that they who have been made the anvil for injuries to beat on, who have
been viri perpessitii, as Seneca speaks of Socrates, men of great sufferance,
who have suffered not only their goods to be torn from them by oppression and
wrong, but their reputations to be wounded with the sharp rasor of detraction,
and have withstood the shock of all, spectantibus similes, with the patience of
a looker on, should be raised and comforted with a promise of that which their
Meekness gave up to the spoil; and that by the providence of God, which loves
to thwart the practice of the world, they should be made heirs even of those
possessions which the hand of Violence has snatched from them; It is a common
proverb in the world, Cum lupis ululandum, That amongst a company of Wolves we
must howl as loud as they; for he that amongst Wolves will make himself a Sheep
shall be sure to be eaten. Vim vi repellere, To arm our selves with force
against violence, and with Circumspection against deceit, To be ready to strike
with one hand whilst we defend ourselves with the other, are lessons written
upon every post, the neglect of which will entitle us to Folly, though in other
things we be as wise as Solomon. What though we speak with the tongues of men
and angels? What though we understand all mysteries and all knowledge; What
though we have all faith, even to remove mountains? yet if we want this (...),
this quickness and dexterity of wit, in removing those obstacles and
retardances which are laid in our way to honor and wealth, we are but as
sounding brass or tinckling Cymbals, not to fright our enemies, but to make
them sport and melody. But St. Hierome will tell us. Aliud est judicium
tribunalis Christi, aliud anguli susurrorum, that there is great difference
between the Judgment of the world and the Tribunal-seat of Christ. What a vain
fellow was David to day? says Mich. when he danced before the Ark. He did it
as a man after my own 2 Samuel 6. 20.
heart, says God. He is a weak man, says the world, and knows not to tread
those paths which lead to honor and preferment; but, He is my Soldier, says
Christ, and will take the kingdom of heaven by force. It is a very small thing
to be judged of the world, or of man's judgment. O let 1 Cor. 4. 3.
me even wear that fools coat which shall be changed for a robe of glory! The
language of the world is, (...). He that will be rich, must ask council of his
wits, must betake himself to violence, must sometimes lurk like a serpent, and
at other times roar like a lion. For this sheepish virtue of Meekness is like
the equus Sejanus, a certain horse which none could ever thrive that kept him.
This Divinity goes for Orthodox in the world. But David, a man of war, of whom
it was sung that he killed his ten thousands, tenders us a doctrine of another
strain, shows yet a more excellent way, by so ridiculous and contemptible a
virtue as Meekness to purchase the inheritance of the Earth.

And indeed if we look nearer upon Meekness, and behold the beauty of her
countenance, we shall even fall in love with her, as with the most thriving
virtue, as with a virtue which will place us in a more firm and settled
possession of that which is ours, then all the Engines of deceit, then all the
weapons of the mighty. But because most men are hard of belief when they are
told that Godliness is great gain, and that we may increase our stock by
loosing it with Patience, and rely on their own brain and reach, as a surer
staff to walk with then the Providence of God, I will make this yet plainer by
reason, and lay it open and naked to the very eye.

To this end we may observe two diverse and contrary dispositions in the nature
of Man, by which we may divide and distinguish almost all the world: The one
rough and stern and contentious; which is most remarkable in evil men. (...),
says Demosthenes; For wickedness is commonly bold and daring and contentious.
I never yet saw the Face of brass; but the Heart was adamant. Take it in St.
James expression, The wisdom which descends not from above is earthly,
sensual, and divilish, full of tumult and confusion. The other, that which the
Philosopher calls ^^m. 3. 15.
(...), a soft and sweet and flexible disposition, which is the common
character of a good man. (...), says the same Orator; For Goodness is
peaceable and gentle, easy to be entreated, ready to be diminished and brought
low by oppression, evil and sorrow. Now take a survey of them both. The first
naturally produces Fear; Fear as naturally begets Hatred; which is
longer-lived than Fear. Hatred raises up Contention, says Solomon; which
seldom ends but in the destruction of those we hate; whom we cease not to
hate till they cease to be; But Meekness is her own safeguard and castle of
defense, -- Rerum tutela suarum
Certa magis,
and keeps us in quieter possession of that which is ours then the Law can do.
Whoever yet took up arms against the Meek? Who will pursue a fly, or a dead
dog? Who will strive with him, that will not fight? I confess, we have of late
seen a generation (I cannot say, of Christians; I cannot say, of Men; I know
not what to call them) whose word is, Kill and Slay, not only those who are in
arms against us, but those damned Neutrals: (For so they call them who will not
help them kill and slay.) But this is not natural and common, but monstrous and
unusual. All that Meekness probably can expose us to is contempt: Et quot
contemptu tuti? How many have made themselves contemptible to keep themselves
safe? Sure I am, Brutus was never wiser then when he put on the person of a
fool. I know it is a very hard matter to persuade the world of the truth of
this which I have taught. For as St. Peter tells us, there shall come mockers,
who will say, Where are the promises of his coming? and do not all things
continue alike since the creation? So there may be who will ask, Where is the
promise of the possession of the earth made good unto the Meek? Is it not with
them as it is with other men? Nay, is it not worse with them than with any men?
Is any man poor, and they are not poor? Is any man weak, and they are not weak?
Is any man persecuted, and they are not persecuted? Are not the Meek every day
driven out of their possessions? And are they not driven out because they are
Meek? He that shall look into the state and condition of Meek men, will
peradventure be fully persuaded there is just cause of these complaints: And
therefore to drown and silence them, we must remove some errors which are cast
as a cloud before our eyes that we cannot see the truth of this promise, the
meek shall inherit the earth.

And first, we must not look for certainty in moralibus, in matters of this
nature, as we do in natural Philosophy, and in the Mathematics. This and the
like propositions may be true, although that which they affirm fall not out
(...), at all times and in every place. It is a Topic proposition, and shows
what (if we consider the nature of the terms and of the things themselves,) is
likely to be, we have the very same almost, Prove. 2. 21. The just shall live in
the land, and the righteous shall remain in it. And yet no doubt there have
been just men, who have been driven up and down in the world and not had a hole
to hide their heads in. And again, Mercy does establish the Throne: And yet we
have read of Kings who have lost their crowns, and that by being too merciful.
And in another place, He that is diligent in his ways shall stand before
Kings: Yet we cannot think but that there have been many industrious men who
never saw the inside of a Court. There is a fair applicability and
correspondency between these, Mercy in a King, and a long Reign; Industry, and
Honor; Meekness and the quiet possession of the earth; but there is not so
necessary a connection as there is between these, a Man, and a living Creature.
If the world were dissolved, yet this proposition is everlastingly true, Man is
a living Creature. But many cross accidents may intervene to make Mercy
malevolent, which of its own nature is a preservative; to keep industry in a
corner, which of it self does raise the dilligent out of the dust; and to drive
the Meek out of possession, who carry about with them the strongest title to an
Inheritance.

A second error there is, and it is this; We are too prone to mistake the
nature and quality of God's Promises; and when we read that God will preserve
and continue the Meek in their estates, we presently conceive that God is
obliged by this promise to exempt us from common casualties, and to alter the
course of things for our sakes. When common calamities like an inundation break
in and overflow the world, we expect that God, who fits in Heaven, and looks
upon the children of men, should bow the Heavens and come down, and work a
miracle for us, even do by us as he did by Noah at the Flood, build us an Ark
to float in till the waters abate. Which is no less then to dictate to the
Wisdom of God, and to teach him who made the world how to govern it. Beloved,
God never promised to exempt the Meek from the common casualties of the world:
but he has promised to uphold them in all, and to take care for them in such a
sort as the world never uses to do. Will you take a line and measure out the
circuit of the promise and St. Hierome is ashamed to do it, in his Epistle to
Dardanus; Pudet dicere latitudinem terrae promissionis: He was ashamed to draw
the map, lest he should give occasion to the Heathen to blaspheme. For from
joppa to Bethlehem are but six and forty miles: and yet God made his people
there a mighty nation, multiplied them as the stars of Heaven, and made them a
fear and terror to the nations round about them. Follow them into captivity and
the Psalmist tells us, that he gave them favor in the eyes of their enemies,
and made all those who led them away captive to pity them. And Psalm. 1^6. 46.
it is more to find favor from an enemy, than to have no enemy at all; more to
be pitied of our enemies, than to tread them under our feet: for this is to
gain a conquest even in our chains. Whether in captivity or liberty, whether in
riches or poverty, the Meek person is still in manutenentia Divina, in the
hands of a powerful God, who makes good his promise even then when it seems to
be broken.

For, in the third place, many times God's promise is made good unto us when we
believe it not; for as the Jews would not receive Christ himself because he
came not in that pomp and state in which they looked for their Messiah; So if
God come short of our desires, we are ready to except against and question the
truth of his promises. We are at a stand, and begin to think that Meekness is
not so thriving a virtue as the Scripture has made it. Whereas we rather ought
to consider that, be it much or little that falls unto us, it is sufficient to
make good Gods promises. For that a Meek man thrives at all, is merely from
God; For consider the malice and craft of the Wicked, how his eyes are privily
against the Meek, with what humility and crouching he waits for the prey, and
what a Lion he is when he has caught it; how he pretends that God himself is
his Second and a-better, and though the Devil be his leader, yet he falls on in
the name of the Lord of Hosts; consider this, and you cannot but cry out,
Digitus Dei est hic; That what part soever the Meek man has in the earth, it
is measured to him by the finger of God himself, who is miraculous in his
preservation.

Again, in the last place, this promise is cum condition, not absolute, but
made over to us upon condition. The Inheritance of the earth is given to us as
an handmaid to wait on us to a better Inheritance, even to an abiding city,
whose builder and maker is God. This is the full extent of the promise. And
therefore if God see that earthly possessions will be as mountains in our way
to the heavenly Jerusalem, we have no reason to complain if he romove them. His
mercies are renewed every morning, and he remembers us in our low estate,
because his mercy endures for ever. But if the case so stand, that my portion
shall be in this life only, then, Nolo, Domine, hanc miserecordiam, says St.
Bernard, Lord, I will have none of this kind of mercy. If this be the case, I
had rather God should frown than smile on me, I had rather he should wound than
kiss me, and break me on a wheel than lay me in a bed of roses; I had rather
have no place on earth than loose my mansion in Heaven. If we ask God bread,
should he give us a stone? if we ask him fish, should he give us a Serpent?
This bread we ask may be a stone, this Fish a Serpent, and liberalis est Deus
dum negat; God is very liberal if he deny us what we expect as a promise: for
the promise is fulfilled though he deny us; Still it is true, The meek shall
inherit the earth.

To look back, and sum up all, and so conclude. We have first seen the Wicked
in his rise, followed him with our eye to his very Zenith, where like a Comet
we saw him blaze a little while and after fall. We have taken the extent of the
promise made to the Meek, and the full compass of his inheritance. And we may
now walk about, and tell the towers, and every part of it; That commonly he is
full; that God is his supply when he is empty; that he supplies him by miracle;
that if he do not supply him, it is for his greater gain; that God is to him
both in poverty and riches, both in life and death, advantage. And all this God
does in a very little while, both pull down the mighty from their seat, and
exalt the humble and meek. But what shall God, who is the Ancient of days,
only move in this little while? and shall we whose breath is in our nostrils,
sit down and sleep, and hope to purchase this inheritance, in a dream? to think
thus of God, is to loose both the while and the inheritance. For God does not
sow Wheat as the Devil does Tares, dormientibus hominibus, while men sleep. The
time will come, says our Savior of his Disciples, that the bridegroom shall
be taken from them; and then shall they fast. Now this PAULULUM, this little
while, may seem to be that time, and the Bridegroom to be taken from us. For
his bodily presence, his presence by temporal blessings, of peace and Health
and Plenty, we enjoy not; and therefore we fast and pray, to subdue the Flesh
to the Spirit, that the Soul may be more free and active in operation. The
while is well spent, if we do this. But if we will avoid the bitter curse of
Meroz, there is something else to be done in this while. We must come to help
the Lord; help him, by helping his Anointed; help him, by opposing the Wicked
man; help him, by promoting the endeavors of loyal Subjects; help him, by
following peace, if so be we can overtake it; help him, by destroying those
Sins which hinder him in his work. For as many times he cannot punish by reason
of the importunity of our prayers, so also many times he cannot deliver because
of the importunity of our Sins. And he may say to us, let me alone, in the one,
as well as in the other. And if we let him but alone, and hinder him not by the
noise of our Sins; of Sacriledg, for why should we help them, that rob him? of
Oppression, for why should he help them, that grind his face? of Uncleanness,
for why should he help them that make his members the members of an Harlot? of
Revenge, for why should he help them that wound him? of Hypocrisy, for why
should he help them that mock him? if we silence these, then will he move and
work forward, and within a while perfect his work. And though the people
imagine a vain thing, though Jesuits, and worse than Jesuits would drive us
out of the land, (for the bottomless pit never sent out worse Locusts than
those, that will eat up their own country) yet wait yet a little while, and
keep his way, and he shall exalt us to inherit the land. Our Silence shall
drown their Noise, our Patience shall dull the edg of their Malice, our
Simplicity shall be wiser than their Policy, our Weakness stronger than their
Power, and our Meekness shall be unto us all in all, even Strength and Policy
and Deliverance; and all this after a little while: And then, where there is no
while, when Time shall be no more, he shall lead us into those new heavens, and
into that new earth wherein dwells righteousness; where there are no war nor
rumors of wars, but joy and peace and immortality and eternal life: Into which
he bring us, who is that Prince of Peace, even Jesus Christ the Righteous; To
whom with the Father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory now and for
ever.

The One and Twentieth SERMON.
MATTHEW. XV. 28. O woman, great is thy faith: be it unto thee even as thou will.
THis woman came from the coasts of Tire and Sidon, says our Evangelist, v.
21, 22. was a Greek, a Syrophoenician by nation, says St. Mark, 7. 26. and so
a Gentile by birth. Which when we remember, says St. Chrysostom, we cannot but
consider the virtue of Christ's coming, and the power of his most glorious
dispensation, which reached from one end of the world unto the other, and took
in those who had not only forgot God, but had also overturned the laws of
Nature, and darkened that light which was kindled in their hearts; which called
sinners to repentance, even gross idolaters, and admitted dogs to eat of the
childrens bread. A Greek she was, and in this she bespeaks us Gentiles exire e
finibus Tyri and Sidonis, to come out from those coasts which whilst we remain
in we are indeed no better then dogs; to leave our sins, and the occasions of
sin; to leave the coasts where Sin breaths, and to come to Christ, to be
dispossessed of those evil spirits which vex our souls, and will destroy them.

The Story of this Cananaean concerns us, you see. But wherefore comes she out
of her own coasts? You shall hear that in her loud cry, (...), says the Text,
v. 22. she speaks it in a still voice, Her daughter was grievously vexed with a
devil. No wind so powerful to drive us from Tire and Sidon to Christ, from the
coasts of Sin to the land of the living, as Calamity. When we are vexed,
eximus; when this wind blows, we presently bethink our selves, and depart out
of those coasts.

But better stay at home then not be heard when we cry. She cries; but Christ
answers her not a word. Yet she cries still. His Disciples come, and beseech
him: and then he answers; but his answer is rather a reason of his silence then
a grant. He answers that to help her was beside his errand, that he was not
sent to that purpose, but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Non
ostiolum spei, not the least wicket of hope is set open to her, not any beam of
comfort shines. Lost indeed she was, but not a lost sheep, a dog rather; and
of Canaan she, not of the house of Israel.

Here is a linguarium, one would think, a muzzel to shut up her mouth in
silence for ever, a hedge of thorns to stop up her way: but Faith and the Love
of her daughter drive her on even against these pricks, and pull her on her
knees; (...), says the Text; Like a Dog she croucheth before him, she falls
down and worships him, saying, Lord help me. And now he who seemed to be deaf
to her cry, makes answer to her silence; and he who regarded not her noise
makes a reply to her reverence and adoration. Not a word from Christ till he
sees us upon our knees. Our noise is not always heard, but he speaks when we
worship. But yet his answer carries less fire with it to kindle any hope of
comfort then did his Silence. Indeed Menander will tell us, (...), that silence
to a wise man is an answer. But a flat denial must needs come more unwelcome
then silence; and here is not a bare denial, but a denial with a reason, with
an (...), It is not good to take the childrens bread, and to cast it to dogs.
What now can this distressed woman reply? or how will she be able to hold up
her side, now she is come ad (...), to the hardest part of the Dialogue, which
the Orators call Contention? What can she answer to Reason? Behold, I will not
say a facelious or witty, but a wise answer. Behold an apple of gold in a
picture of silver. Here is a cloud drawn over her; yet her faith sees a star in
this cloud: and by a strange kind of Alchimy she draws light out of darkness;
and makes that sharp denial the foundation of a grant. She answers by way of
concession, Truth, Lord: The Jews are Children; nay, Masters: let them have
the bread. I am a Dog, and am content with a Dogs reward; even with the crumbs
that fall from the Table. His silence she answers with her knee, and his bitter
answer with humility; an answer which Wisdom it self does not only approve but
admire; Then Jesus answered, and said unto her, O woman, great is thy faith: be
it unto thee even as thou will. Before, silence; now admiration: before, a
reproof; now, a commendation: before, a dog, now, a woman: before, not a crum;
now, more bread then the children. She cried before and Christ answered not;
but now Christ answers, and not only gives her a crum, but the whole table;
answers her with a FIAT TIBI, Be it unto thee even as thou will!

The words which I have read are the last part and conclusion of the Dialogue;
a happy conclusion. For where Misery begins well, and holds out and perseveres,
Christ always concludes in mercy. Truth, Lord, is answered with O mulier; and
a prayer for a crum is rewarded with a grant of all we can desire. So then the
parts are two; a Commendation of the woman's faith, and a Grant of her request.
And of these we will speak in their order.

The commendation is not ordinary, nor delivered by way of common expression:
but here we have (...), an holy exclamation; O woman, great is thy faith! This
is not Signum perturbati animi, sed docentis Magistri; We must not conceive
this to be the sign of any motion or perturbation in Christ, but the lesson of
a good Master, who would move us to admiration, that admiration might win us to
faith. Exprimit in se, ut exprimat de te; In himself he expresses it, that he
may bring it from us. In anger he is, that we may be angry with our sin: In
grief he complains, that we may be grieved for our selves: and he is loud in
his approbations, to awake our sloth, and to make us active in the pursuit of
that which he admires. Per tropum probat, aut miratur; when he commends, or
admires, he does it by a trope. If his plain instructions will not prevail, he
is content to condescend, and bring us to belief by a figure.

But now what is it that Christ commends and admires? It is the greatness of
the woman's faith. Now Faith may be said to be great either in respect had to
the Understanding, or to the Will. For the act of Faith proceeds from them
both: and it may be said to increase and be great, either as the Understanding
receives more light, or the Will more warmth; as the one does more firmly
assent, and the other more readily embrace. In the Understanding it is raised
by certainty and assurance, and in the Will by devotion and confidence. This
woman's faith was great in both respects. She most firmly believed Christ to be
the Lord, able to work a miracle on her daughter: and her Devotion and
Confidence so strongly built, that neither Silence nor Denial nor a Reproach
could shake it! And because we are told, Magnitudo virtutis ostenditur in
effectu, that the greatness of virtue is best seen in the effects; as we best
judge of a Tree by the spreading of its branches, and of the Whole by the
parts; we will therefore contemplate this woman's Faith in those several fruits
it brought forth; in her Patience, in her Humility, in her Perseverance; Which
are those lesser stars that shine in the firmament of our souls, and borrow
their light from the luster of Faith, as from their Sun.

And first, we cannot but admire her Patience; Which is bona valetudo fidei,
the very health of Faith, says Tertullian, and shows it to be of a good
growth. And surely if Socrates was styled senex perpessitius for his great
sufferance, this Canaanitess may well be called mulier perpessitia, a woman
which endured much; in her misery, reproach; in the bitterness of her soul, a
repulse, silence, and denial, and the name of dog. Fabius Verrucosus was wont
to call that grant which was given with some roughness and asperity, panem
lapidosum, stony and gravelly bread, which will sooner break the teeth than
nourish the body. What then think you is a denial with a reproach? Not bread,
but a stone. Yet we see this woman's Patience was able to digest this stone, and
turn it into bread. And indeed this is one part of a Christians Omnipotency;
his Patience is infinite, and suffers all things: It swalloweth down stones.
Christ himself was a stone of offense, but yet Patience digests this stone with
disgraces, with poverty, with afflictions, with martyrdom, with sword and
persecution, and makes them beatitudes. Never any contumely, never any loss,
never any smart so great, which could weary a true Christian Patience: Talia
tantaque documenta, says Tertullian: Such precepts, such examples have we of
Patience, as that with Infidels they seem incredible, and call in question the
truth of our profession. But with us they are the very ground and foundation of
our Faith. (...), says Gordius the Martyr in St. Basil; What a loss am I at,
that I can dye but once for my Savior? No Christian whose Patience has not
met with a stone; if not Martyrdom, yet Poverty; if not Poverty, yet
Contumely. In labors abundantly, in stripes above measure, in deaths often. And
could St. Paul do no more? Yes; he could: Sed ubi historiam perstare non
potuit, votum attulit; when he could not fill up his history; he brings in a
wish, even to endure the pains of hell for the salvation of Israel, his kinsmen
according to the flesh; I cannot now say that this woman's Patience was so
great; but she received those darts of denyals, of disgrace, clypeo patientiae,
upon the buckler of Patience: and a Denial with Reproach, is, if not so terrible
as Hell, yet many times as bitter as Death. I may be bold to say, A Patience it
was that represented to our Savior (though a dark, yet) a picture of his own.
Hinc vel maxim, Pharisaei, Dominum agnoscere debuistis. Patientiam hujusmodi
nemo hominum perpetraret, says Tertullian to the Pharisees. If there had been
no other argument to prove Christ God, yet his wonderful Patience had been
sufficient. So we may truly say, Were there no other argument to prove that
this woman's Faith was great, yet this great measure of Patience were enough to
make it good: For so great a Patience could scarce have subsisted if Christ had
not been in her of a truth.

Next follows her Humility, a companion of Patience. Quis humilis, nisi
patiens? says Tertullian: There cannot be Humility without Patience, nor
Patience without Humility. But here we have even (...), as the Father speaks,
an extreme humility; Humility on the ground: (...), she worshipped him. Not a
humility which stays at home, but which comes out of her coasts after Christ.
She cries after him; he answers not. She falls on the ground; he calls her
dog. A humility that is not silent; but helps Christ to accuse her. A Humility
not at the lower end, but under the table, content with the crumbs which fall to
the dogs. Thus does the Soul by true Humility go out from God to meet him, and
beholding his immense Goodness looks back unto her self, and dwells in the
contemplation of her own poverty; and being conscious of her own emptiness and
nihiliety, she stands at gaze, and trembles at that unmeasurable Goodness which
fills all things. Ecce, says St. Augustine, factus sum mihi regio egestatis.
This consideration has laid me waste; I am become to my self a wilderness,
where I can discover nothing but unruly passions and noisome lusts, ready to
take my soul and devour it. Foelix anima quae taliter exit a Deo! Happy soul
that so departs from God! It is a good flight from him which Humility makes.
For thus to go away from God into the valley of our own imperfections is to
meet him. We are then most near him when we place our selves at such a
distance: As the best way to enjoy the Sun is not to live in his sphere. We
must therefore learn by this Woman here to take heed how we grace our selves.
When Perseus the Macedonian King had rebelled against the Romans, and was now
overthrown by Aemilius, he wrote unto them letters of submission, but dated
them with the name of Perseus the King; and therefore the Consul would not
answer them. Sensit Perseus cujus nominis esse obliviscendum, says Livy;
Perseus quickly perceived what name he was to forget, and therefore leaving out
the title of King, he writes the letters again, and so received an answer. What
Perseus there did by constraint, this woman here performs in true humility;
forgets the name of child, nay of woman, and to gain but a crum styles herself
a dog. A pattern for us, to learn to think our selves but Dogs, that we may
be Children. For nothing can make the heavens as brass unto us, to deny their
influence, but a high conceit of our own worth. If no beam of the Sun touch the
in the midst of a field at noon day, thou can not but think some thick cloud
is cast between thee and the light; and if amongst that myriad of blessings
which flow from the Fountain of light, none reach home to thee, it is because
thou art too full already, and have shut out God by the conceit of thy own bulk
and greatness. Certainly, nothing can conquer Majesty but Humility, which
lays her foundation low, but raises her building to heaven. This Canaanitess
is a Dog; Christ calls her woman: She deserves not a crum, he grants her the
whole loaf, and seals his Grant with a FIAT TIBI: It shall be to Humility even
as she will.

And now, in the third place, her Humility Ushers in her Heat and Perseverance
in prayer. Pride is as glass: Vitream reddit mentem, says Damianus; It makes
the mind brittle and frail. Glitter she does, and make a fair show; but upon a
touch or fall is broken asunder. Not only a Reproach, which is ictus, a blow,
but Silence, which can be but tactus, a touch, dasheth her to pieces. Reproach
Pride and she swells into anger, infermento est; she is ready to return the
Dog upon Christ. But Humility is murus aheneus, a wall of brass, and endures
all the batteries of opposition. Is Christ silent? she cries still, she follows
after, she falls on her knees. Calls her Dog; she confesses it. She will
endure any thing, hear any thing, bear any thing, do any thing; and all this to
gain but a crum: From Humility springs this her Fervor and Perseverance, (...),
from the depth of an humble and low conceit of her self. A common error it is
reigning amongst us, and our Pride begets it, when we frame unto our selves a
facil and easy God; a God who will be commanded of us, and led as it were in a
string; a God that will welcome us whenever we come, and be content with
whatsoever little we bring. This is nothing else but to set up a God of our own
making, an idol. For what else is Idolatry but the mistake of that God whom we
choose to serve? But if we knew our selves, if we knew the distance between
heaven and earth, the difference between God and a Worm, we should find God to
be a God of state and magnificence, qui solet difficilem habere januam, whose
gates open not so easily as we suppose; a God who expects that our addresses
unto him should be accurate, and joined with long attendance and expectancy.
Did we rightly dread his Majesty, and weigh our own baseness, we should think
then with Pythagoras, Deum non esse salutandum in transitu, that God will not
be spoken to in the By and passage; we should fear that by our slight and
trivial prayers we were too bold with him, and that in wrath and indignation he
should reply as Augustus did to his friend who entertained him coena perca and
quotidiana, with course and ordinary fare, Non putaramme tibi tam familiarem
fuisse, I did not think I had made my self so familiar with my creature. Christ
here no doubt knew the Woman's faith before he heard it in her cry, but he is
silent, but he denies, but he calls her Dog; and all this, to make her
importunate; ut exploret affectum recurrentem, to see whether her desire would
recoyl upon the repulse. He withdraws himself, that she may follow closer
after. He puts her back, that she may press forward in pursuit, and invade him
with violence; ut excitet affectum languentem, to fet an edge upon her
affection, to inflame her love, and to raise her importunity with delay. For
the prayer of Faith res est seria and gravis and improba, a serious, a daring,
an imperious thing, which will take no denial; but looks upon the very face of
God, and stares upon him, if he refuse to hear. Which the ancients used to
express by a strange kind of phrase: They said this was (...), an holy
importunity to make God ashamed. For certainly even in this sense it is true,
Est quaedam prevaricatrix modestia, est quaedam sancta impudentia; there is a
kind of Modesty that betrays us, and there is a holy and sanctified Impudence,
when with the Woman here we will not be answered neither with silence, nor with
a denial, nor with a reproach. Though he kill me, says Job, and, Though he call
me Dog, says the Woman here, yet will I pray, and double my cry; I will not
leave till a FIAT be spoken, till the devil does leave my daughter. Haec est
illa grata vis Deo; This is that welcome violence, with which the kingdom of
heaven is taken by force; This is the way by which God delights to be wooed and
won. Servat tibi Deus quod non vult cito dare, God lays up that for thee which
he will not give thee at the first, ut magna magne desideres, that what thou
accountest great in the possession, thou may make also great in the
purchase. Thou must hunger for a crum, ne fastidium veniat ad panes, that thou
loath not the whole loaf. Our Savior himself, when he negotiated our
reconciliation, continued in sighs and supplications, praying (...), with
strong crying: and now beholding as it were himself in this Woman, and seeing
though not the same yet the like fervor and perseverance in her, he approves it
as a piece of his own coin, and sets his impress upon it, O MULIER, MAGNA EST
FIDES TUA; O woman, great is thy faith.

And these three, Patience, Humility, Perseverance and an undaunted Constancy
in prayer, measure out her Faith. For Faith is not great but by opposition: Non
nisi difficultate constat, It cannot subsist, much less increase, if it find no
difficulty to struggle with. If there were nothing to make me doubt, where were
my Faith? What I see I believe not: but when some mountain, some difficulty,
comes between my eye and the object, the virtue and crown of Faith is to look
through it. The woman cries; Christ is silent; she doubles her cries; he
denies; she cries still; he answers with a term of reproach; she is the more
importunate: Quicquid est, id porro est; What she was before, she is still.

I might add a fourth, his Prudence, but that I scarce know how to distinguish
it from Faith. For Faith indeed is our Christian Prudence: which does (...),
says Philo, inoculate the soul, give her a clear and pearcing eye, by which
she discerns great blessings in little ones, a talent in a mite, and a loaf in
a crum; which sets up (...), a golden light, by which we spy out all spiritual
advantages, and learn to thrive in the merchandise of Truth. We may see a beam
of this light in every passage of this Woman; but it is most resplendent in her
art of thrift, by which she can multiply a crum. It is but a crum she demands:
For so indeed are not only temporal blessings, Honor, and Riches, and Health,
but Miracles also themselves, if compared to that Bread of life, to our
spiritual estate. Yet she will make use of this Crum, and dispossess at once
both her daughter and her self, her daughter of a devil, and herself of her
former impiety. A Crum shall turn this Dog into a child of Abraham. To our eye
a Star appears not much bigger then a candle; but Reason corrects our Sense,
and makes it greater then the globe of the Earth: so Opportunities and
Occasions of good, and those many Helps to increase grace in us, are
apprehended as atoms by a sensual eye; but our Christian Prudence beholds them
in their just magnitude, and makes more use of a Crum that falls from the
table, then Folly does of a sumptuous feast. A little, says the Psalmist,
which the righteous has is more then great revenues of the Psalm. 37. 16.
wicked. A little wealth, a little knowledge, nay a little grace, may be so
husbanded and improved that the increase and harvest may be greatest where
there is least seed. It is strange, but yet we may observe it, many men walk
safer by starlight then others by day. There is, says St. Hierome, sancta
rusticitas: Many times it falls out that Ignorance is more holy then Knowledge:
Do any of the Scribes and Pharisees believe in Christ? What saw they, in
Christ? A carpenters son; a friend of publicanes, a conjurer. What gained they
by his miracles but their own obduration, and to be worse than they were; But
this simple Woman saw a Lord, a Divine power in his miracles, and knew how to
satisfy her desires and fill herself even with a crum that fell from his
table. Where then is the fault? Not in the light but in him that bears it. For
commonly we are more bold in the day when it is clearest: we attribute all to
the light, and think not of our feet; so that peradventure we should see more
had we less light. Great wits are commonly ambitious, and loath to yield. What
once their error has set down, they think they are bound for ever to maintain.
For a Pharisee to believe in Christ, were to pull off his phylacteries, and
banish him the sect! But this Woman here, though she sat not in Moses chair,
was more skilful then they who did; saw that in the coasts of Tire and Sidon
which they could not in Jewry, and became there a child, a Daughter of Abraham,
whilst they remained Dogs at Jerusalem; a child indeed of Abraham, heir to his
Humility, who called himself Dust and ashes; heir to his Patience, qui tam
grave praeceptum quod nec Deo perfici placebat, patienter audivit; O si Deus
voluisset, implesset, says Tertullian; who heard patiently that heavy command
to sacrifice his son, which God liked not himself; and had fulfilled it, had
God given him leave: heir to his zealous Fervor in prayer, which followed and
urged God from Fifty to Ten. Lastly, heir 1 Genesis 18.
to his Faith: and for this we need no more proof than our Saviors Elogium,
then my Text, O woman, great is thy faith.

Shall we now take the pains to measure our Faith by this Canaanitish woman's?
We may as well measure an Inch by a Pole, or an atome by a mountain. Here was a
patience that could digest stones; ours will not digest bread, no not Christ's
blessings. His Gospel we take down as a pill, and his Precepts as poison: Do
this, and live. We had rather dye then do it. Well said Tertullian, Malum
impatientia boni; Evil is nothing else but impatience of that which is good. We
are not only impatient of Afflictions, of Poverty, of Reproaches, but also
impatient of Godliness, of Sobriety, of common Honesty, of the Gospel, of
Christ, of Heaven it self upon those terms it is profer'd us. And all that
bread which should nourish us up to everlasting life we turn into stones. Blow
what wind will, we are still in finibus Tyri and Sidonis, at home in our own
coasts.

But next, for Humility, who vouchsafes once to put on her mantle? Humility!
it is well we can hear her name with patience: But humi serpere, to creep on
the ground, is not our posture. You will say Christ does not call us Dogs.
Yes; he does; For, though he be in heaven, yet he speaks still, and in his
Scripture calls every sinner a Dog, a Swine, yea, a Devil. He upbraids us to
our faces, as often as we offend. But we will not own these titles; but call our
selves Priests, when we sacrifice to Baal; and Kings too, when we are the
greatest slaves in the world. If Humility still live in the world, sure it is
not the same Humility which breathed here in the coasts of Tire and Sidon.

Lastly, For our Perseverance and Fervor in devotion, we must not dare once to
compare them with this Woman's. For, Lord! how loath are we to begin our
prayers, and how willing to make an end! When God is silent, we think he will
not speak: when he answers, we think he is silent: But when we are told that
our sins do hinder our prayers, and that Christ cannot help us because we are
Dogs, then we desist, and will pray no more, because we will sin more, and
rather suffer the Devil to vex our souls, then dipossess him with noise. Yea,
which is ridiculous and monstrous, Quod affectu volumus, actu nolumus; we pray
for that we would not have, and desire help which we would not enjoy. Every day
we pray for Grace, and every day we quench and stifle it: Every day we desire
Christ's help, and every day we refuse it: So that we may well, with a little
alteration, use our Saviors words, The woman of Canaan shall rise up in the
judgment with this generation, and shall condemn it: for she came from Tire and
Sidon, and would not be denied; we live in the Church, and are afraid that
Christ should grant our requests. Her devotion was on fire, ours is congealed
and bound up with a frost. We talk much of Faith; but where are its fruits?
Where is our Patience, our Humility, our Perseverance in devotion? which gave
the just proportion to this Woman's faith, and commend the greatness of it to
all posterity. For these are glorious virtues, and show the full growth of her
Faith. These answer St. James his OSTENDE MIHI, Show me thy faith by thy works.
But yet to come up close to our Text, our Savior mentions not these, but
passes them by in silence, and commends her Faith: Not but that her patience
was great, her Humility great, and her Devotion great: But because all these
were seasoned with Faith, and sprung from Faith, and because Faith was it which
caused the miracle, he mentions Faith alone, that Faith may have indeed the
pre-eminence in all things.

First, Faith was the virtue which Christ came to plant in his Church. Non
omnium est credere, quod Christianum est, says Tertullian; This virtue belongs
not to all, but is peculiar to Christians. (...), It is the first inclination
to health, and the groundwork of our salvation. Let the Heathen accuse the
very title and name of Faith; (...), as Theodoret calls it; let them object
that our Religion brings in meram credulitatem, a mere and foolish credulity,
and that we do (...), but play the fools, in taking up things upon trust; yet
this Persuasion, this Belief, this Faith is it which draws us from the coasts
of Tire and Sidon, takes us from the number of Dogs, and makes us citizens of
the heavenly Jerusalem. When we could not do what we should, not fulfill the Law
God taught us to believe: and it was the riches and glory of his Mercy to find
out this way, and save us by so weak an instrument as Faith. Besides, Faith was
the fountain from whence these rivulets were cut, from whence those virtues did
flow. For had she not believed, she had not come, she had not cried, she had
not been patient, she had not humbled herself to obtain her desire, she had not
persevered; But having a firm persuasion that Christ was able to work the
miracle, no silence, no denial, no reproach, no wind could drive her away. A
sign that our Faith now-adayes is not so strong; it falls off so soon, at the
least opposition, and fails and falls to the ground with a very breath, a sign
that we have paralyticas cogitationes, as one speaks, paralytical thoughts,
which cannot reach a hand to our Will, nor guide and govern our desires to the
end.

Lastly, Faith is that virtue which seasons all the rest, makes them useful
and profitable, which commends our Patience and Humility and Perseverance, and
without which our Patience were but like the Heathens, imaginary, and
paper-Patience, begotten by some premeditation, by habit of suffering, by
opinion of fatal necessity, or by a Stoical abandoning of all affections.
Without Faith our Humility were pride, and our Prayers babbling. For whereas in
natural men there be many excellent things, yet without Faith they are all
nothing worth, and are to them as the Rainbow was before the Flood, the same
perhaps in show, but of no use. It is strange to see what gifts of wisdom and
temperance, of moral and natural conscience, of justice and uprightness did
remain not only in the books but in the lives of many Heathen men: but this
could not further them one foot for the purchase of eternal good, because they
wanted the Faith which they derived, which gives the rest (...), a loveliness
and beauty, and is alone of force to attract and draw the love and favor of
God unto us; These graces otherwise are but as the matter and body of a
Christian man, a thing of it self dead, without life; but the soul, which seems
to quicken this body, is Faith. They are indeed of the same brotherhood and
kindred, and God is the common Father unto them all; but without Faith they
find no entertainment at his hands. As Joseph said unto his brethren, You shall
not see my face except your brother be with you; So nor shall Patience and
Humility and Prayer bring us to the blessed vision of God, unless they take
Faith in their company. You see our Savior passes by them all; but at the
sight of Faith he cries out in a kind of astonishment, O woman, great is thy
faith! And for this faith he grants her her request, Be it unto thee even as
thou will: Which is my next part, and which I will touch but in a word.

FIAT TIBI is a grant; and it follows close at the heels of the Commendation,
and even commends that too. For what are Commendations with ut a Fiat, but as
that Faith in St. James which bids the naked and destitute, Be warmed, and
filled, but gives them nothing which is needful? And such are our Commendations
for the most part, no more then a sound, verba sine penu and pecunia, as he in
Plautus speaks, words without profit or comfort. A miracle it is to hear a
charitable panegyric: But Christ's Commendations end here in a miracle. For as
St. Augustine speaking of those words of the Gospel, Stulte, hac nocte, gives
us this descant, STULTE: Tale in quenquam Dei verbum judicium est, Such a word
from God as FOOL is a judgment. For when God calls us Fools, he passes a
sentence: So may we say that O mulier, with Christ is a FIAT, his Commendations
a Grant. For what he approves he rewards, and what he commends be crowns: And
the best approbation is her Reward, the best commendations a Crown.

The FIAT follows close upon the Acclamation. And indeed a large grant it is.
Yet some have strived to improve and enlarge it. Origin thinks that Christ did
not only heal this woman's daughter, but gave her power to do it herself, and
was so pleased with her that he was content to give her part of his Power, and
a hand in the miracle. But a mere fancy it is, without show of sense. But
even our age has coined the like; That Christ did not only merit for us, but
by his merit purchased us a patent of meriting our selves. One would think these
men had slept upon Origen's pillow, and dreamt the same dream; these for the
soul, as he for the body. For to what purpose is this new invention? FIAT, Let
it be done, let but her daughter be cured, and the woman's noise is laid. Nor
can the miracle be less welcome because Christ works it himself. Or; let her do
it, yet she must do it by Christ's power; and so the FIAT is Christ's still, and
we are where we were before. And why should we affect to merit our selves? Is
it not enough that Christ will bring us to heaven? Or is the Crownless welcome
if our hand do not help to put it on? And if our merit be not coined without
the impression of Christ, what then have we gained! For the payment is his
still. This is nothing else but interpretationibus ludere de scripturis, by
false glosses to sport with the Truth and the Scripture: And we may say of
these additions as the Orator spoke of Figures in speech, Possumus sine istis
vivere, We can live and be saved without them. Let Christ say, FIAT TIBI, to
the Canaanitish woman, and it is enough; her daughter shall be made whole by
that very FIAT, from that very hour. And let him say unto us, FIAT VOBIS, Be
unto you as you will; and we shall be dispossessed of our spiritual enemies, of
our lusts and foul affections; and, as his children, we shall not only have the
crumbs, but shall sit at his table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and with
this Canaanitish woman; and shall enjoy not only quicquid volumus, what we
will, but more then we can will or desire. Which the Lord for his mercies sake
set a FIAT to, and grant unto us all for Christ Jesus sake: To whom with the
Father and the holy Ghost be all honor and glory.

The Two and Twentieth SERMON.
PROVE. XII. 14. A man shall be satisfied with good by the fruit of his mouth;
and the recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him.
IN the morning you beheld David the father rejoicing, and committing his joy
to song, LAETATUS SUM, Psalm. 122. 1.
I rejoiced: In the words which I have read Solomon the son opens the
fountain of joy, and points out unto you the spring from whence it flows, and
that is obedience to Gods will, whether seen in the fruit of our Mouth; we
shall be satisfied by the fruit of our mouth; or manifested in the fruit of our
hands; The recompense of a man's hands shall be rendered unto him. We may add the
fruit of our Minds, in our thoughts: for these make a character and impression
in the soul, and hang there like pictures, says Basil, and such pictures as
may put on the substance of those actions which they represent, and therefore
are to be esteemed (...), as complete works already finished in the soul. For,
says Tertullian, they are wrought in the flesh, and with the flesh, and by the
flesh, adeo and sine opere and sine effectu cogitatus est carnis actus; so that
a thought is a work in the flesh, when it produces no act at all. Wheresoever
Goodness is, whether it bridle our Tongue, or guide our Hand, or regulate our
Fancy, it carries its satisfaction, its recompense along with it. Our songs
of praises echo back again upon us; the works of our hands follow us, and fill
us with joy; and our thoughts, if Goodness raise them, are comforts. What need
we then run to and fro through the earth, and seek for joy and satisfaction,
when it is so near us, even in our mouth, and in our Hands, and in our minds.
If it may lie wrapped up in a thought, much more will it be loud in our words;
and if our words may carry it along, it will flow and abound in our good works.
I may say it is the reflection of our thoughts, the echo of our words, and the
resultance from our works, and music and melody in all. The sense and sum of
all that the Wiseman has here proposed unto us in these words is this, That
Goodness, whether in thought, word or deed, will satisfy us, that is, fill us
with joy; and nothing will satisfy us but goodness. For the argument will hold
a contrario, If that which is good satisfy us, then that which is evil cannot.
If Goodness have its reward, which is satisfaction, then Evil has its wages of
another nature, which is death. A man shall be satisfied with good, but there
can be no satisfaction in evil. The lines then by which we are to pass are but
these two; first, that Goodness does satisfy; secondly, that nothing else can
satisfy us but Goodness.

And that Goodness does satisfy we cannot doubt if we know what it is, and
consider the nature of it, and the fountain from whence it springs. For it
flows from God, as Joy and Satisfaction do from Goodness. It is a beam from
that eternal Light, an emanation from God himself, I had almost said a portion
of the Divinity; and if I did positively say it, does not even the Scripture
say as much? That by it we are made partakers of the Divine Nature, by escaping
the corruption which is in the world by lust? For of his John 1. 16. 2 Pet. 1.
4. Ephesians. 1. 23.
fullness we receive ^t, and Grace for Grace. For the free gift of Grace and
Goodness, the free addition of satisfaction from his fullness that fills all
in all, fills all in every Good man, fills the Mind with light, the Will
with holy affections, and the Body with an obsequious inclinableness and
obedience to the Will, and makes the whole man a Temple to himself, full of
light, of peace, of glory; so fills it that it is satisfied as with marrow
and fatness with all satiety of joy. The Chaldee Paraphrase brings it home to
my Text; satisfied with marrow and fatness, that is, with thy Law, that is,
with that which is Good. And thus we may draw an argument from the nature of
Goodness, which the nearer it carries us to the fountain of Goodness, the more
satisfaction it brings with it, and the fuller is our Cup. Inebriabuntur ab
ubertate domus tuae, says the Psalmist, They shall be overcome and even
intoxicated with this cup. Without God we cannot be happy in heaven it self,
nay without him there could be no heaven; and with him we shall enjoy what we
can desire even in the lowest pit. Nihil illi satis est cui non sufficit Deus:
We can never be satisfied till we rest in the greatest Good; and Goodness lays
us in his very bosom, nay in his heart. We never find our selves and all
things but in him.

And as we draw an argument from Piety, so may we draw another from the Love of
it; and therefore amamus amorem nostrum, says Augustine, we do not only love
Goodness, but even the Love with which we embrace it, and delight in both: And
this satisfaction proceeds not only from that which is good, but from our
hearty affection to it. Goodness shines upon us, and kindles our Love; and as
there is a glory in goodness, so there is in our Love. For Joy and Satisfaction
is a resultancy from Love, for our delight is to have and do what we love. That
which we love is also the joy of our heart. If Love be as the Sun, Joy and
Satisfaction are as the beams that stream from it. If Love fill the heart, it
will heave and work it self out, and break forth in joy. Gaudium de amore, say
the Schools; our Satisfaction is the offspring of Love, and issues from it,
and bears its shape and likeness. For as our Love is, such is our Joy. If our
Love be kindled from heaven, our Joy will be also from the heaven, heavenly,
and resemble that of the Angels: But if it be placed on things below, on that
which is transitory, on that which will not satisfy, it will be also
transitory and unsatisfying. What is the satisfaction of a Worldling? a thief
may break through and steal it away. What is the satisfaction of the Ambitious?
a frown will chase it away. What is the satisfaction of the Wanton, burnt and
consumed in his lust? The adulterer waits for the twilight; the twilight
comes, and to night sin is as a purchase, but to morrow it is rottenness to
his bones, and dullness to his understanding; to night it is the horn of beauty,
and to morrow a fury. Go, compass about the world, and what satisfaction can
you find? Draw all its beauty and honor and riches together, and all is but
ingens fabula and magnum mendacium, a long tale and a huge lie; and
Satisfaction and Joy may seem to be exhaled out of these as noisome vapors are
out of the earth, to be seen a while, and then to be nothing; or, which is
worse, to gather into a cloud, and dissolve in tears of sorrow and bitterness.
Ever as our Love and Desire is, such is our Satisfaction.

One argument we take more, a minori ad majus, to persuade us to this Truth. If
the bare opinion of Piety, in those who are not yet made perfect, satisfy,
though it be but for a while, then Piety it self will satisfy much more. If
the shadow, if a weak representation of Virtue and Piety will refresh us, what
will it do when it shines upon us in perfection of beauty? If one good act,
which is but the shell and outside of Goodness, in them who rather approve than
love it; if one good thought, one good word, one good action lift us up, how
will a habit of goodness exalt us! If, I say, the shadow has this operation,
what has the substance, the thing it self? If the giving a Cup of cold water
will raise and settle content in us, how will that Heart be filled with joy
which is sacrificed to its Maker? We may, if we please, discover this in our
selves. What feel we in our Heart when our Hand has reached out a penny? Does
it not make a kind of melody there; does it not so fill us that it is ready to
break out at the lips? What hear you when you give good counsil? does it not
echo back again upon you? When you have heard two Sermons on the Lord's Day, do
you not tell your selves you have sanctified the Sabbath? When you have
received a Prophet, though in your own name, do you not look for a Prophets
reward? See what a paradise one leaf of the Tree of life may make (for all
these may be but leaves) what a glorious structure may be raised upon a
Thought. And if Error, if Opinion, may work some satisfaction, then Truth may
much more. If a Dream may enlighten us, what will a Revelation from God himself
do? And if the embracing of a cloud do so much please us? How shall we be
transported when we shall find our Juno, even Goodness it self, in our arms! If
a form of Godliness, then much more Godliness in its full power will fill and
satisfy us. Run to and fro through Jerusalem, go about the streets thereof;
muster up together all that name the Lord Jesus, and you shall find that every
man is full, every man almost is satisfied, few drooping and hanging down the
Head. In our Health we comfort our selves, and on our bed of Sickness we send
for comforters; and as miserable comforters as they are, we are willing to hear
them, and a little opiate Divinity, a few good words, the name of JESUS does
settle and satisfy us. There be very few Rachels, that will not be comforted.
We run from that which is good, and sit down in the shadow of it; we wound our
Conscience, and then stain it over again; we break the whole Law, and one sigh
is satisfaction; nay we break the Law, and persuade our selves we have kept it;
any persuasion is satisfaction. We break one Law, and satisfy our selves in
the misinterpretation of another, and so break it when we think we have kept
it. Industry is commanded, and that must countenance our love of the world.
Zeal is commended, and that must raise a faction. Truth must be defended, and
that must beat up a drum. It is not women only, but men, that are never to seek
for an excuse, and that is satisfaction. Every man posts to destruction, yet
every man would seem to be on the wing to heaven; Every man is sick, yet every
man is well; Every man is empty, yet every man is full: We tread the paths that
lead to destruction, and yet we are in the way to happiness? Where is the
shaking and the trembling spirit? where is the broken heart? where are those
prickings at the heart? or who puts up the question, What shall I do to be
Acts. 2. 37.
saved? Every man is satisfied; and, if it were true, we might conclude every
man is good. For whatsoever the promises be, most men are bold to make this the
conclusion, and though they have raised a tempest, conclude in peace. And it is
a great deal more common to infer what pleases us, and what may serve for
satisfaction, though it be upon a gross mistake, and oftener, then upon a
truth. And thus we assure our selves of happiness upon no better evidence then
that which flesh and blood and the love of our selves are ready to bring in,
and satisfy our selves with false hope of life, when we are full of malice,
envy, and uncleanness, of which we are told, that they which do such things
shall not inherit the kingdom of heaven. Gal. 5 21.
And what satisfaction is this? a Satisfaction without a warrant, a
Satisfaction which we our selves only have subscribed to with hands full of
blood; a Satisfaction which is but a cheat, but a delusion, presenting us
nothing but a reward, when we are condemned already; filling us with hopes of
bliss, when we are in the mouth of destruction. That which is Satisfaction
indeed has no other basis to stand on then Piety and conformity of our works,
words and thoughts to the will of God: And then it is as mount Sion, which
cannot be removed: it stands firm, for it is built upon God himself. If thou
raise it upon Fancy, thou buildest in the air. If thou lay it upon Gods
eternal Decree in thy election, that will slide from thee, and let the fall
into hell: for that concerns thee not unless thou be good; but another decree
contrary to that, which thy neglect of piety has drawn thee under, belongs
unto thee, because thou would not know what belongs to thy peace, and what
might bring Satisfaction. Will thou lay it on the infinite Mercy of God, that
will cover a multitude of sins, but not those sins which are thy only
satisfaction; that will distill as dew, but not on the hairy scalp of him that
goes on in his sins: And though she triumph over Justice, yet here she yields,
and calls it in to double vengeance upon thee, because thou were an enemy to
Mercy, which first showed thee the way to be satisfied, and now turns from
thee, and will not hear when thou call to her to satisfy thee being out of
the way. If thou will have Mercy crown thee, thou must be merciful to thy self:
If thou will make thy election sure, thou must do it (...), as it is supplied
in some copies, by piety, that is by faith and good works. For Goodness is
that, and that alone, which satisfies us, which fills us with joy and peace in
the holy Ghost, and for which God will satisfy us with his likeness, and fill
us with glory in the life to come. And so we pass to that which we proposed in
the second place; and it was this,

2. It is the prerogative of Goodness and Piety to be alone in this work.
Nothing can satisfy us but Piety and our transforming our selves by the Romans
12. 2.
renewing of our mind, and shaping our thoughts, words and actions to the will
of God. For first Satisfaction is but a name on earth; as St. Paul speaks of
Idols, we know it is nothing in the world. The earth and all that therein is
cannot yield it; the round world and they that dwell therein could never find
it. And as God spoke to Moses, Thou heardst a voice, but saw no shape; so
Satisfaction, which flows from God alone, in this resembles him: The voice of
it has sounded in our ears, but as for the shape and substance of the thing it
self we have seen none. But as the world, having heard of God, but not knowing
him aright, sought him in stocks and stones, in birds and creeping things; so
men having heard of Satisfaction, which can be found no where but in God, by a
kind of Idolatry against God have sought it in the creature, in Beauty, which
fades whilst we look upon it; in Riches, which have wings, and fly away; in
Honor, which is but a blast, and not in me, but in him that gives it. In these
it can no more be found, then the very nature of God himself. These conceits
and notions of Satisfaction do universally pass amongst men. Now as that
general consent and voice of all nations, That there was a God, though they
err, not knowing where to seek him, yet is a fair proof that there is a God;
and as the same general consent of men, that God is to be worshipped, though they
mistook the manner of it, yet proves certainly that there is some form of
worship acceptable to Him: so this ecumenical conceit of satisfaction to be
had, which has thus overspread and possessed the heads of all men, cannot be in
vain, but is an evidence that there is some good that will satisfy, that has
a contenting quality, and in which we may set up our rest. Only vain men, who
have their mind in their eyes and not in their hearts, as Augustine speaks,
have been willing to mistake, to tread the waters, and to walk upon the wind,
to trust to that, and to make that their mount Sion which slides away from
them, and gives no rest to their souls. Rest to our souls we never find till
with the Dove we return to the Ark, to the Church of Christ, where our tongues
are made God's glory, and our hands the instruments of righteousness wherein
that Piety and Goodness dwells which alone can satisfy.

For secondly, such is the nature and quality of the soul, that it is not
fashioned nor proportioned to the things of this world. What is a wedge of
gold, what is beauty, what is a Crown to a soul? This being an immortal and
spiritual substance can be satisfied with nothing but what is wrought in it by
the Spirit of God, with Holiness and Piety; which being as immortal and
spiritual as the soul, is most apt to assimilate, and fill and satisfy it.
Will I eat, says God of himself, the flesh of bulls, or drink the blood of
goats? Can God take any delight therein? It is not the sacrifice, but the heart
which being offered up brings a sweet savor unto him: without this, sacrifice
is an abomination. And so, what is a feast, a banquet of wine, the sound of a
viol, the whole world, to a soul, which must needs check it self when in
condescension to the flesh it takes part in that delight they bring? Will ye
spend these upon it? as the Babylonians did their sheep and flower upon their
Idol Bell? Behold, the Soul can neither eat nor drink any thing; and is no
more satisfied with these then the Angels, were with Abraham's fine meal and
cakes which he baked upon the hearth. No: the meat which must satisfy the soul
is baked and dressed in the mind, and then brought forth by the tongue and hands.
It is the flesh and blood of the Son of man, which is indeed his death, his
doctrine, his obedience, humility, righteousness. For we cannot abstract these,
and divide Christ from his doctrine: This is the gross error of the world, and
fatal to many: but we must join together Christ and his precepts; and these
will satisfy a soul.

And to this end, in the next place, God has imprinted in the soul and in the
very nature of Man (...), an infinite and insatiable desire, which cannot be
satisfied with any thing that the world can present. The Heart is a little, but
a vast member: Our desires are as Numbers, you cannot give a last. The Soul,
which is made capable of God, can be satisfied with nothing but with God, not
with any thing that is to be seen in this shop of vanities. The Covetous is
never rich enough, the Ambitious is never high enough, and the Philosopher
never knows enough. The Appetite is infinite, and cannot be satisfied with that
which is finite. Now we have an axiom in Philosophy, That God and Nature never
made any thing in vain. He that made Hunger, has made bread to stench it; and
he that made Thirst, has made drink to quench it. And he that has imprinted
this infinite and insatiable desire in man, has made and prepared something
also to satisfy it: Which since we see we cannot find in the world, though we
should live Methuselah 's age, nay, though we should live to the end of it; we
must seek for it somewhere else, even above, where Christ sits at the right
hand of God; we must seek it in him who is the fullness of time that fills all
things, and in that Piety and Goodness by which we dwell in him, and he in us;
and so partake of that fullness which will fill us for evermore.

We will draw but one argument more, and that is a contrario, from Wickedness
and Impiety, the licentiousness of the Tongue, and the wantonness of the Hands.
In these we can find no satisfaction, no more then in Hell it self. Sin
delights and torments ^^* gives us a Hail, a flattering salutation, and betrays
us; cries Hosanna, and crucifies us; leads us in triumph, but in chains; and
when our heart is merry, breeds a worm to eat it out; which gives some
satisfaction indeed, but such as the Serpent gave with the Apple, which brought
with it shame and pain and sorrow and death. There is no peace, says my God,
to the wicked: and where there is Isa. 57. 20.
no peace, there can be no satisfaction: but they are like a troubled sea,
which cannot rest, whose waters cast out mire and dirt. No true peace, no true
satisfaction can there be, but gaudium quasi, says St. Augustine, joy and
satisfaction in a manner and as if it were, Satisfaction in a picture, in a
shadow, in a representation, drawn out in the colors of the rainbow, which
appear and are not, as when an hungry man dreameth, and behold, he eats, and
when he awaketh, his soul is empty, as the Prophet expresses Isa. 29. 8.
it; As if I were a king, might the beggar say; As if I were in health, may the
sick man say; As if I were a Philosopher, may the Idiot say; As if I were in
heaven, may Dives say. As if is but as the bringing in of a picture for a Man,
which is but as if it were so. What being has that which is but as if it were?
not a satisfaction, but a torment. For to be as if it were is not to be. The
picture of Heaven is not Heaven, and the picture of Satisfaction and Happiness
is no more then a thin and fading representation thereof, no more then a
shadow, nay, not so much; for being sensual, it cannot be the shadow of that
which is spiritual. Well said the Father, Gaudium illorum habet QUASI;
Tristitia illorum non habet QUASI; Their Joy and Satisfaction is but as if it
were; their Misery true and real: their Joy is a picture, their Torment
substantial and sensible; their Satisfaction is a phantasme and an apparition,
but their Sin and Sorrow shall be ever before them, ever against them. Nor can
we ever be satisfied with good but by the words of our mouth and the works of
our hands; These alone carry Satisfaction as their recompense along with them.

4. Further yet, to show how unsatisfying a thing Sin is, you may behold it
tormenting the wicked man, and that not only after the act, but also before,
and in it; first, forbidding it self, then perplexing him in the act, and after
gnawing his heart. For this luctation, this, Shall I, or shall I not? even a
wicked man may have. And then what trouble and business is there? what waiting
for the twilight? what watching opportunities? what study, what cost, what
defalcations from our selves for that which will undo us? And after Conscience
follows Sin with a whip whither soever the sinner goes. Most sins we commit
cost us dear, our wealth, our honor, our health, our reputation. And within a
while all our sins are set in order before us; and then versa est Cithara in
luctum, all the music and melody Sin made, ends in starts and sighs and
cast-down looks, in horror and amazement.

To conclude this; There is no way left us, but to take the wings of a Dove,
Piety and Conformity to our Maker, and to fly away from Sin, that we may be at
rest. And since nothing can satisfy the mind but that which settles it, and
nothing can settle it but Goodness and Holiness, let us earnestly seek after
it, as being that which, as we are made after the image of God, makes us also
after his likeness; not indeed so immutable as He is, but yet constant in our
obedience, as far as our Humane nature is capable; not all-sufficient, as he
is, yet at peace and rest within our selves, because we rest in him; not
omnipotent, as he is, but by his assistance and grace able to do all things
which may work our peace, and satisfy us; Being filled with the fullness of
God; not with that fullness which God is, (for Ephesians. 3. 19.
that is impossible) but with the fullness of that Holiness which he has
ordained to fill and satisfy us. For when our thoughts are heavenly, he
whispers back unto us: when our tongues utter his praises, he speaks to our
hearts, and comforts us; when our hands are busy in his service, they at once
finish a good work, and draw out the recompense of reward; The end is, They
shall be satisfied with good --. Give me leave now but to cast an eye back, and
gather something for our use; and then I shall commend both it and you to the
blessing of God.

And first, if the fruit of our Hands and Lips be that alone which can satisfy
us, let us then up and be doing, buckle on the armor of light, quench every
fiery dart of Satan, fight against principalities and powers, and beat down
every strong imagination that opposes it self to that righteousness which will
satisfy us with good, and this imagination especially, That no endeavor of
ours, no pressing forward, will bring us to the mark. We need not fear to enter
the lists: for there be more with us then against us. To complain of weakness
when we are called, to work out our own satisfaction, is not Humility, or, if
it be, it is but a voluntary humility, nay but a depression of mind, which has
not so much as the show of wisdom; an Humility that will not acknowledge any
power willing to do that which we are unwilling to do, and in the contrary of
which we place all our delight and satisfaction; an Humility that pretends
darkness of understanding, because it will not see, and perverseness of will,
because it will not work; which laments over us, as over the dead, who indeed
have no mind nor desire to live, but love darkness more then light, the broad
way more then the strait, and death better then life; an Humility which is not
the fruit of the Spirit, but the work of the flesh to hold it up against the
Spirit. Be humble and obedient; that Humility came down from Heaven: But what
Humility is that, that is the mother and nurse of Disobedience? That Humility
which is commended to us in Scripture lifts us up to Heaven; this other, which
is the parasite of the flesh, disables us, and sinks us to the lowest pit. That
Humility boweth us down with sorrow, this binds our Hands with sloth: That
gives us life and activity in the service of God, this buries us alive; That
looks upon imperfections past, this makes way for more to come; That prepares
and makes plain our way to perfection, this makes us more imperfect. I know no
better argument to move us then this; for it is St. Paul's; Therefore be ye
steadfast, unmovable; always abounding in the 1 Cor. 15. 58.
work of the Lord, singing praises to the Lord, and making him melody with your
obedience; forasmuch as ye know that your labor is not in vain in the Lord:
As if this consideration only were enough to strengthen the weak hands, and
confirm the feeble knees, to fasten our roots, to build us up in Christ, to
stablish us in the faith, and to make us an everlasting foundation.
Satisfaction is the end, and you have all the means to attain it,
Understandings and Wills, Directions and Precepts, Promises and Rewards, Heaven
and Eternity to draw you on and encourage you. And if this Rhetoric have no
power on those who are Men and yet will be stones, behold the Angels ministering
unto you, and God himself calling, knocking, waiting, entreating; who will
never be wanting to us if we be not wanting to our selves, who must needs do
his own will, and his will is our satisfaction.

And therefore, in the next place, let us level our actions and endeavors on
this, and not spend and waste our selves upon that which is not bread, and will
never fill us. Let us not be so strong to do evil, and so weak to do good; be
lame and impotent, when we should move toward Happiness; and rush upon
Destruction as the Horse does into the battle? Let us not seek after
Satisfaction in the things of this world, as the sons of the Prophets did after
Elijah upon a Peradventure when he was taken away. For it is the greatest folly
in the world thus to misplace and mispend our diligence. This is to plow the
winds, and to cast our seed upon the rocks, which will yield no incrrease; This
is to work in glass, which will break in our Hand, when with the same labor
and art we might cut out a Diamond to adorn us. Beloved, when I see men sending
their hopes and thoughts afar off, and then following them with all heat and
violence of action; when I see them stoop to their proposed ends with as swift
a wing as the Falcon to her prey, and then miss them; when I see them climbing
to the top of the tree, and then falling back again with nothing but those
boughs they laid hold on; when I see men hastening to their desires, and not
obtaining their ends, or, if they do, not those ends which they set up, finding
that which they took for bread to be a stone, and that which they called fish a
serpent; gathering riches, and possessed with fear; honor, but trembling at the
height; pleasure, but with repentance: when I see men labor and strive, and war
and fight, spoiling and spoiled, con-conquering and overcome, destroying and
destroyed; when I see men working to their ends sometimes by ruin, sometimes
by battery, sometimes by craft, and, if that will not serve, by violence, when
I see Kings pulling the crowns from one another heads; when I see such hot
contentions, such tragoedies raised, for that which is not, which may not be,
or, if it be, will not be of that fashion which we gave it in our thoughts;
methinks I see not, as Alexander spoke, the battle of Frogs and Mice (although
that was to as much purpose as these) but the strivings of mad distracted men,
whom History (which is not always the light of truth) has shown to the world
as Hero's and generous and great-spirited men. Or if I see Caligula in his
march, with his great host and army which he raised not to fight, but to gather
cockles on the shore. Or I behold men laboring in the world as Cornelius
Agrippa says Spirits do in the minerals; they dig and cleanse and sever
metals, and when men come, they find nothing is done. And can there be a
greater folly and madness then this? or shall we call these men wise, politic,
magnanimous, high-spirited men? Give them what name you please, if there be
several kinds of madness, as we are told there are, then these will come within
the verge and reach of it. I am sure the Prophet David draws them within that
compass, and calls them fools: This their way utters their foolishness. Psalm.
49. 13.


For again, if nothing will satisfy us but Righteousness and Piety, we need
not consult what we are to choose here where the object has all that goodness
which can make it desirable. And therefore God by his Prophet, as if men did
not wonder enough, or it were not enough for men to wonder, calls to the
Heavens, Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this: Jer. 2. 12, 13.
for my people have committed two Evils, they have forsaken me the fountain of
living waters, and have hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, which will
hold no water. And may it not seem a strange thing, that men should refuse
their meat, which would satisfy them, and so prodigally sell themselves, all
themselves, for that which is not bread? as the Prophet Isa. 55. 2.
speaks. May it not go for a wonder, that men should debauch their
Understanding, which should be their counselor for their advantage and
satisfaction, and make it their purveyor for their wealth, their surveyor in
the works of the flesh, and no better then a pander to their lusts; that they
should bow their Will to that which it would have even when it does embrace it,
but determines its act, and demolisheth it again in the twinkling of an eye;
that they should make their Memory a Treasury of nothing but that which should
be buried in the land of oblivion; that their Affections, those incorporeal
heads, as Basil calls them, should catch and grasp nothing but air and
emptiness; and then that they should prostitute all the members of their Body
to be instrumental to the Soul in these her excursions and wanton sallies upon
vanity, to fetch in that which brings leaness unto it, the snow of Lebanon in
stead of waters out of the river of the Lord? But after all this, when I have
so long fed on husks, to deceive my self into a persuasion that I have been all
this while at my Fathers house and feasted at his table, to supply my defects
and emptiness out of the book of life, and to conclude my name is written
amongst the elect, when my tongue is an open sepulcher, and I am to every good
work reprobate; that I should feed my self with a groundless and irregular
thought of Gods mercy, which though it be over all his works, yet is not over a
stubborn and unrepentant sinner, which is none of his works; that I should lay
me down in peace, and sleep upon this pillow, upon this hope, That a sigh at
last will go for mortification, and a prayer at my death for the obedience of
my life, and a confession, when I can scarce speak, for that faith which
works by charity. Hear, O Heavens, and wonder: nay rather, why art not thou
troubled, O my Soul, and astonished within me? For what is this but to sleep at
the gates of Hell, and to pass unto torment in a dream of satisfaction? to
build our selves a pillar of assurance to lean upon, and then to fall into
pieces with it? to stuff a hollow and false faith with vain and improfitable
imaginations, as the soldier did his headpiece, which he felt hard under him,
with chaff, and then thought he had made his pillow easier. In a word, what is
it but to feed on poison instead of meat, to smile and flatter our selves to
death, to call in flesh and blood with these deceitful thoughts to favor us,
and to breath nothing but false hopes, till our breath departs, and these
hopes and these thoughts perish with it. O then, as the Wiseman speaks, if we
be wise, let us be wise to our selves; wise to edification, and not to ruin;
wise with that wisdom which is from above, and not with that which is earthly,
sensual, devilish, as full of deceit as the Deceiver himself, as full of
falsehood as the Father of lies: but let us hearken to the Lord God, who will
teach us to profit; let us be wise unto salvation. And this is our wisdom, to
choose that which will satisfy.

To draw to a conclusion; If this be the prerogative of Godliness to be alone
in this work, so that nothing else can work us satisfaction, let her have
prerogative also in our hearts, and exercise full power and authority and
dominion over our desires, to chase away from them all heterogenious and
deceitful appearances, to banish all that are enemies unto her; that so we may
captivate our Wills unto her, and not bring her into subjection to our Wills;
not first distaste and refuse her, and then make use of her name; first bid her
depart from our coasts, and then in her name not cast out devils, but let them
in, or be as malicious and mischievous as they. In the name of Religion and
Piety, why should that be Religion to day which in the days before us went
under the name of Impiety? Why should Religion pass away with the fashion of
the world, and change as often as that? Why should we take away its
prerogative, and give it to the World, to command our desires, and to command
Religion to attend and promote them? in our hastening to wealth, and to turn
covetous? in our grinding the face of the poor, and to turn cruel? in our
pursuit of honor, and so turn ambitious? as if nothing of Piety and Religion
were desirable but the name, and the things of this world were the only object
that could not fill our desires and satisfy them. And so we make up a
religious Mammonist, a religious Oppressor, a religious Tyrant, a religious
Atheist; we join together God and the Devil, the name of God and a Devil
incarnate. Thus it falls out when we invert the order of things. It is too
frequent and common a thing in the world to cry up Religion and Godliness as
the Ephesians did their Diana. Demesnius his Rhetoric, From this craft we have
our gain; is that which moulds and fashions Religion: It shall be no longer
Religion then it brings on advantage; if it prove dangerous, it shall loose
both its name and prerogative. Hence it comes to pass, that, as there are many
that are called Gods, and called Lords, so there are many Religions. 1 Cor. 8.
5.
The Covetous has his, the Ambitious has his, the Wanton has his, and the
Schismatic has his; many Religions, and none at all, none that can satisfy
us. Thus whilst we seek satisfaction in every object to which our lusts and
affections lead us, we find something which we call by that name; but whilst we
look upon it, it slips from us, and we see it no more: it does but smile upon
us, and leaves us. If we seek it in Beauty, that is but color, and it is
changed whilst we look on it. Who saw when that eye sunk which took so many
hearts? who observed when that face wrinkled, which was so gazed on? All we can
say is, this Star is shot, this Heaven is shriveled as a scrowl. If we look
for it in Riches, they have wings, and fly away; Satisfaction dwells not in a
misers bagg. Yet we rise up Prove. 23. 5.
early and lie down late, we labor and sweat, we cheat and oppress, we venture
our bodies and we venture our souls, we venture, nay cast away, that which
would satisfy us indeed, only to gain this satisfaction, to dye rich, and we
had rather pass with that esteem then with the honor of a Saint. And so we pass
away, we dye rich, and our money and this miserable satisfaction perishes with
us. The fool in the Gospel sung a Requiem to his soul at the sight of his
barns, and that night there were those that came and took his soul from him.
Again, if we seek it in Knowledge, there indeed one would think it might be
found, Knowledge being so proportioned to the Soul; but alas! there it is not.
For what satisfaction is it to attain unto this, to know that I am ignorant? or
what comfort does that light bring which shows my defects? The more we know,
the more we see we are ignorant; and the more light we have, the more we
discover our wants. We may think at every small distance the heavens close with
the earth; but when we make our approach nearer, a larger space opens then that
we have left behind us. Ad immortalium cognitionem nimis mortales sumus, says
Seneca; We are too mortal to fathom the Ocean of Immortality. Much reading is a
weariness of the flesh, and Knowledge, as it Eccl. 12. 12.
brings content, so it brings also vexation to the spirit. But then when the
times of refreshing, the time of satisfaction, shall come; that Beauty I doted
on will become a fury to whip me; the rust of my silver and gold will James 5.
8.
witness against me, and eat up my flesh as it were fire; and my Knowledge, if
it wait not on Piety, will procure me many stripes. What is Alexander now the
greater for his power? what is Caesar the higher for his honor? what is
Aristotle the wiser for his knowledge? what delight has Jezebel in her paint,
or Ahab in his vineyard? what is a delicious banquet to Dives in Hell? or what
satisfaction can the remembrance of these transitory delights bring? All the
beauty, honor, riches, knowledge in the world will not purchase one moment of
ease: All the rivers of pleasures, which are now run out and dry, and only flow
in our remembrance, will not cool a tongue. The gate is shut against all these;
and we find torment, endless torment, instead of satisfaction. Let us therefore
seek for satisfaction, but not there where it cannot be found; not in the
world, whose very figure and fashion passes away, but in that faith 1 Cor. 7.
31.
which overcomes the world, in that faith which works by charity, which 1
John 5. 4.
does (...), as Chrysostom speaks, slumber Gal. 5. 6.
all vain and absurd imaginations, that we now hugg and anon are afraid of, and
all vain words, that now are music unto us, and anon return upon us as swords,
which does guide our hands, that they may be reached out to no forbidden thing.
Let us seek satisfaction in the fruit of our lips, and the work of our hands,
in Piety and true Obedience. Lo, there it is found: Where this is in truth and
reality there it hold its prerogative: it shapeth our thoughts, forms our
words, and mingles it self with all the works of our hands. Then Peace of
conscience, that heaven upon earth, and Satisfaction, that pillow on which we
rest in all the storms that beat upon us, shall meet and compass us about on
every side; not a fading false satisfaction, but true, as our Obedience is
true; and solid and weighty, as ^^at is sincere; a fair pledge and earnest of
that fullness of light, joy, peace and glory, of that infinite satisfaction
which we shall receive in the highest heavens wherein dwells righteousness;
where He that fills all in all shall satisfy us, that is, crown us with
Happiness for evermore.

The Three and Twentieth SERMON. PART I.
MATTHEW. IV. 1. Then was Jesus led-up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the devil.
CHrist is the Captain of our salvation, as the Apostle styles him Hebr. 2. 10.
And no sooner is he baptized, no sooner is he come out of the river, but he
enters the field against the enemy of mankind, and omnia salutis nostrae
sacramenta veluti juratus absolvit, as Hilary speaks; He performs all the
Offices of a Savior as fully and exactly as if he had taken a military oath to
glorify Gods name, and to finish the work which he gave him to do, of our
Redemption. His Care of our welfare did not omit any tittle, any Iota. He looked
not only ad ultimum, to the end, but usque ad ultimum, to all those means and
to all those particular acts which led him to it, that so he might (...), bring
his work to perfection, and himself be made perfect by sufferings. It was not
enough for him to be born, but he will condescend to be baptized by his
servant. It was not enough for him to fulfill the Law, but he suffers himself
to be tempted to break it. It was not enough to suffer for sin, but he will
suffer himself to be tempted to sin. He was content not only to be sent into
the world, but to be led into the wilderness; and, that the Devil may assault
him, to present himself in the shape of a weak hungry man; to follow him to the
pinnacle, to the mountain, to any place from whence the Devil may hope to tumble
him down. He would be any thing but a Sinner, that he might save sinners.

We will not so much as doubt whether this were a real Combat, or only
performed (...), in imagination, and in a vision, as some of the Ancients
thought. For this were to question his Baptism also, and the Descending of the
holy Ghost like a Dove; Which was so really done that Tertullian peremptorily
concludes, that when the Spirit took this shape, there was as truly a Dove
there as there was the Spirit; although St. Augustine and Chrysostom are of
the contrary opinion. The Text here is plain, he was led (...), of the Spirit,
which is as much as, by the hand of the Spirit. And that of the Father is most
true, Nimis disputando fidei autoritas elevatur; We derogate from that authority
and power which our Faith should have over us, by raising controversies where
we need not: And whilst we start up doubts and questions, and then run after to
catch them, we commonly lose the Truth. It is part of a continued History of
the Acts of our Savior: and there is no show of reason which may persuade us
that, when all is said to be done by Christ, one part of it should be done
really, and the other but in a vision; especially here being so many reasons to
evince the contrary. For neither was it any honor for the Devil to cope with
our Savior, who for Man in the nature of man fought against him, and overcame
him; nor any greater dishonor to Christ to be tempted, then to be a Man.
(...); as Nazianzene spoke of his being born, so may I of his being tempted;
Why should we fear where no fear is? (...); Shall we honor him the less,
because he has humbled himself so far as to enter the lists with our enemy?
No: His Circumcision, his Tentation, his Fasting, his Hunger, his Sweating, his
Dying are the glorious and honorable marks of a victorious Captain. And as
Soldiers use to show their wounds and skarrs as the badges of honor, and to
publish and make it known; Haec vulnera, has cicatrices pro patria; These
wounds we have received, these skarrs we bear about us, for the defense of our
country; so may we magnify our Savior in that he fought and dyed for us men
and for our salvation. Timeamus nobis de reverentia ista, Let us be very wary
that we offend not Christ out of too much reverence.

May it therefore please you to fix your eyes, and duly consider this Duel or
single Combat between Christ and the Devil, our Captain and our Enemy. In this
Text we have the Preparation to it, and therein these circumstances remarkable;
1. the Persons, Jesus, a Savior; and the Devil, a Destroyer: Jesus, an
Advocate; and the Devil, an Accuser of the Brethren and a Calumniator: The Lion
who fights for us, and the Lion who seeks to devour us. 2. The manner how
Christ was brought into the field, He was led by the Spirit. 3. The Time when;
Then: After he was baptized, and had the holy Ghost descend upon him in the
shape of a Dove, and had heard a voice from heaven saying, This is my beloved
Son in whom I am well pleased, then he was led forth. 4. The Place where he
fought it out, the Wilderness. This was campus certaminis, the field where this
hardiment was to be tried, this battle fought. 5. His preparation to it, he
fasted forty days and forty nights. 6. And lastly, the Opportunity which the
Devil took to set upon him; He set upon him when he was a hungry. and this we
find in the Preparation; The Battle or Contention is spiritual; and it is
called Tentation. And in all battles the trial is who shall be the strongest.
The Tentation is threefold, I. to Distrust; from the consideration of want; II.
to Presumption, from the providence and praedestination of God; III. to flat
and gross Idolatry, from hope of the pomp and glory of this world. First, if we
want, the Devil concludes God cares not for us. Secondly, if he care for us, we
may do what we please. Thirdly, we may have what we please, if we will but fall
down and worship him. The price of the whole world is but a bow or prostration
of the body. These are the three darts which are thrown at Christ by an enemy
of craft and advantage: And Christ puts forth his buckler, and quenches them:
and the Devil being disarmed runs out of the field, or at least makes a
retreat. The Text says, The devil left him; and behold, Angels came and
ministered unto him. I have presented you with a short view of the whole. Come
we now to the particulars. First, I shall speak of the Persons.

In every action that passes in the world the circumstance of the person
carries it weight, and leaves a kind of impression upon it, and makes it more
or less remarkable to our view. Rei pondus etiam persona consummat, says the
Orator; That which makes up the full value of an action, that which consummates
and seals it up, is the Person. It was not so much for the Levites to bear the
Ark, as for David to dance before it. It was not so remarkable for a Publicane
to invite Christ to his house, as for Christ to dine with him. It was not so
much that the first Adam should fall, as it was that the second should be
tempted. (...), says Nazianzene; It is more for him to be pursued then it is
for us to be taken. A strange thing it may seem that he who had the Devil fast
in a chain should let him loose to assault him. Sed nihil imperiosius
charitate; Nothing is so imperious, nothing has so commanding a power, as
Love. It makes us forget our selves, put off our selves, lose our selves. And
it made the Word flesh; It brought down Christ from Heaven, from amongst thoose
troops of Angels and Archangels, into the wilderness, amongst the wild beasts;
It brought him to hunger who feeds the young Ravens which call upon him: It
offered up him to the Tempter who knew no sin. The Schools conclude that Christ
was obedient not according to his Divine will, but humane; and therefore that
he was tempted as Man, it was no derogation from the Majesty of his Godhead.
And therefore he presents himself as a Man, in the form of a servant, that he
might be a mark for the Devil to shoot at: He hungers, that he might tempt him
to distrust: He stands upon the pinnacle, to make it appear possible that he
might throw himself down: He follows him to the mountain, and beholds what the
Devil did show him. And it is very probable that had the Devil been fully
persuaded he was God, he would never have cast away his darts. Having
Scripture, as you see, at his fingers ends, he knew well enough that God could
not sin, and that Wisdom it self could not be deceived. For all Deceit
proceeds, says Clemens, as well from the Ignorance of the party deceived as
from the Crafts of the deceiver; as an overthrow does from the Weakness of him
that falls as much as from the Strength of the conqueror. Hoc unum non nisi duo
faciunt. To be tempted and to sin are two distinct things, and cannot be done
but by two. When we fall, the Devil and Our selves fling us down: And therefore
Nazianzene, Orat. 46. lays it down as a positive truth, that the Devil did
attempt Christ (...), because covered with the veil of Flesh. And (...),
because of his Humanity, which was visible. And in another place he tells us,
(...), that the Devil was entrapped with Christ's Humanity. Or suppose he knew
him to be God, yet it might fall out with him as it does with us when we are
his captives; What we know we know not; and those conclusions which before we
were able to make good by demonstration, in the heat of some passion we forget
as if we never had heard them. St. Gregory, I am sure, thought so; as he
declares himself, 2. Moral. Antiquus hostis Christum in mundum venisse
cognovit; Our old enemy knew well enough that Christ was come into the world,
when he cried out in the persons possessed, What have we to do with thee, Jesus
thou Son of God? But when he saw he was passible, and did suffer those things
which were common to mortal men, when he saw he was a hungry, and when he saw
him disgraced, he was in doubt as men are who halt between two opinions, and
know not which to subscribe to. Omne quod de ejus Divinitate suspicatus est,
fastu superbiae suae rei in dubium venit: By his pride and disdain he began to
be jealous and suspicious even of that suspicion he formerly had of his
Godhead. For, as St. Paul speaks of the Jews, Had they known it they had not
crucified the Lord of glory; so may we of the Devil, Had he known Christ to be
God and Man, and the Savior of the world, he would never have put into the
heart of Judas to betray him, nor have moved the Jews to put him to death, by
which the determinate counsel of God was brought to pass, and by which himself
was trod under-foot, and his kingdom overthrown. But such a Captain it behoved
us to have, who could be tempted, but could not sin; who might be set hard at,
but could not be overthrown; who could discover the falacies of that subtle
Sophister; who could subsist, and not turn stones into bread; who could go up
to the pinnacle of the Temple, and come down from it; who could see the world
and the glory of it, and contemn it. The Schoolmen, where they speak of this
Tentation of Christ, tell us of a double tentation, an inward, and an outward;
and rank our Savior with our first Parents in the state of innocence, who, as
they imagine, could have no inward tentation at all, because the Flesh was then
in full and perfect subjection to Reason, and their Reason in due obedience to
God; whose Fancy could receive no species or phantasms but upon deliberate
counsel, whose Understanding had no cloud to obscure it, and whose Will waited
as an handmaid on the Understanding, and followed as that led. All this may be
true, and yet might our first Parents be tempted inwardly. For Tentation, if it
go no further, is no sin. We are then tempted when objects are proposed to the
Eye, and then pass to the Fancy, and from thence are tendered to the
Understanding. I may see an object, (suppose the forbidden fruit) and think of
it, and know it, and yet not sin. It is beauty in the Eye, and so in the
Fancy, and it may be so in the Understanding, and yet the Will may not
incline to it, because Reason may judge it, though fair to the eye, yet
dangerous to the touch. Scire malum non facit scientem malum; To know evil
cannot denominate us evil. For God, who is a pure essence and Purity it self,
knows Evil more exactly then we, and therefore hates it with a perfecter hatred
then we can. I may know the Apple to be fair to look to and pleasant of taste,
and yet not taste it. I may know that Bread is the staff of our life, and yet
rely more upon the providence of God then on bread. I may know that the nearest
way down from the pinnacle is to fling my self off, and yet choose the safer, and
go down by the stairs. I may see Riches to be the God of this world, and yet
count them as dung. For I cannot see but the tentation may be inward, and yet
no sin. Nay; if it be but a tentation, it is not sin; and if it be sin, the
tentation is at an end. And if the tentation had not its operation upon the
will and inward man as well as upon the outward and sensitive part, let them
tell me how Adam fell. Besides, there is a great disproportion between the
state of the first Adam and the state of the second, between our first Parents
and Christ. For although they were created upright and in a state of innocence
(for indeed they could not be created otherwise by God, who is Goodness it
self) yet we do not read that they were conceived by the holy Ghost. In Christ
there was no sin, nor could there be. He had not only Nolle peccare, but Non
posse peccare, not only a Will not to sin, but an Impossibility of sinning;
although Durand, upon I know not what grounds, phansieth the contrary. The
Prince of this world comes, and has nothing in me, says our John 14 30.
Savior, (...), nothing in him which he might accuse, not only no sin, but no
fuel for his scintillations, his sparkles, his tentations; no fuel for his
sullen tentations to fall upon, and smoke up in distrust; no combustible matter
for his glorious tentations to settle upon, and flame up in ambition. There was
nothing in Christ which the Devil had or could make his, no Ignorance of what
he should do, no Dullness of Mind, no Difficulty in resisting tentations. The
second Adam was like unto the first in all things, not only in his state of
innocence, but in his fall, sin only excepted. But in Adam though there was no
fomes peccati, no fuel, yet there was a possibility of sinning, which was ad
instar fomitis, and which the Devil made use of as of fuel, in which he raised
that fire that consumed him to dust and ashes, brought death and the condition
of mortality both upon him and his progeny. We will not here make any curious
search to find out the degrees of this Tentation of our Savior, or what
operation it had upon him. Scrutari hoc temeritas est, credere pietas est,
nosse vita est and vita aeterna; To dive too far into this, into the manner how
the tentation wrought, would be rashness; to believe that Christ was tempted,
is an act of piety; and to know it, and make use of it, is life, and life
eternal. And I know that discourses of this nature are not welcome in this age,
where not Schoolmen but dunces are most in request, where men are afraid to
hear of any truth that is new to them, and disdain to know more then they know
already, although, if they were diligent, they might learn more in their
Catechism. And indeed in this point we can walk no further then we have light
from the Scripture. And there we find that Christ did suffer something when he
was tempted, that he did (...), that he was touched Hebr. 2. 18.
with the feeling of our infirmities, like unto us in all things, sin only
excepted. And (...), that he learnt something, that is, obedience, Hebr. 4. 15.
by the things which he suffered. This we may receive simplici and nota fide,
by a plain and common faith: And we dare not stretch further for fear we
stretch beyond the line. Tempted he was; but temptations did fall upon him as
waves upon a rock, which dashed them into air, into nothing; or as hailstones
upon marble, erepitant and solvuntur; They made some noise, but no impression;
they did no sooner fall, but were dissolved. And this is enough for any to
know, but those quibus nihil est satis, who will know more then they can know.

It is sufficient for us to know that our Savior was tempted: and it will be
very necessary for us to know the end why he was tempted. For as he was made
Man, so also was he tempted, for our sakes. First, as he was made a sacrifice
for sin, so here he made himself an ensample which we should follow when the
enemy assaults us. For, as Commentators on Aristotle observe that his rule many
times lies hid and is wrapped up in the example which he gives, so we need scarce
any other rules for behavior when we are tempted, then those which we may find
in this story of our Saviors combat with our enemy. And our Savior may seem
to bespeak his brethren, even all Christians, as Ablimelech does his Soldiers,
Judge. 9. 48. What you have seen me do, make haste, and do likewise. It had been
enough for our Savior to have promulged his law and given us warning and
direction, and never have entered the lists himself; to have said as his servant
does Ephesians. 6. If the Tempter come, take the shield of faith, take the helmet of
salvation, and the sword of the spirit; and not have taken up the sword
himself. For what needed he a sword, who needed no defense? what needed he a
buckler, who was invulnerable, and who with one word, with a (...), could have
made the Devil fly away and leave him? But he was (...), a great lover of
mankind; and, as a good Master, he would not only teach them, but make himself
a copy; not only give them rules, but totas dictare materias, make a form for
them; dictate by action as well as by words, and in his own tentation show them
a plain way, as the Apostle speaks, to escape in theirs. Habes auctorem quo
facias hoc; Be the tentation what it will, if you look upon Christ, you may
learn to overcome it. Lo, says our Savior, I have given you an ensample. And
certainly, as John 13. 15.
the Apostle counsels us, to look upon Jesus the author and finisher of our
faith, Hebr. 12. 2.
that is, look earnestly upon him with an intentive and inquisitive look; so
must we also look upon his Tentation, and consider it not as his trial, but as
our instruction. Sic oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat: These were his
postures; Thus he did. Thus he quenched the Devils fiery darts; Thus he answered
his falacies; Thus he broke the enemies thrust by showing it was not home, and
answered Scripture with Scripture, and beat the Devil at that weapon which
himself had chosen. And as the more we look upon the Sun, the more we admire
it; so the more we consider our Captain, the stronger and skilfuller we shall
be. A very look on Christ our Champion if it be serious, will make us wise unto
salvation, and stronger then the strong man that comes to bind us and rob us of
our goods. For though the lesson be hard to Flesh and Blood, yet when he who is
Flesh and Blood has as it were con'd it himself and repeated it over unto us,
it will be easy and plain.

Secondly, as Christ was tempted for an ensample to us, so in his tentation
there is a kind of law and decree that we must fight. For jubetur exemplis, in
the examples of great and eminent persons there is a command, and they bind in
manner of a Statute Law. We may conclude here a majori ad minus, If Christ be
tempted, we cannot be exempt. And as the Apostle tells us, The less is blessed
by the better, so here, the less is taught by Hebr. 11. 7.
the greater. If this be done to the green tree, what will be done to the dry?
If the Devil set upon him who knew no sin, certainly he will not be afraid to
assault us who are a^ ready to sin as to breathe. For this end did Christ come
into the world; and for this end did we come into this world. For this end were
we created; nay, for this end were all things created. Fecit omnia Deus ad
instruendum certamen rerum duarum; God made all things, says Lactantius, to
set two armies in array; the Flesh, and the Spirit; Sense, and Reason; Man,
whom he made after his own image, and the Prince of this world. And therefore
he has mixed, as it were, an appearance of Good with that which is evil,
various and delectable pleasantness in the things of this world, that by those
fair allurements in show there may be a possibility of inducement into that
evil which is not seen: and he has blended an apparancy of Evil with that
which is Good, that by those sorrows and labors which are distastful to the
eye, there may be a possibility in us of refusing that good which is covered
with such horror. But the present pleasure he checketh with fear of
punishment, and the present horror and sharpness he sweatens with hope of
reward: that we may see more with our mind then with our eye; that when our
Sense would join with Evil because of its color, our Reason may fly from it
because of its smart; and when the Flesh declines Goodness because it is
irksome; the Spirit may embrace it because it has the promise of a reward:
that when the Devil speaks fair, we may shut our ears, because we know his
words are as swords; and when God nayls us to the cross, we may bless his name,
because he means to crown us. Thus indeed our Savior did not stand in the
middle betwixt these, in a possibility of falling from one to the other, (for
then he could not have been a Savior) but yet for to show that he was Man, and
to let us know the condition of Man, he put on a person, as it were, and was
tempted as if he had. For we must not think of Christ as Alexander did of
Philip his father, who every day added victory to victory, that in his
tentations and victorious sufferings he did all himself, and left us nothing to
conquer. No; as he is the first fruits of our resurrection to glory, so he is
the first fruits of our sufferings and tentations, and in that he was tempted,
did but praeludere; take up the weapons and fight, that he might put them into
our hands; walk upon the waters, that we might soeculi fluctus praeeunte Domino
calcare, tread the proud waves of tentations under our feet, since he is gone
over them before. Some men there be indeed that fancy to themselves an easy
passage into heaven, and a victory over the Enemy sine sudore and sanguine,
without any sweat or shedding a drop of blood; and think they may wanton it on
the way, and sport themselves into happiness; and because they have heard of
some few, of the thief on the cross, and some others, who have been changed in
their mind, as some shall be in their bodies at the general resurrection, in a
moment, in the twinkling of an eye, think this favor may reach to all; because
Christian virtues are called gifts, will stay till they are given; and when
they read that our Savior has overcome the World and the Devil, think all is
done; no passion for them to subdue, no tentation to wrestle with, no Devil
that can hurt them. A gross error, which strikes at the very life and soul of
Christianity. For neither did the Thief nor any other enter into paradise but
through tentations, and though there were a new and unusual power which wrought
upon him as it did upon others in the first ages of the Church, yet he had the
same tentations to revile Christ which the other had who hung with him; and one
great tentation he overcame, when he asked help of him who in all appearance
could not help himself. And certain it is that as the Devil fought against
Christ, so he fights against all mankind, and some he overcomes with more ease,
others with more difficulty. But it never fares worse with us then when we look
so long on privileges till we make them rules; till what was but for term of
life, for some time, for some men, we draw down an entail upon all posterity.
What if some men have their penny who are called into the vineyard in the
evening and cool of the day? what is this to thee, who art called at noon and
in the heat of the day? What if some have breathed forth their souls from their
bed? what is it to thee who art called to the stake? It is true, Christian
virtues are Gifts; but yet they are seldom obtained but by labor and sweat.
Seldom any temperate, who set not a knife to their throat; seldom any chaste,
who make not a covenant with their eyes. In a word, nisi vim inferas, regnum
coelorum non intrabis, unless you labor and sweat, unless you first subdue and
subjugate your selves, you can never conquer the Devil. Christ indeed conquered
him, but it is for those who will fight. To him that overcomes will I give to
eat of the tree of life. Rev. 2. 7.
Now the reason of this is most plain; For though our Savior, when he coped
with Satan, could have beat him as small as the dust before the wind, have put
him in fetters, and chained him up for ever; yet was this neither expedient for
Us, nor agreeable with the infinite Wisdom of our Savior: Not for Us; For, si
defit hostis and pugna, nulla est victoria; If there be no enemy, if there be
no striving, there can be no victory. Toll certamen, ne virtus quidem
quicquam; Take away this combat with our spiritual enemy, and Virtue is but a
bare naked name, is nothing. If there were no possibility of being evil, we
could not be good. What were my Faith, if there were no doubt to assault it?
What were my Hope, if there were no scruple to stagger it? What were my
Charity, if there were no injuries to dull it? Laetius est quoties magno sibi
constat honestum; Then Goodness is fairest when it shines through a cloud; and
it is difficulty which sets the crown upon Virtues head. Our Savior was made
glorious by his tentations and sufferings; So must we by ours. And therefore
God has placed us in the midst of tentations, that we may in vita vitam
acquirere, in this painful and short time, in this course of tentations,
purchase everlasting life. Nor can it consist with the Wisdom of Christ to
overcome the Devil for those who will readily yield to him, to foil him in his
proud tentation for those who will not be humble, and to beat off his sullen
tentation for those who will distrust and murmr; nay, for such as make this
his victory commeatum delinquendi, a license and charter for all generations to
fling away their weapons, and not strike a stroke, but stand still, as if they
were a praedestinate mark set up on purpose for the Devil to shoot at. If he
should have done thus, we could not take him for our Captain: and if we do
thus, he will not take us for his soldiers. Non novimus Christum, si non
credimus; We do not know Christ, if we believe him not to be such a one as he
is. Therefore as God dealt with the Israelites, so does Christ with us. God
rooted out the inhabitants of Canaan, Judge. 3.
and made room for his people; yet he left some of them to prove Israel, even
as many of them as had not known the wars of Canaan, namely, the Caananites and
Sidonians, etc. And this for two reasons; 1. to teach them war; 2. to prove
Israel, whether they would hearken to the commandments of the Lord. Even thus
has our Savior disposed of our great Enemy: He has abated his strength in
the way, but has not utterly rooted him out; though he has spoiled his
principality, yet he has left him a Devil, an enemy to mankind still, for a
purpose of his own, to prove us whether we will be his soldiers or no, and to
teach us war, which we could not learn without an enemy.

Nor needs this be grievous unto us. For as he has caught us both by his Word
and Ensample to prepare our selves to the battle, and bestir our selves like
those who fight under his colors; so, in the next place, there is a kind of
influence and virtue derived from his Combat, which falls as oil upon us, to
supple our joints, and strengthen our sinews, and make each faculty of our
souls active and cheerful in this exercise. Multum nobis dedisset, si nihil
nobis dedisset praeter exemplum; Certainly he had given us much, if he had
afforded us no more then his ensample. But to this he has added his Precept,
and set before us (...), the garland: And we could never fail, Si tanta in
terris moraretur fides, quanta merces ejus exspectatur in coelis, if we could
draw up our faith, and make it proportionable to the reward. But to this, as
there is gratia jubens, a commanding grace, so there is gratia juvans, a
helping grace; to help us in our melancholy, that we do not despair; to help us
in loathsome tentations, that we be not swallowed up. Per Christum, and in
Christo, by Christ, and in the power of Christ, we shall beat down all our
enemies. This Man, whose will is mutable, shall vanquish that Devil whose
malice is obdurate: This poor Beggar shall beat that Prince: This worm, this
dust and ashes, shall disarm that Goliath, that Leviathan. For as Christ tells
us that he will be with us, so does he also fight with us, to the end of the
world, setting us on by his precepts, urging us forward by his ensample,
quickening us by his spirit: And if we fail, having the stronger on our side, it
is manifest that we have preferred Satan our enemy before Christ the Captain of
our salvation. Our life is hid with Christ Col. 3. 3.
in God, and whilst we there leave it by continual meditation of his
meritorious sufferings, by working and forming Christ in our souls, no dart of
Satan can reach us: But when we hide it in the minerals of the earth, in the
riches of this world, the Devil is there, he is there to seize on it: When we
hide it in malicious and wanton thoughts, they are his baits to catch it: When
we hide it in sloth and idleness, we hide it in a grave which he dug to bury
it: When we think to save it, we loose it: But when we hide it in Christ, when
we do Deum per Christum colere, worship God through Jesus Christ our Lord, when
we rely on his power in Christ, which is the foundation of all Christian
Religion; then our life, having put off the old Adam, is clothed with
righteousness, and is in a manner divine; our mortal has put on immortality;
and having hid our sins and weakness in Christ, the image of God brightly
shines forth in every action, and the life of Jesus is made manifest in our
mortal flesh; so that our life with 2 Cor. 1. 11.
him, and his life in our mortal flesh, in our weekness, in our infirmities,
arms us against all assaults, and makes us more then conquerors.

Now, in the last place, Christ 's help we need not doubt of if we be not
wanting unto our selves. For we have not such an high Priest who will not help
us. But (which is one and the chief end of his Tentation) who is merciful and
faithful, and was tempted that he might succor them which are tempted. He has
not only Power (for so he may have, and not show it) but also Will and
Propension, Desire and diligent Care to hold them up that are set upon for the
trial of their faith. Indeed Mercy without Power can beget a good wish, but no
more; and Power without Mercy will neither strengthen a weak knee, nor heal a
broken heart: But Mercy and Power together will work a miracle; will hold us up
when we are ready to fall; will give legs to the lame, and eyes to the blind,
and strength to the weak; will make a fiery furnace a bath, make a rack a bed;
will keep us the same men amidst the changes and armies of sorrows; will
moderate our sorrows when they are great, that they be not long; and when they
are of continuance, will call the evils that are as if they were not; will
uphold us against the terrors of Death; and when he sounds his retreat, and
takes us off from the field by Death, will receive us to glory. And this
Compassion and Mercy, though it were coeternal with Christ as God, yet as Man
he learnt it by his sufferings, says the Apostle, Hebr. 5. 8. For the way
indeed to know another misery is to be first sensible of our own. For we
commonly see that men who are softly and delicately brought up, have hearts of
flint. If Dives be clothed in purple., and fare deliciously every day, it is no
marvail to see him less merciful then his Dogs when Lazarus was at his door.
But you may say, Could Christ, who was the Son of God, forget to be merciful?
or was he now to learn it as a new lesson, who by his wisdom made the heavens,
because his mercy endures for ever? No: He saw Joseph in the stocks, Job on
the dunghill, and the Mariners in the tempest: He heard the sighs and
complaints of the poor, he numbered all their tears, and had compassion on his
afflicted ones, even as a father has on his only child. But then, before he
emptied himself, and took upon him the form of a servant; sicut miseriam
expertus Phil. 2. 7.
non erat, ita nec misericordiam experimento novit, as he had no acquaintance
with sorrow, so neither had he any experimental knowledge of mercy and
compassion. In his sufferings he had trial of misery, and learned to be
merciful. His own Hunger moved him to work that miracle of the Loaves: For it
is said in the Text, He had compassion on the multitude. His Poverty made him
an Orator for the poor, and he beggs with them: and his Compassion melted him
into tears at the sight of Jerusalem. When he became a man of sorrows, he
became also a man of compassion. And yet his experience of sorrow added in
truth nothing to his knowledge; But it rowseth our confidence to approach with
boldness near unto him who by his miserable experience is brought nearer to us,
and has thus reconciled us in the body 1 Cor. 21. 12.
of his flesh. For he that suffered for us has compassion on us, and suffers
and is tempted with us, even to the end of the world. He was on the cross with
St. Peter, on the block with St. Paul, in the fire with the Martyrs; He in his
members is still destitute, afflicted, tormented. Would you take a view of
Christ? You may look upon him in your own souls; take him in a groan, mark him
in a sigh, behold him bleeding in the gashes of a wounded spirit. Or, to make
him an object more sensible, you may see him every day begging at your doors.
Christ learnt this Compassion in our flesh, says the Apostle; Inasmuch, as the
children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself Hebr. 2. 14.
likewise took part of the same; and in our Flesh he was hungry, was spit upon,
was whipped, was nailed to the cross. And all these were as it were so many
parts of that discipline which taught him to be merciful; to be merciful to
them who are tempted by famine, in that he was hungry; to be merciful to them
who are tempted by riches, because he was poor; to be merciful to them who
tremble at disgrace, because he was whipped; and to be merciful to them who will
not, yet will, suffer for him; who refuse, and yet choose; tremble, and venture;
are afraid, and yet dye for him; because, as Man, he found Death a bitter cup,
and would have had it pass from him: Who in the days of his flesh offered up
prayers and supplications, with strong crying and tears, for mortal men, for
weak men, for sinners, for those whose life is a warfare. Pertinacissime durant
quae discimus experientia; This experimental knowledge is rooted in Christ, is
sixth and cannot now be removed, no more then his natural knowledge. (...),
says the Philosopher; Experience is a kind of collection and multiplication of
remembrances, the issue and child of memory. Usus me genuit, matter peperit
Memoria. It proceeds from the memory of many particulars. And this experience
Christ had. And as the Apostle tells us he learnt, so the Prophet tell us he
was acquainted with our griefs, and carried our sorrows about with him, even
from his birth, from his cradle to his cross. By his fasting and tentation, by
his agony and bloody sweat, by his precious death and burial, He remembers us
in famine and tentation, in our agony and bloody sweat, and all the penance we
do upon our selves for sin. He remembers us in the hour of death and in our
grave, and will remember us at the day of Judgment. As a father pitieth his
children, so he pities us, Psalm. 103. 13. and the reason is given verse 14. For
he knows our frame; he remembers we are but dust: He knows our frame; he
remembers we are built up of flesh, as he was: And he knows what impressions
Sorrow can make in flesh. He remembers that Man in the best estate is but
vanity: that when he is strongest he is ready to fall. And then if he falls as
a Man, out of frailty, and not as an Angel, as Lucifer 's presumtuously, his
Compassion is ready to lift him out of the dust. And this is a part of Christ's
Priestly office, which he begun on earth, and in heaven performs for us even to
the end of the world. This lasts even after the Consummatum est; when all was
finished. Christ Jesus is an Intercessor yesterday, to day, and for ever.
Behold, says Saint Stephen, Acts 7. 56. I see the heavens open, and the Son of
Man standing at the right hand of God. And every Christian by the eye of faith
may see him there also, even at the right hand of God interceding for us:
Father, behold, here I am: and for my sake behold the children which thou have
given me. It is true, they have sinned; for even I was tempted. They have
fallen, but by my help are risen again. They have received many spots from the
world, but they have been willing to wash them off with their tears, that I
might wash them with my blood. They have profaned thy name, but they have
called on thy name. Oh give ear unto their cry; hold not thy peace at their
tears. Or, if thou will not hearken to the tears of a sinner, yet behold the
sighs, the tears, the bloody wounds of a man that did never sin. And now,
Father, forgive them as men, forgive them as my brethren. To these sinners I
have given the glory which thou gave me, that they may be one, even as we are
one. And the Father of Mercy receives us, and embraces us in his arms; puts
upon us the best robe, puts immortality upon our mortality, impeccability upon
our peccancie, and all at the intercession of his Son, who being himself
tempted, learnt to succor them who are tempted.

The Four and Twentieth SERMON. PART II.
MATTHEW. IV. 1. Then was Jesus led-up of the Spirit into the wilderness, etc.
HEre we have the Field where our Savior coped with our adversary the Devil,
and the Manner how he was brought thither: He was led-up of the Spirit. Which
motion excludes both all violence in the person leading, and all rashness and
inconsiderateness in the person lead. The Spirit leads gently: and the quiet
and gentle leading of the Spirit is as a document to us not to follow
unadvisedly, or indeed rather not to outrun the Spirit. For when we run thus
in haste, we commonly run our selves out of breath. (...), says Nazianzene;
Every man is commonly very hot in the beginning; but the nearer and nearer he
comes to the object, the fainter and fainter he grows; and when he meets it, he
falls down for want of spirit; now a zelote, anon a Laodicean; now consumed
with zeal, anon chill and cold; now a Seraphim, but by and by a stone. The
reason hereof is from the Will of man, which may easily be inclined and carried
to any object, though never so terrible, whilst there is nothing to move the
Sense, and by the Sense (...), the irrational part of the soul; because there
the Reason does but fight with a shadow and representation of evil, but here
with the evil it self full of horror and affrightment, naked as it is: Which
now has a double force, both upon the Sense and Apprehension, and by its
operation on the one multiplies its terror on the other; and the more it is
felt, the more it is understood; far more terrible in its approach then in our
books or contemplation. And therefore it will not be safe for us to challenge
and provoke a temptation, but to arm and prepare our selves against it; to
stand upon our guard, and neither to offer battle, nor yet refuse it. Sapiens
feret ista, non eliget; It is the part of a wise man not to seek for evil, but
to endure it. And to this end it concerns every man to exercise (...), his
spiritual wisdom, that he may discover Spiritus ductiones, and diaboli
seductiones, the Spirit's leadings, and the Devil's seducements; lest he do not
only seek tentations, but create them; and make that a provocation to evil,
which bespeaketh only his obedience or patience; lest I conceive that the
Spirit sends me when I resist him, when I do (...), fall cross with him, and
run violently against him. And this we have gained by the Spirit's Leading.

We descend now in campum certaminis, into the place of trial, the Wilderness:
For thither Jesus was led; amongst the wild beasts, says St. Mark; into the
most forsaken and solitary desert, as some have made the discovery; a
mountainous place between Jerusalem and Jericho, not far from Galgala, the
place where he that fell amongst thieves was wounded, where Luke 10. 20.
John Baptist was before he baptized. And their conjecture is probable, because
that desert is near unto Jordan: So that the journey was not long from Jordan,
where Christ was baptized, to this desert, where he was tempted. We will not
stand much upon the place, or curiously search whether it were this or any
other; but rather modestly inquire the reasons why our Savior would withdraw
himself into a solitary place, there to be tempted. And here, as we cannot be
so unreasonable as to think that Christ had no reason to induce him to withdraw
himself for a while, (for this were to conceive that he was led thither by
chance, and not by the Spirit) so we must not coin reasons of our own, and then
set his image and superscription upon them; not frame conclusions, and then
make his actions, which are nothing like them, the premises out of which they
are naturally drawn. For this has been the mother of all Error and
Superstition: And, as Martin Luther says, Nihil periculosius Sanctorum gestis,
Nothing is more dangerous then the actions of the Saints when they are
mistaken; so may we of Christ's. For whilst we dote upon our own phansies, and
then gaze and look to find them in the action of this Saint or that, or of
Christ himself, by a kind of justice it falls out that we lose our sight, and
walk in the dark, and think, when we have buried our selves alive in idleness,
and a fruitless solitude, that even then we are with John Baptist, or with our
Savior, in the Wilderness. The resolution of Tertullian is most safe, malo
minus sapere, quam contra; It is better a great deal to know less, then amiss;
And not to know every reason which moved our Savior to this retiredness, then
for some ends of our own peremptorily to conclude this or that was the reason,
which is none at all. Diverse conjectures are given by the learned: I. That he
was led into the Wilderness to find that Sheep which was lost in Paradise, in
the desert of the world. II. To provoke the Enemy, and conquer him in his own
place: for he is said to walk through dry places. III. To draw the picture, as
it were, and propose to Matthew. 1^. 13.
us the true pattern of a Poenitentiary, who must learn to go out of the world
by contemning it, as those did whose faith is commended Hebr. 11. Of whom the
world was not worthy, who wandered in deserts and in mountains, and in dens and
caves of the earth. IV. To be free from importunity and trouble, that he might
fast without interruption his full forty days. V. For prayer; which requires
the collection and retirement of the whole man. VI. To add authority to his
preaching and doctrine, that by his secession he might be thought to be sent
from God, as Elijah and John Baptist were. VII. Some have been so bold as to
conclude, that here he laid the foundation of a Monastical and Eremitical life;
as if, because Christ went aside for forty days, they were most like unto
Christ who did seclude themselves in deserts, in caves, in cells, or shut up
themselves between two walls all the days of their life. Many other reasons
have been framed, according to the several constitutions and tempers of men's
minds, and a^ every man has been willing to find himself in Christ. We shall
make choice of some few, not censuring any but the last; and draw up all within
the compass of these three: 1. That he was led into the wilderness to prepare
himself for his great work and office; or rather, to teach us so to do, and not
to venture upon any high employment without due preparation. 2. To sequester
himself for prayer; to teach us to be alone, to take our selves from the world,
when we pray. 3. Lastly, by this his retirement to draw to us a resemblance of
a Christian man's life, which is nothing else but a secession and a holy
pilgrimage out of the world. And having past over these, we shall in the close
remove the pretended reason which draws down this action of Christ to
countenance and confirm that high and ungrounded estimation which many have of
a solitary life, placing perfection in that alone, as if a Christian never
appeared in his full beauty but when he comes forth in a Monks cowle or in the
habit of a Pilgrim and Eremite. Of these in their order.

And first, our blessed Savior, before he puts his hand to that great work
which was enjoined him by his Father, withdraws himself from the society of
men, and from the sight of his parents, afflicts his body with fasting, and
fills his mind with holy and divine meditations. And this he did, as for us men
and our salvation, so for our instruction also, teaching us not only (...), by
his precepts, but also (...), by his example, to fit and prepare our selves for
our office, and not to attempt any work of his (...), with unwashed hands. Thus
did Moses and Elijah, and Jeremiah, (...), separate themselves for a while to
God alone, says Nazianzene; then to receive (...), a divine initiation; and
then to give precepts, to work miracles, and prophecy. Thus did Basil and
Nazianzene and Augustine and other holy men of God withdraw themselves, and
laying aside all other cares, were intent on themselves alone and on God: And in
this solitude, as in a heavenly shop, as the Father speaks, they did shape and
form Christ in themselves, that from thence they might come forth more able
servants of their Master, and more learned teachers to the people, and might
present Christ unto them as they by long study had formed him in themselves;
present him as a meek Savior to the Angry, as a liberal Redeemer to the
Covetous, as a Patient Master to the Froward; that they might present him in
such a shape as that the beauty of it might transform others into the likeness
of him. Thus did they go as it were with Moses into the Sanctuary, and seek for
light and counsel from God, that they might after break forth into action, and
shine as bright in the world. It is reported of Augustine, and he writes of it
himself, that being urged by Valerian the Bishop to take the common care and
government of the people upon him, he earnestly withstood him, and with many
entreaties besought him that in the time of Lent he might cease from that
labor, and prepare himself for that office legendo, orando, plangendo, by
reading and prayer and mourning, and thus become acquainted with those ways
and means whereby which he might labor with more happiness in his work. Many
like examples might be brought. But this has been the practice not only of
holy men, but of heathen men. Thus did Tully and Antony and Crassus make way to
that honor and renown which they afterward purchased in eloquence; Thus did
they pass a solitudine in scholas, a scholis in forum, from their secret
retirements into the schools, and from the schools into the pleading-place.
Thus did Demosthenes by his looking-glass in his chamber learn that gesture
which might take the eye of the spectator, and by the noise of the sea learnt
to bear the tumult of the auditory: So that Valerius Maximus says wittily of
him, Alterum Demosthenem matter, alterum industria enixa est; His Mother brought
forth one Demosthenes, and his Industry another. And this even Nature it self
teaches: Nihil magnum cito vult effici: Nature has so ordered it, that
nothing of any great moment can be suddenly brought forth. Every work must find
us fitted and prepared for it, or else, when we set about it, we shall find it
will fly out of our reach, For every great work is res difficilis and morosa,
coy and hard to be woed. Hence the Philosopher gives it as a reason that there
be so few wise men, Quia sapientiam pa^^i dignam putant quam nisi in transitu
cognoscant, Because most men have so low an opinion of Wisdom that they think
her not worth the saluting but by the by. Let us look into our selves, and we
shall find the reason why we are no better then we are, is, Because we do not
reverence our selves, but think that any thing will become us, that we may
retain the honor of a Man, and yet stoop down to those actions which make us
worse then the beasts that perish. And this befalls us in the performance of
any great work; The reason why we do not perfect it as we should is, Because we
do not reverence it as we should. We think to give an Alms is but to fling a
mite into the treasury; to Fast, but to abstein for a day; to Pray, but to say,
Lord, hear me, or (which is worse) to multiply words without sense; to Preach,
but to speak an hour; to be a Hearer, but to come to Church; to be a Bishop,
but to put on a mitre; to be a King, but to wear a crown; And this is to
disesteem and undervalew these duties: This is to be officiperdae in this sense
also, to destroy our work before we begin it. For what place can our work have
amongst those thoughts which stifle it? and where the birth is so sudden and
immature, how can it choose but prove an abortive? I cannot conceive but that
our Savior could have performed the work he came about without this preamble
or preparation: but yet in honor to this great work he would first step aside,
and not suddenly enter upon it, but by degrees; first retire, and fast, and
pray, and then work miracles; To teach us that a Christian is not made up in
haste, that no good work will beget it self between our fingers, nor come
toward us unless we fit and prepare our selves to meet it. And yet some there
be who are willing to think that this is more then needs; that it is in the
greatest profession that is as it was in the Cirque-shews amongst the Romans,
Odiosa circensibus pompa, that as there, so in this, all pomp and show and
preparation is in vain; that the sooner they enter upon it, the more dextrous
they shall be in the performance; Divines, as Nazianzene terms them, of a day
old, made up ut e luto statua, as soon as you can make a statue of clay. No
desert that they will go to, no cell that they will retire to, no secession
that they will make; but presently upon the work they enter, leap into the
Pulpit; and there they stir and make a noise, semper agentibus similes, like
unto those who are always busy; or indeed rather like unto those spirits in
minerals that Cornelius Agrippa speaks of, which digg and cleanse and sever the
metals, but when men come to view their work, they find nothing is done. With
these men there are no (...), no prefaces, no (...), nothing to be learnt
first. All with them is the Work, no study or preparations: All is working of
miracles: And indeed one great miracle they work; Docent antequam discunt, They
teach that which they never learnt; and their skill and art is so teach men
that they shall be more ignorant then before. Our Savior here is led by the
Spirit into the wilderness to prepare him for his work; but these will not
prepare themselves because they pretend they are led by the Spirit. Nor is this
evil of yesterday, or which befalls the weakest only: but the Devil has used
it in all ages as an engine to undermine this good work; What men are not able
to manage for want of due consideration, to bring in the Spirit as a supply.
Tertullian was as wise a man as the Church had any, but being not able to prove
the corporeity of the Soul, he flies to Revelation in his book De Anima; Non
per ^stimationem, sed revelationem; We cannot make this good by judgment, but
by revelation: Post Joannem quoque prophetiam meruimus consequi; We have our
Revelations as well as St. John. Our sister Priscilla has plenty of them; she
has her traunces in the Church, and converseth with Angels, and with God
himself, and can discern the hearts and inward thoughts of man. St. Hierom
speaking of a Monk in his time, thus describes him; (...), There is start up a
man who has exactly learnt all knowledge without a teacher, full of the
spirit, his own master; who like a Carneades can dispute both for and against
the truth; who needs no preparation, but can do what he will, and when he will.
But this is not the Spirits manner of Leading: for he leads us by degrees and
by a certain method. For even so he led our Savior, first into the wilderness,
and then to his work. And though his leading of the Apostles were
extraordinary, yet even them he commands to stay at Jerusalem, and to expect
his coming. And although their determinations were subscribed to with a VISUM
EST SPIRITUI SANCTO, It seems Good to the holy Ghost, yet they conferred one
with another, met together in council, and did deliberate before they did
determine. Nor did they once imagine that they had the Spirit in a string, or
could command him when they pleased, or call him down to help them in their
work sedendo and votis, by sitting still and doing nothing; that he would fly
down unto them, and sit upon them, though they slept. Much less can we imagine
that he will wait upon our spirit and humor, and when we have cripled and
disenabled our selves for any service of his, in a moment anoint and supple our
joints, and make us active for the highest calling; when we have put our selves
into prison, even thrown our selves into the dark and loathsome dungeon of
Ignorance, that he will come to us as the Angel did to Peter, Acts 12. and
smite us on the side, and raise us up, and bid us arise up quickly, and go on
an embassage which we do not know; go set our hands to his plough, which are a
great deal fitter for another. Certainly to be a Disciple of Christ is a
greater work then to cast our garment about us, to take up the habit of a
Minister. No: we must be led into some secret and solitary place, there to fast
and pray, to fit and prepare our selves for the work which we have to do, there
to taste how sweet the word of God is, to ruminate and chaw upon it as it were
and digest it, to fasten it to our very soul and make it a part of us, and by
daily meditation so to profit that all the mysteries of Faith and precepts of
Holiness may be as vessels are in a wellordered family, ready at hand to be
used upon any occasion. Now this we may imagine to be the work of the Spirit
alone: and so it is; but of the Spirit leading us into the desert, placing us
on the mount of Contemplation, there by long study and industry to learn
confusa disterminare, hiantia cogere, sparsu colligere; to separare those
things which are confused and mixed together; to separate Fear from Despair, and
Confidence from Presumption; to draw and unite those things together which are
severed, as Faith and good Works, Knowledge and Practice; and to join together
those Texts which bid us rejoice with them which bid us mourn, those which
command our Zeal with those which exact our Meekness. Et diligentia and pietas
adhibenda est, says St. Augustine; altera fiat ut quaerentes inveniamus,
altera ut scire mereamur: We must make use both of our Diligence and Piety; by
the one we find when we seek, by the other we are filled both to seek and find.
Unless we follow the Spirit in this his Leading, we have no reason to expect he
should lead us further. Aliud est esse vatem, aliud esse interpretem, says St.
Hierome; It is one thing to be a prophet, another to be an interpreter of
Scripture. There the Spirit foretells things to come; here by our industry and
skill in language we give that sense which the words will best bear: Those
interpretations now-adayes which are entitled to the Spirit are so dark and
obscure, ut interpretes interpret indigeant, that we must take the pains to
interpret the interpreters, and find greater difficulty in their explanations
then in the Text it self. It will be good therefore first to prepare our selves
in private before we lift up our voice like a trumpet; and, if we will be
(...), workers together, with the Spirit, to work as he directs us. It is a
rule in Quintillian, Ut praeceptorum est docere, ita discipulorum est praebere
se dociles: As it is the office of the Master to teach, so is it of the Scholar
to be attentive and apt to learn. And it holds true in Divinity also; As the
Spirit is our teacher, so are we bound to observe those rules which he has
drawn out for all those who will be his followers. Res enim aliter coalescere
nequit sine discentis docentisque concordia; For this business will not close
and be brought together without an agreement on both sides. If the Spirit will
first lead me into the wilderness, and I will presently to the streets of
Jerusalem, it is not likely my message should be from the Spirit, whom I have
left behind me in the desert. And therefore to prepare our selves to this work,
we must observe those rules which a learned Physician gives for the finding out
of the truth; There must be 1. Amor operis, a Love of the work; 2. (...), a
love of industry, and earnest study in our preparation; 3. (...), a methodical
proceeding and progress; 4. (...), practice, and exercitation, and a conformity
of our operations to the work. And this gold, though it be brought from Ophir,
yet may be useful for those who are the living temples of the holy Ghost. My
Love kindles a fire in me, and makes me active; my Industry is ruled by method,
that it be not fruitless; and all is confirmed by Practice: and then the Spirit
(...), sets his seal and impression and character, and makes it a good work.

And first, if we ask the question, What moved Christ to make this preparation?
we cannot better answer then by saying it was his Love unto the work; That he,
having loved us first, might provoke us to love him again, and prepare our
selves to our work. And to this end Love is a passion imprinted in us, says
Gregory Nyssene, (...), to this good end, to be leveled and fixed on the work
of our Salvation; Where when it is once fastened, it is restless and unquiet. It
will into the wilderness, though it meet with the Devil himself. It passes all
difficulties whatsoever; and nihil erubescit nisi nomen difficultatis, and is
not ashamed of any thing, but that any thing should be too hard and heavy for
it. Heat and Light are the two ornaments of the Sun, joined and united
together; and quo calidior radius, est lucidior; the hotter the beams are the
more light there is. So the Love of a good work and the good Work which we love
are as nearly united together as Heat and Light; and the more Heat in my Love,
the more Light in my Work; and the more my Light shines forth, the more my Love
increases. They both are one to another, both mother and daughter, both
begotten and begetting.

For again, the love of knowledge, which fits and prepares us to the work of
the Gospel, brings in (...), a love of labor and industry; Which will not do
things by halves, nor bring us to the chair till we have sat at the feet of
Gameliel. Thus it is in all the passages of our life. We propose nothing to our
selves of any great moment, which we can presently conquer. (...), says Basil;
Even the things of the Devil are not attained without labor and sweat. How
laborious is thy Revenge? how busy thy Cruelty? how watchful and studious thy
Lust? What penance does thy Covetousness put thee to? Vitia magno coluntur,
says Seneca; Even our vices cost us dear, and stand us at a high rate. And can
we expect such an easy and quick dispatch of those things which bring along
with them an eternal weight of glory? Can a negligent and careless glance upon
the Bible, can our aerie and empty speculations, can our confidence and
ignorance straight make us Evangelists? Or is it probable that Truth should
come up e profundo putei, from the bottom of the well, and offer it self to
them who stand idle at the mouth and top of it, and will let down no bucket to
draw it up? This indeed is now-adayes conceived to be the Spirits manner of
Leading, not about by the Wilderness, by a sequestered life, but straight to
Jerusalem, to the holy City; where there is little enquiry made whether they
have been at Jacobs well, and let down their bucket; where by many God is
served in spirit, but not in truth: And so they be born again of the Spirit, no
matter for this water. Who glory in their ignorance, and amant ignorare, cum
alii gaudeant cognovisse, as Tertullian speaks; Whereas others can receive no
satisfaction or content but in knowledge, their great joy it is to be ignorant.
Some truth there is in what they say, that the Spirit is an omnipotent agent,
but ill applied by them, That since he can do all things, he will also teach
those who will be ignorant, and who do him this great honor to call him Master,
when there are no greater non-proficients in the world, ever learning of this
good Master, and yet never coming to the knowledge of the truth. It is true,
the Spirit is a powerful agent; but it is as true that he is a free agent, and
will not teach them who will not learn; will not bring us to Jerusalem unless
we will first follow him into the desert; qui pulcherrimo cuique operi
proposuit difficultatem, who on purpose has placed some rubs and difficulties
between us and Knowledge, that we may with labor and anxiety work out a way
unto it. He has cast some darkness upon Scripture, that our Industry may
strive to dispel it: and in some places, as Heraclitus speaks of the Oracle of
Delphos, (...), he does neither plainly manifest, nor yet hide the truth, but
leaves some glimpse and intimation, that we may search and find it out. It was
the saying of Scaevo^a the Lawyer, Jus vigilantibus scriptum, That the Civil
Law was written to men awake, who could look about them, (...), as Cujacius
adds out out of the Basilicae, not to men asleep. And can we then think that
that Knowledge which is saving, which must make us happy, is of so easy
purchase that it will be sown in every ground, or, as the Devils Tares, will
grow up whilst we sleep? There is indeed that relation, that sympathy, betwixt
the Soul of man and the Truth that there is between the Seed and the Ground:
but if it be not tilled and manured, if not cultivated and prepared, it will
yield never an ear of corn, but bring forth briars and thorns.

But we leave this, and pass to the third, which is, Method and orderly
proceeding in the ways of our calling. As in all Sciences, so in the
businesses of Christianity, we must not think to huddle up matters hand over
head, as we please. Nemo vellus portat ad fullonem; no man carries his fleece
to the Fuller first, before it be spun out and woven: Si te titillat clericatus
desiderium, says St. Hierome; If thou have a kind of spiritual itch, and be
tickled with a desire of being a Preacher, if thou think the nearest way to
heaven is to go up into the Pulpit, yet at least discas quod possis docere,
learn that first which thou may after teach, and think there is a pair of
stairs unto Knowledge as well as into the Pulpit, and that thither thou must
ascend by steps and by degrees. Learn it by thy Sermon; if any thing may be
learnt out of it; that as thou dividest thy Text, and thou handlest each part
in its order, so thou must divide the parts of thy life, and spend them upon
those particulars which will promote thy knowledge. Sunt gradus multi per quos
ad domum Veritatis ascenditur, says Lactantius; There be certain steps and
degrees by which we ascend into the house of Truth, and we must pass step by
step unto it. For she will admit of no guests who will leap over the wall, but
of those only who come orderly and mannerly in. She looks down as it were upon
us, and observes how we come toward her. If we are upon the wing, or leap up
two or three steps at once, she shuts her door and turns her back upon us. To
see him a Master of a Ship in the Adriatic Sea, who could never rule a
cock-boat in a fish pond, him a Captain who was never yet a Soldier, and him a
teacher who is to learn, is a strange kind of (...), an immethodical disorderly
proceeding, which is used in the world: and what can the issue be but a
Shipwreck, a Defeat, gross Ignorance and Confusion?

The last is (...), exercise and practice of truths in that order in which we
learnt there. This is of singular use to drive them home, as a nayl is by the
masters of the assemblies, to make them enter the soul and the spirit, the
joints and the marrow; to do something by way of preparation which may bear
some affinity and correspondence with the (...), the chief work, we have to do.
Our preparations must not be like to those prefaces and proems which the old
Orators used to frame and lay by them to serve for any tract or oration: but it
must be such as will fit and join it self to the work, and be one entire piece.
You see our Savior here makes use of Solitude and Fasting and Prayer: and what
more agreeable then these to the work which he had to do, which was indeed to
go about doing good, and then to suffer death for the sin of the world, which
was now no paradise but a wilderness? It is a sign of a happy progress when our
preparation is a kind of type and presage of our work; when our rising is fair;
when the beholder may say, He is much given to meditation; it is like he will
be a Divine; He is gone into the wilderness, he has retired himself; sure he
has some great work in hand. But the event is most unprosperous when Idleness
and Ignorance are made the key of the Scripture, when Darkness must usher in
the Light, and Belial be a forerunner to God. No work ends well which begins
not well, which is taken in hand without due preparation. When we have taken
any great work upon us, it will be good for us to follow our Saviors method,
first retire from the world, and go out into the wilderness; first fast and
pray, and then work miracles. And so much be spoken of the first reason of our
Saviors Secession, his Preparation to his work.

The second is, That he might be fitter for Prayer. In monte orationi adhaeret;
miracula in urbibus exercet; For Prayer he chooses the mountain, for his Works
the city. He prayed all night, says the Father, and wrought his miracles in
the day. Our Savior often retired, as we find in Scripture, and for this end.
And when he gives us directions for Prayer, one is, Enter into thy chamber,
into thy closet; Shut thy door; Hide thy self for a little Isa. 26. 20.
time. Which are works pointing out to those things which must be done without
noise. Every good work requires the whole man, a soul divided and taken from
the world; but especially Prayer, which is ascensus mentis in Deum, a kind of
an ascent of the mind unto God. SURSUM CORDA, Lift up your hearts; They are
(...), mystical words: But how can we lift up a heart of flesh. It is much it
should ascend, having such a weight upon it as the Body, having an Eve which
cannot always be closed, an Ear which cannot ever be shut; but when the weight
of Sin hangs upon it, when it is clogged with impertinent thoughts, how should
it ascend? Nunc creberrime in oratione mea aut per porticus deambulo, aut de
faenore computo, says St. Hierome; Now many times it falls out in my prayer
that I do nothing less then pray: I cry for Mercy, but the thought of Judgment
is loud; I pray for chastity, when lustful thoughts sport in my heart. I walk,
I talk, I fight, I dispute, I tell money in my prayer; and indeed I do but say
my prayers. Therefore intention of mind is most necessary to Prayer; which is
torn and distracted if it be not fastened on God alone. (...), is thought to be
an Apostolical Constitution; Be thou not double-minded in thy prayer. Let not
one thought stifle another, the thought of the world quench the desire of a
blessing. Let not thy wandering imaginations contradict thy Prayers. Let not thy
Devotion be stained with blood, or polluted with lust, or spotted with the
world. Quomodo te a Deo audiri postulas, says Cyprian, cum teipsum non audis?
How can thou hope to be heard of God, when thou do not hear thy self; how
can thou expect that he should understand thee, when thou can not tell thy
self what thou meanst? when thou art to thy self a barbarian? How can thy soul
parley with thy God in such a Fair and concourse of evil thoughts? How can
thou ask a blessing from the Father which is now in heaven, when thou have so
many companions about thee from the earth earthly? Thou ask for bread, but
thou desire a stone: Thou ask for grace, but thy mind is on riches: Thou
ask fish, but thy hand is reached out to that Serpent which will sting thee
to death. It might be said unto thee as St. Hierome once said to his Friend
when he found him in ill company, What make you in such a troop? What do thou
on thy knees, when so many loose thoughts round thee about? What should a
beadsman do in such a throng? But this, miserable men that we are! many times
befalls us, because we do not retire, and call our thoughts out of the world.
It is true that Devotion may mingle it self with the common actions of our
life. Arator ad stivam HALLELUIAH cantat, The plowman may sing an Halleluiah at
the plow-tail. He may collect some sacred colloquie. SERERE NE METUAS; If I
miss this season, I shall have no harvest: If I remember not God in my youth,
he will forsake me in my age. And God hears from heaven that prayer of his
which he makes with his bow or hammer in his hand. But yet many times in the
affairs of our life there is a kind of dust gathered, which soyls and darkens
the brightness of our Devotion; Which when we have brushed off by sequestring
our thoughts from the world, it will be more clear. Sometimes we must, as St.
Hierome speaks, Intrinsecus esse cum Deo, be within in our hearts with God
alone, so busy in our colloquie with him, so amazed at his Majesty, so
trembling at his Justice, so ravished at his Mercy, so swallowed up in the
contemplation of him, that we even forget our selves, that we lose our selves,
that we annihilate our selves; that we have eyes, and see not; ears, and hear
not: that when a covetous thought would steal in at the windows of our eyes, we
may be blind; and if music be loud, we may not hear it. Some have so wrought
upon themselves that they have forgot to eat, to taste, to speak. The Legend
tells us of St. Agnes, as I remember, that in her devotion she was lifted three
foot above the ground. And he that wrote the life of St. Bernard reports it of
him, that he was so given to prayer and meditation, that living a whole year in
his cell or chamber in a Monastery, when he came forth, he knew not whether it
were cieled or no; and when there were several windows in it obvious to the
eye, he thought there had been but one. In these, whether fables or truths,
this truth is pointed to, That when we tender our prayers to God, we should
abstract our selves from our selves and from the things of the world; That we
should not come to him till we have cast our cares and our thoughts behind us.
The Beads-mans Motto is, NON ALIUD NUNC CURO QUAM NE CUREM; I have but one care
in this world, and that is, that I may never have more. When I call upon God,
God does as it were put forth his hand and beckon to me to escape from the
world, not to be multiplex and varium animal, not to divide and distract my
self, and part my self out to variety of objects; but be one in my self, that I
may be one with him. The Psalmist prays unto God, Psalm. 86. 11. Unite my heart
to fear thy name. The Vulgar rendereth it, LAETETUR COR MEUM, Let my heart
rejoice. Hierome out of the Hebrew, UNICUM FAC COR MEUM, Make my heart one and
alone. And so Symmachus, (...), which is the same. Aquila; SIT COR MEUM (...),
Let my heart be alone; Let it be more retired and secluded from the world then
any Monk, that it may be free from the thought of things below, that it may
behold nothing but thee, that it may be all thine; that in respect of the world
it may be like unto those who have been dead long ago. Thus when the Mind is
taken from the Sensual part, it begins to reflect upon it self, and then
beholds its own wants, its want of piety, its want of sincerity; then it
beholds ictus and laniatus, those gashes and wounds which Sin has made in it;
then it sees clearly to behold that receptacle, which should have been a temple
of the holy Ghost, turned into a stews, a place for Ohini and Ziim to dance in,
for the Devil to sport in. And after this sad survey of it self, it is restless
and unquiet; it strives to empty it self of sin, to vent it self out in sighs
and groans unspeakable, to send it self gushing out of the eyes in rivers of
tears, and to breath it self forth at the mouth by an humble confession. And
now, whether in the body or out of the body we cannot well tell, but it makes
haste to be at rest, it presses forward toward the Mercy-seat, and is as
restless in her importunity as she was in her sin; never gives over till those
wounds and gashes be cured by the blood of her Savior, till his sighs and
groans speak for ours; never rests till the hand of Mercy wipe all tears from
our eyes, and treasure them up in a bottle. This is the work of a devout soul.
And he that will be such a Beads-man, must make his Senses follow his Mind, and
not his Mind his Senses; which may be brought, says Pliny, to have no other
object then that which the Mind has; when they are taken from their own. And
thus I learn to be blind, though I have light; to be deaf, though I have my
hearing; with our Savior to go out of the world into the wilderness, or by my
Christian art make the world it self a desert.

And here to shut up what has been said with a short application to our
selves; We of this Nation, in the first place, have great reason to be jealous
over our selves with a godly jealousy, and just cause to fear that we have not
come so prepared to duty as we ought. For what has been the fruit and effect
of these our many Fasts, of these our many Prayers? Certainly, the cloud which
hung over our heads is more thick and dark then before. And, as the Prophet
speaks, The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind, Isa. 9. 12.
and they both devour Israel with open mouth. For all this his anger is not
turned away, but his hand is stretched out still. What shall we say? Has God
forgotten to be merciful? or is that inexhausted fountain of Goodness drawn
dry? Or can the God of peace delight in those civil or uncivil broyls? Can he
that shed his blood for us delight to see ours spilt as water on the ground?
No: We must seek for the reason at home in our own breasts; and St. James has
shown us how we should find it, chap. 4. 2, 3. Ye lust, and have not: ye kill,
and desire to have, and cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not,
because ye ask not. Ye ask, and receive not, because ye ask amiss. We pray for
Peace, and lift up hands full of blood and oppression. We pray to God to settle
the pillars of the Kingdom, when our study is to shake them; to be favorable
to Sion, when we fight against it. And therefore says God, When you spread
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and when you make many prayers, I
will not hear: for your hearts are full Isa. 1. 15.
of blood. Will we have our prayers effectual? We must take the Prophets
counsel in the next verse, Wash you, make you clean from oppression, cruelty
and deceit. This is the best preparation to Prayer. If we will hearken unto
God, he will incline his ear to us; and if we love Peace, and pursue it, the
God of peace will give it. Thus if we we call upon him, he will hear; and thus
if we cry unto him, he will answer, here I am. Here I am, as ready to crown you
with blessings as you are to ask them, as ready to send peace within your walls
as you are to desire it, ready to crown you with external peace here, and with
eternal hereafter.

Again, when we pray we must follow our Saviors example, and withdraw our
selves and retire. When he had sent the multitude away, he went Matthew. 14. 23.
up into a mountain apart to pray. And he went forward a little, and fell Mark
14. 35.
on the ground, and prayed. In Gethsemane he withdrew himself from his
Disciples, that he might more freely pour forth his soul unto God. Retiredness
is most fit for passionate and affectionate prayers. Then our passions may best
vent themselves: Then our Indignation, our Fear, our vehement Desire, our Zeal,
our Revenge, may work freely upon the whole man; 2 Cor. 7. 11.
may force tears from our eyes, and sobs from our tongues; may beat our
breasts, and cast our bodies on the ground. Then Ingeminations and Reiterations
and Expostulations are more seasonable. That which peradventure Modesty would
stifle in company, in our secret retirements is the true eloquence of a wounded
soul. There God will hear us when we speak, and he will hear us when we do not
speak. He will understand us when we express our selves; and he will understand
us when our sorrows and tears are so great that we cannot express our selves.
There every sigh is a prayer, every groan a loud cry: and though our language
be imperfect, and come short of our wants, yet is it easy and plain to him,
because it comes from a broken heart. And therefore what here by ensample
Christ teaches us, he gives us a rule, To pray in private, To pray in our
closet, and he promises Matthew. 6. 5, 6.
that our Father that sees, that hears in secret, will reward us openly. He
will lead us through the wilderness of this world into a paradise of pleasure,
where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes; where there shall be no more
sorrow, no more travel, no more fighting; but peace, and rest, and joy and
glory for evermore.

We have done now with the two first reasons, or conjectures rather, why our
blessed Lord and Master went into the wilderness. We come now to the third;
which was, That by this his Retirement he might draw out to us the resemblance
of a Christian man's life, which is nothing else but a Secession and holy
Pilgrimage out of the world. For as the Wilderness is indeed a part of the
world, and yet in a manner out of the world, so is Christ in the wilderness a
fair representation of a Christian, who lives in the world yet is not of the
world, who is a part of the world, yet separate from it; who is no sooner born
into the world, but is taught to renounce it. As Joseph is called a Nazarite in
the Latin Translation; not that he was of Genesis 49. 26.
that order, or observed their Law, which was made many ages after; but that by
his strictness and severity of life, by his piety and innocence, he was severed
and removed from others, whose lives were irregular; and therefore he is said
to be separate from his brethren. Or as Macarius calls a virtuous man (...), a
stranger, a barbarian to the World, in St. Paul's sense, because he understands
not the World, nor the World him. The 1 Cor. 14. 11.
Apostle repeats it again and again, that the Patriarchs were but strangers
Heb. 11.
in the land which was given them; in their own land, yet strangers. Howsoever
God had promised them an inheritance in Canaan, yet they took his word in
another and higher sense, of the spiritual Canaan. They abode in the land of
promise as in a strange country, looking for a city having a foundation, whose
builder and maker is God: Which was to make a wilderness; in Canaan; nay, to
make the land of Promise it self a Wilderness. Hence St. Hierome is positive
and peremptory, That the Saints in Scripture are no where called inhabitatores
terrae, the Inhabitants of the Earth, or of the World; but that it is a name
always given to sinners and wicked persons, to those of whom it is written, Woe
to the inhabitants of the earth. St. Augustine Rev. 8. 13.
says, the wicked do only habitare in mundo, dwell and have their residence in
this world, and may pass into a worse, but never into a better place; but the
righteous can only be said esse, to be there, to have a being and existence
there; to be there as the Angels are said by the Schoolmen to be in uno loco
quod non sint in alio, to be in one place, not circumscriptively, but because
they are not in another; to be in the world, but not of the world; to be in
this world, because they are not yet in the other; to be on earth, because they
are not yet in heaven. It is a hard saying this, and an unwelcome doctrine to
flesh and blood, to the children of this world; That we should be sent into the
world ideo ut exeamus, to this end that we should go out of it; be placed in
Jerusalem, and then bid to go out into the wilderness; be seated in such a
paradise, and then driven out of it, even whilst we are in it; be set to till
the ground from whence we are taken, to digg and labor as in a mine, and then
be taught to be afraid and run from the works of our own hands: to see Beauty,
which we must not touch; Fruit, which we must not taste; Riches and Treasure,
which we must tread under foot. It is indeed a hard saying; but even Scripture
and Reason have made it good, and sealed and ratifi^d it for a truth. They are
not of the world, even as I am not of the world, says Christ John 17. 16.
of his Disciples. A Christian is no more of the world then Christ himself. I
have chosen you out of the world: which is in a manner a drawing them John 15.
19.
out into the Wilderness. I have chosen you out of the world, to hate and
contemn it, to renew and reform it; to fight against the lust of the flesh, the
lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, which is (...), all that is in the
world. 1 John 2. 16.
St. John the beloved Disciple, who leaned on Christ's breast, was nearest to
him, and learned this doctrine from him, exhorts us not to love the 1 John 2.
15.
world, nor the things of this world. And not to love it here is to hate it;
and Hatred is as a wing to carry us away in haste into some wilderness from
that thing we hate. If we hate the world, we shall not endure to look upon it,
much less to stay and dwell in it, or build a tabernacle here. Love not the
world. Fly afar off, and retire not only from those sins and vices which all
men know and confess to be so, which are branded with a mark, and carry their
shame in their forhead, but even from those deviations and enormities which by
the profit and advantage they bring have gained some credit and repute amongst
men, have not only escaped the stroke of reprehension, but are crowned with
praise; and because they thwart not the statutes of Omri, and may consist with
the laws of men, are new Christians as it were, and have the names of those
virtues given them which are perfect and consummate in that obedience alone
which is due to the Gospel of Christ and to the Law of God. Love not the world,
is a sequestring, a kind of deportation, a banishment of us not only out of the
world, but out of the confines and borders of it, even from that which weak
Christians, and not yet perfect men in Christ, judge to be no part of the
World. Love it not; look down upon it, crucify it, as St. Paul did. By the
virtue of Christ's cross I am crucified to the world. The World looks Gal. 6. 14.
down upon me with scorn and contempt and indignation. And the world is
crucified unto me; I look down upon it with the like scorn and contempt. I pass
by it, and revile it, and wag my head; I look upon it as upon a dead corpse,
which I must not touch; as upon a crucified thief, who is exposed to shame. To
conclude this; As Christ withdrew himself from the City and multitude into the
Wilderness, so does the Christian withdraw himself from the World: He is not of
the World, he is chosen out of it; he loves it not, but looks upon it as upon a
dead carrion, and crucified carkase, a loathed object, an abomination, which
threatens not only the ruin of the Temple, but even of Christianity it self.

And this will be more evident, if we consider the nature either of Man, that
is led, or of the Spirit, that leads us; Man being elemented and made up in
this world to look toward another, and the Spirit of God being a lover of Man,
a lover of the image of God, and ready to lead him out. For first as Man, when
he builds a house, first sits down, and consults what use he shall put it to;
so God, the Creator of the world, who made the world for man's sake, made up Man
also to be made an ensample of his Wisdom and Goodness, made him to worship
him, chalked out his way, beckoned and called loud after him to follow him in
that way, that so at last, as it were by so many steps and degrees, by the
example of his Son and the conduct of his Spirit he might bring him out of the
world unto himself. I have made thee, I have created thee, I have formed thee
for my Isa. 43. 7.
glory, says God by his Prophet; to communicate my goodness and wisdom, to
make thee partaker of the Divine nature, to make thee a kind of God upon earth,
by which according to thy measure and capacity thou may represent and
express God. In homine quicquid est sibi proficit; There is nothing in Man
which is not advantageous to him, which may not help to carry him through this
world to the region of Happiness. We cannot doubt of his better part, his Soul:
for that being heavenly and a spark, as it were, of the Divine nature, cannot
but look upward and look forward too upon its original; must needs be ashamed
and weary of its house of clay, and be very jealous of the World, which is but
a prison, and has greater darkness and heavier chains to bind and fetter the
Soul it self. And therefore when it looks on the World, and reflects and takes
a full view of it self, and considers that huge disproportion that is between
the World and an immortal Soul, you may find it panting to get out. As the heart
pants after the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, O God, says
David; and, When shall I appear before the living Lord? Now was David
recollected and retired into himself; now was he in his wilderness, communing
with his own heart. We cannot doubt of the Soul, whilst it is a soul, and not
made fleshy, immersed and drowned in sensuality. If it be not led by the Flesh,
but lead it self, out of the world it will, and return to its rest, to its
retirement. But then even the body being thus animated with such a soul, may
help forward the work. Glorify God in your 1 Cor. 6. ^0.
body, says St. Paul. Not only withdraw your Souls, but your Bodies also, out
of the world. For as God breathed in the Soul, so his hands have made and
fashioned the Body, and in his book are all our members written. He made Psalm.
139. 16.
the whole man, both Soul and Body, and built it up as a Temple of his blessed
Spirit. And if the Soul be the Sanctuary, the Body is the Porch: and his hand
moves from the inward parts to the outward, from the Sanctum sanctorum to the
very door and entrance. What is there almost in this our retirement from the
World which is not done by the ministry of the body? Our Fasting, our Prayers,
our Alms, haec de carnis substantia immolantur Deo, these are all sacrificed to
God of the substance of the flesh. What is Martyrdom? That certainly is a
going out of the world. And this advantage we have above the Angels themselves:
We can dye for Christ, which the Angels cannot do, because they have no bodies.
So that you see the end for which Man was made and sent into the world, was to
be ever going out of it. His natural motion, and that which becomes him as Man,
is to move forwards: Which motion is made easier every day by the word of the
Spirit, by the Gospel of Christ, by the power of which the Eye that was open to
vanity is plucked out, the Hand that was reaching at forbidden things is cut
off, the Ear which was open to Every Sirens song is stopped, the Fancy
checked, the Appetite dulled, the Affections bridled, and the whole man
sequestered and abstracted out of the world.

And now, in the second place, if we consider the nature of the Spirit, what
should he inspire Man with but with that which fits him and his condition?
Whither can he, who made him, lead him but to himself, to his original? To all
that are in the world the voice of the Spirit is, Come out of it; escape for
your lives; Look not behind you; neither stay in it. Fly into the wilderness;
Rest your selves in the contemplation of the Goodness and Mercy of God. This is
the dialect of the Spirit: nor can he speak otherwise. For Heaven and Earth are
not so opposite as the Prince of this world and the Spirit of God; Who hates
Mammon, till we make it our friend; reviles the things of this world, till they
help to promote us to things above; forbids those things which are without,
till we make them useful to those things which are within: Who convinces,
reproves, condemns, and will judge the world. If you are so greedy of the
things of this world that you would have stones made bread, if you go into the
City and climb the pinnacle of the Temple, if from the mountain you take a
survey of the kingdoms of the world and the glory of them, you may know who
has you by the hand. The Text does intimate that the Devil does then take us
up. The Spirit of God leads us in the ways of Gods Providence, unknown to the
world; he takes us into the wilderness, far from the noise and business of this
world; he leads us not to the mountain to view kingdoms, but draws us down into
the valley, there by an humble dependence on God to learn to contemn the world.
The Flesh fights against the Spirit; and so does the world; and these are
contrary. And as many as are led by the Spirit, are the sons of God, says St.
Paul: Which they cannot be till they renounce the World. For what is our
Filiation, our Adoption, but a receiving us out of the world into his family?
We must leave the world behind us before we can say, Abba, Father. In a word,
the Spirit of God does in a manner destroy the World before its dissolution;
makes that which men so run after, so woo, so fight for, as dung: or at best,
it makes the world but a Prison, which we must struggle to get out of; but a
Sodom, out of the which we must haste to escape to the holy Hill, to the
mountain, lest we be consumed; or but a Stage to act our parts on, where when
we have reviled, disgraced, and trod it under foot, we must take our Exit, and
go out.

Let us now draw down all this to our selves by use and application. Here we
may easily see what it is to which the Spirit leads us. It leads us out of the
world into the wilderness, from the busy noise and tumults there to the quiet
and sweet repose we may find in the contemplation and working of a future
estate: He leads the carnal man to make him spiritual. For what Ezekiel. 2. 6.
is a Christian man's life but a going out of a world full of Scorpions, a
leaving it behind him by the Conduct of the Spirit? The Spirit leads us not,
cannot lead us, to the Flesh, nor to the World, which spreads a bed of roses
for the Flesh to lie down and sport in. For this is against the very nature of
the Spirit, as much as it is for light bodies to descend or heavy ones to move
upwards. Fire may descend; the Earth may be removed out of its place; the Sun
may stand still, or go back; the sweet influences of the Pleiades may be bound,
and the bonds of Orion may be loosed; Nature may change its course, at the word
and beck of the God of Nature: But this is one thing which God cannot do, He
cannot change himself. The Spirit of God is a lover of Man, a hater of the
World; and from the World he leads Man to himself. He led not Cain into the
field; it was a field of blood. He led not Dinah to see the daughters of the
land; she went out, and was defiled. He led not David to the roof of his house;
it was a fatal prospect, it was but a look, and it let in the lust of the
flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, even all that is in the
world, at once into his heart. But he leads thee to thy chamber, there to
commune with thy own heart: He leads thee to the house of mourning, to learn
the end of all men. He leads thee to the Temple, to behold the beauty of the
Lord. He leads thee from Bethaven to Bethel; from the world, to the place where
his honor dwells. These are the Spirits leadings. His Dictons are, Blessed
are the poor; Blessed are the meek; Blessed are they that mourn. This is no
part of the music of this World. We find in our books of that Semiramis that
famous Queen of Babylon caused this inscription to be written on her Tomb, THAT
HE THAT OPENED IT SHOULD FIND IN IT GREAT TREASURE; which when Darius had read,
allured by this fair and promising inscription, he brake it up, but within
found no treasure, but a writing that told him that, if he had not been a
notorius wicked person, he would not have broken-up the sepulchers of the dead
to look for treasure. We may indeed when we read of Riches and Pleasure and
Glory in the Word, of great Riches, lasting Pleasures, infinite Joy, feed our
selves with false hopes here: but these are but as a fair inscription upon a
Tomb, when we have broken them up, read them uncovered, in their proper sense,
we shall find nothing but Poverty and Sorrow and Dishonor within, and withal a
sharp reproof for those who search the Gospel to find the World there; or walk
to Ophir, to the hills of the robbers, to a Mahumetical Paradise, a Kingdom of
Saints upon earth, a Thousand years pleasure, and persuade themselves the
Spirit has them by the hand, and leads them to it. Beloved, Sensuality and
Ambition are two the greatest enemies the Spirit has, and the Spirit fights
against them. If Diotrephes will have the highest seat, the Spirit leads him
not. If the ground of our Religion be, From hence have we our gain, it is the
Prince of this world and not the Spirit who leads us. If we make Religion to
Lackey it after us, and accomplish our lusts, we have left the Spirit behind
us, and Mammon is our guide. If the Bishop of Rome dream of Kingdoms, of
Universal power and Infallibile judgment, it can be no other Spirit that
guides him but such a one as was sent from Rome in a cloak-bag. If we cry down
Idolatry and commit Sacrilege, we mistake the Spirit; Nor can he lead us to
both: for he that pulls down Idols, will not also beat down his own Temple to
the ground. If we receive the Sacrament, and make it a seal to shut-up Treason,
we have profaned the Spirits seal, and made, as St. Augustine speaks, that
which was a sacrament of piety, a bond of iniquity. If we look and fix our eyes
upon the earth, and, like that bad Actor, cry, Oh Heavens! if we run to Honor
and Riches, and whatsoever our boundless lusts have set up, with a GLORIA
PATRI, Glory to God, in our mouth, it is not the Spirit, but a Legion of
Devils, that speaks in us; for both acknowledge Jesus, but withal ask, What
have we to do with thee? If the World be the hinge we move upon, the Spirit is
not in our company. If the Wheel be not lift up from the earth, you may be sure
no Cherubin moves with it. Therefore, to conclude, let us, as Job speaks, be
afraid of all our works and actions: and if we find the impress of the World or
Flesh upon them, cast them from us as refuse silver and adulterate coin. Never
think that when our walk is toward the Tents of Kedar, the Spirit will bring us
within the Curtains of Solomon. Never think that a pretense will make him our
Companion, when in our walk we grieve, resist and quench him; or when we are
the Devils Captives, that the Spirit of God leads us. He loathes Uncleanness;
but he did not lead those brethren in evil to the murder of the Shechemites.
He looks for the performance of a Vow; but he did not lead Absalom to Hebron.
He will take a gift in his Temple; but not to enrich a Pharisee. He accepts
what is given to the poor; but not that Judas should put it in his purse! O
what an easy matter is it for flesh and blood to call-in the Spirit to
countenance it, and when it follows its own natural swinge, to draw it along
with it, to carry it with more ease and applause to its end? How soon can we
persuade our selves that is lawful which we would have done? Let us not deceive
our selves: Let not Honor, or Riches, or Pleasure, or Power deceive us. For be
the pretense what it will, if our eye be on the World, the Spirit leads us not;
for he leads us out of the World, even into the wilderness, to be sequestered
from the World, to be alone from the World, by abstinence and meditation and
denial of our selves to fight against it. And this is the victory which
overcomes the world, even our Faith, Which is the substance, the expectation,
not of Riches, or Honor, or Pleasure, but of things hoped for, the evidence of
things which are not seen, nor can be seen in this world, but shall be seen and
enjoyed in the world to come.

The Five and Twentieth SERMON. PART III.
MATTHEW. IV. 1. Then was Jesus led-up of the Spirit into the wilderness, to be
tempted of the devil.
WE pass from the circumstance of Place to that of Time, Then was Jesus led to
be tempted; Then, when Jesus was baptized; Then, when the heavens were opened
unto him, and when the Spirit had descended like a Dove, and lighted upon him;
Then, when his Commission was sealed as it were by a voice from heaven, This is
my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased: Then, when he enters upon his
office, he enters upon temptation. Then, when he was washed, did the Devil
attempt to soil him. Then, when the heavens were opened unto him, was hell
opened against him, when the good Spirit descended, was the evil spirit at
hand; and in whom God was well pleased, in him was the Devil ill pleased, and
so made forward against him. By this we may learn that, as God has his time,
so has the Devil his: As God has his NUNC, his Now, of showring down graces
from above, so has the Devil his TUNC, his Then, of drying them up. NUNC
TEMPUS ACCEPTABILE, Now is the acceptable time; Now is the day of salvation,
says God; and NUNC TEMPUS DESTRUCTIONIS, Now is the expected time; Now is the
day of destruction, says the Devil. Time in it self is nothing: Per se non
intelligitur, nisi per actus humanos: All the knowledge we have of it is by
those acts which are done in it. When we say, This was now done; this then;
this will be done, we have expressed as much as we can of Time. God works in
time: and the Devil has his time. Then when God has wrought upon his
creature, the Devil, who is a great observer of Time, takes that TUNC, that
Then, to destroy his work. You see our Savior comes no sooner out of the
river, but the Devil sets upon him And as he used the Lord, so will he the
Servant. Christus speculum Christiani; Christ is as a Looking-glass, in which
every Christian may view himself; behold himself in his altitudes, and in his
depressions; in the favor of God, and in the danger of the enemy: take notice
how God opens heaven upon him, and how the Devil even then opens his mouth to
destroy him; consider that when God is most loving, the enemy is most raging;
that he is never more in danger then when he is most safe; that he shall find
his adversary most fierce when God is his strength: Nunc animis opus est: Now
we have most need of courage and resolution, of care and circumspection, when
the Devil comes and finds nothing in us, but all that was his washed off by
Repentance and Baptism. When we wallow in our own blood, when we are taken in
the Devils snare, circumspection is too late: for we cannot properly be said to
be in danger of the enemy when we are taken, but when we have openly renounced
him and bid defiance to him by the profession of a new life, then we stand as
it were upon the top and brink of the pit, a mark for the Devil to shoot at,
that so our spirits may fail us, and we fall back again into the bottom of it.
When the danger is past, then is it nearest; and when we are out of the pit,
then are we most ready to fall back again. No wise Captain is ever so confident
of peace, so emboldened with the flight of his enemy, as not to prepare for
war, which is at his doors when it makes no noise. Here we may discover the
enemies policy; Primordia boni pulsat, tentat rudimenta virtutum, sancta in
ipso ortu festinat exstinguere; He beats upon the very beginning of Goodness,
he assayes the very rudiments and principles of Piety, and makes it his
masterpiece then to extinguish the light of Grace when it is first kindled in
our hearts. This he practiced upon Christ: And in the same manner he ventures
upon Christians, in their childhood, in their spring, in their new birth; that
they may never grow up to the stature of men; be seen in their blossom, but not
in their blade or ear; that they may never be perfect men in Christ Jesus. Thus
he set upon the first Adam, and thus he set upon the second: and thus he sets
upon the sons of Adam. We shall briefly lay before you both the (...), and
(...), both the Doctrine and the Reason; and show you both that it is so, and
why it is so; That the Devil takes his time and opportunity, and the reason Why
he takes this as his time. And with these we shall exercise your Christian
Devotion at this time.

Then was Jesus led forth. By this example of our Captain we his Soldiers may
learn what to expect, and draw that lesson for our direction which the Wiseman
gave his son, My son, if thou come to serve the Lord, Ecclus. 2. 1.
prepare thy soul for tentation. No Moses, but meets with a James and Jambres
to withstand him: no Samson but shall meet with the Philistines. If Nehemiah
will build up Jerusalem, there will be Samballats and Tobiahs to weaken his
hand from the work, that it be not done. If Jeremiah prophecy, the Princes
will put him in prison. If there be a great door and effectually opened to St.
Paul, there will be many enemies. If we run not on to the same riot with the
world, the world will run against us to overthrow us. If we turn our face from
the Devil, he will after us to give us a fall. Still the better the work is the
more resistance and opposition it shall find. We read that the children of
Israel gathered together to Mispeh, and drew water, and poured it out before
the Lord, and fasted that day, and 1 Samuel 7. 6.
said there, We have sinned against the Lord: that is, They abjured their sins;
they washed them with their tears; they macerated their bodies with fasting,
they put on a strong resolution to serve the Lord. And see, The Philistines no
sooner heard of it but suddenly, upon the very report, the Lords of the
Philistines went up against them. Now they had cast away from them their false
Gods, and had solemnly kept the Fast, not a few soldiers, but the Princes and
Lords of the Philistines, are up in arms: And Gregory gives the reason, Quia
cum altiori vita proficimus, maligni spiritus, qui semper been agentibus
invident, nobis infestiores sunt; Because the evil Spirits are most enraged
when we are least like them, and the Devil is never more a Devil then when we
have renounced him. For he deals with us as Laban did with Jacob. For twenty
years together, whilst he served Genesis 31. 23.
him, Jacob led a quiet and peaceable life: but when he left his service and
fled from him, then Laban pursues him as an enemy. So whilst we do the Devil
service, and are led by him according to his will, we find not those fightings
without and terrors within; we are not sensible of molestation, but run on with
ease in those ways which lead unto death: but when upon better deliberation we
resolve with our selves to shake off his yoke; and to fling his bonds from us,
then he prepares his deadly weapons; he smites us with the hand, and smites us
with the tongue; he disgraces our endeavors, and disgraces the work it self;
he pursues us, as Laban did Jacob, flings his darts thick after us, and every
day multiplies his tentations. When Jacob had sent all he had over the brook
Jabboh, and was left alone, Genesis 32. 24.
the Text says, a man wrestled with him until the breaking of the day. I cannot
but reject the fancy of Procopius out of the Rabines, That this Man was no
other but the Devil: yet the reason upon which they grounded their opinion is
it self grounded upon a truth: That the Devil did now invade and set upon him
because he was now slipped out of his hands, and had withdrawn himself out of
that place where Idolatry breathed, that he might worship God in sincerity and
truth. For thus does the Devil present himself unto us in a shape of beauty and
delight, like an Angel of light, whilst we sleep in darkness, but when we are
awake and bestir our selves to fly from that wrath which is now visible to our
eye, he sets upon us, and wrestles with us, touches the hollow of our thigh,
puts it out of joint, that we may faint and sink under our resolution. Non
obsidet mortuos, sed impugnat viventes, he fights not against the dead, but the
living. Non impugnat adversarius nisi milites Christi, says Cyprian; Christ's
Adversary strikes at none but Christ's soldiers. Those who are down already he
passes by; but his malice heaves at them that stand, that they may fall. He
will not bestow a dart upon thee while thou art dead in sin: but when thou
beginnest to breathe in the land of the living, then his fiery weapons fly
about. He sets not upon thee in the stews, or in the tavern, or in a seditious
rout; for this is his own work, and he fights not against himself: but he sets
upon thee in the holy City, in the Temple, in the congregation of Saints. If
thou have a good thought, he will strive to strangle it in the birth: If thou
speak a good word, he will silence thee: If thou have built up a strong
resolution to defy him, his deadly weapons are up to beat it down and demolish
it: But if thou strive forward to the top of Sion, to the top of perfection,
then to stagger thee and tumble thee down, is his masterpiece. He deals with
us as the Egyptians did with the Hebrews: For two hundred years they were in
slavery indeed, but their burdens were not so great. When they spoke of
sacrificing to the Lord, the Egyptians upbraid them with idleness; Vacant,
idcirco vociferantur, Exodus 5. 8.
They are idle; and therefore they say, Let us go and sacrifice. But when they
thought of flight, and desired to depart out of those coasts; when Moses and
Aaron cry, Let the people go; then Pharaoh cries, Get ye to your burdens.
OPPRIMANTUR OPERIBUS; Let there more work be laid upon them, and let them labor
therein. In this manner does our enemy deal with us. When we willingly serve
him, when we are as ready to take a bate as he is to offer it, when we are
pleased with his flattery, and fall down to those Idols which he sets up, he is
not rough and fierce, but a gentle Devil: but when we bid him go, when we shake
off his fetters, then he is a tyrant. The application is St. Bernards, That he
lays a greater task of brick upon those who are going out of Egypt. St.
Chrysostom Hom. 31. in Genesis compares him to a Pirate, who hoiseth up sails, and
follows those ships which are fullest laden. Whilst we are no better then
dungboats, and carry about with us nothing but the filth and corruption of the
wo^ld, he never makes after us: But when we are Merchants ships, well fraughted
with gold and precious jewels, when we carry about with us the rich Pearl in
the Gospel, when he sees us full of Righteousness and Holiness, well ballasted
with cheerful Devotion, with watchful Circumspection, with regular Zeal, with
that inestimable wealth which makes us rich unto God; then his envy is on the
rack, then his hell is increascd, then he winds about and seeks opportunities
to grapple with and board this elected vessel, this vessel of such a burden.
This indeed is a prize. When the people of Israel were now gone out of Egypt,
God gave them a Law, and, he gave unto Moses two tables of testimony, tables of
stone, which he had Exodus 20. Exodus 31. 18.
written with his own finger, that so they might be taught to renounce the
rites and ceremonies of the Egyptians, and be rightly instructed in the
worship of the true God. This was an object the Devil could not look on: For it
presented that Law to the eye of the people which led them to true religion, to
the detestation of the superstition of the Egyptians, to the abolishing of all
evil customs, to the exstirpation of Idolatry, to the reformation of their
manners, to the worship of the true God. And therefore he works upon the people
to work upon Aaron, to make them Gods, as if he who had delivered them so often
were none. Up, say they, make us Gods which shall go before us. At which sight
Moses was angry, and brake Exodus 32.
the tables beneath the mount. And so for a God they had a Calf, and for a
Divine Law they had their own Invention. So busy is this enemy to digg at the
very first foundations of Religion, or upon them to raise his own work: And
wheresoever the finger of God is, there does he lay his claw. If God make
Tables of stone, he will set up a Calf. And this our great Captain has taught
us both by his example here, and by his parable Matthew. 13. 24. The sower sowed
good seed in his ground: but while men slept, his enemy came, and sowed tares
amongst the wheat; SUPERSEMINAVIT; So the Vulgar renders it. Super seminavit,
non seminavit, says Chrysostom: He did not sow it, as the Wheat, but sowed it
upon. Praecedunt Creatoris bona, mala Diaboli post sequuntur; The good things
of God are first; the Devils work is after. Malum non est natura, sed accidens;
The growth of evil is not natural, but accidental. When the good seed is in the
ground, then comes the Devil with his supersemination: and he flings his Tares
not in the midst of the Thorns, but in the midst of the Wheat. He strives to
choke the best fruit: he strives to sow sin amongst the Saints, contentions
amongst the Peaceable, craft amongst the Simple, wickedness amongst Innocents.
His sowing is not amongst the Thorns, but the Wheat, not so much to have any
fruitful increase of his Tares, as to destroy the Wheat; not to take the
guilty, but to slay the innocent. Of this practice of his we have a fair
resemblance Judge. 6. 3. When Israel had sown, the Midianites came up, and the
Amalekites, and the children of the east, even they came up against them, and
encamped against them, and destroyed the increase of the earth, so that they
were greatly impoverished. Even thus it comes to pass, says the Father, that
when by our spiritual industry and influence from above we have brought forth
much fruit, filled our garners with the fruits of holiness, and laid up many
rich ears in the closet of our conscience, then by negligence and improvidence
these seeds corrupt, and our whole crop and harvest is lost. But indeed the
Midianites here and the Amalekites came upon the men of Israel when they had
sown, made haste to their seed-time rather than their harvest: And this more
fully expresses the malice of our Enemy, whose craft and policy it is rather
to stay our beginnings, which are but weak, then to slay till we are built up
as a temple of the holy Ghost. For then his work will be harder, and he will
have less hope to prevail. Cum Divina lux in mentes humanas spargitur, says
Gregory, mox ab occulto adversario contra fulgentem mentem tentamenta
succrescunt; When God spreads the beams of Divine illumination, then the Devil
comes with his mist. When God renews us every day, the Devil winnows us every
day. When God commands, the Devil tempts. As God has his promises, so has the
Devil his. As God threatens, so the Devil threatens. As God inspires us, so the
Devil insinuates, and is never more busy about us then when God dwells in us
and we in him. Then he raises up Midianites and Amalekites, then he brings up
his troops against us; then he plyes our Sense and our Fancy; puts sharpness
upon that Goodness which we delight in, and gives a pleasant relish to that Sin
which we detest; makes our friends our enemies, to drive us from piety, and our
enemies our friends, to allure us to sin. When David desired to learn Gods
statutes, presently it follows, The proud have Psalm. 119 68, v. 69.
forged a lie against me: Quanto magis Deo servis, tanto magis in te excitas
adversarios; The more thou servest God, the more rubs thou shall meet with,
says St. Ambrose. The stronger thy resolution is to that which is good, the
more violent will be the temptation to that which is evil. In a word; Thou
shall never find more enemies then when God is thy friend. We see our Savior
did no sooner prepare himself to his office, but presently the Tempter comes to
him, even Lucifer himself, says St. Augustine, that arch-devil, says
Chrysostom, who as he exeeeded other spirits in the excellency of his nature,
so he was more subtle and working in his tentations. Nor does he set upon
Christ once, but often. Tentabatur a Satana, says St. Mark, he was tempted;
Which does not only signify the act, but import the frequencie of tentations.
And this he suffered not from one Devil alone, but from many, as Eusebius
thinks, Lib. 9. De Demonstr. Evang. even then when the holy Ghost had descended
upon him: that as God had approved him by his voice, so the Devil might try him
by his; that as he had been baptized with water and the holy Ghost, so he might
baptize him with fire; that as God did crown him with joy, so he might crown
him with thorns. Agnosce in Christo haereditatem tuam. We may see in part the
lot of our inheritance. Born we are to glory, but born withal to temptations;
in greatest danger, when we are walking out of it; then most violently
assaulted, when we begin to overcome; when we are fallen, not able to rise; and
when we are risen up, most ready to fall.

We might here enlarge our Discourse: but I had rather tender you the reasons
Why it is so. And we draw the first from the Envy of the Devil, who cannot
behold God, nor any thing that is like unto him, but is troubled with his
beauty, and is troubled with the least reflection of his beauty; is troubled
with his infinite goodness, and is troubled with his created goodness; is
troubled with his nature, and is troubled with his name. Who if he could, would
rob God of his purchase, and would overthrow the heavens, and all that ever God
made, all the created substances in the world. Pervicacissimus hostis, nunquam
otium sui patitur, says Tertullian; His malice is so great that he is never at
rest. He watches every good thing in its bud to nip it, in its blossom to
blast it, in its fruit to spoil it. And then he rages most when man is
delivered from his rage. Tunc accenditur cum exstinguitur; Then is he most
enflamed when his darts are quenched. And indeed this is the nature of Envy, to
be restless, never to sleep. The Hebrews express Envy by the Eye; Why is thy
eye evil? that is, Why art thou envious? The Devil has an eye which is always
open, observing not only the fruits of Holiness, but the very seeds. The Poor
that is envious looks with an evil eye upon the penny that another has: He that
is illiterate is angry with a letter: he that is weak wishes all were
cripples. This torments the Devil as much as Hell it self. Invidia primum
mordax suis; Envy has a venomous tooth, but it is first fastened in it self. It
is the pain and death of our Enemy not only to be punished with his own sin,
but with our goodness; not only to be grieved at his own overthrow, but at our
hope of victory: and therefore he kindles and is on fire at the sight not only
of the Sun, but of a Star, yea at the least scintillation and glimpse of
Goodness. A good thought is a look toward heaven; and this he strives to
divert: A good profession is a profer; and he abates our strength in the way:
An Abba, Father, is a call to Love; and he strives to disinherit us. Ever as we
make forward, he is ready to assault us, placing horror in our way, that we may
fear to proceed. And like a cunning enemy he sets upon us at our first onset,
lest we gather strength. He is (...), as Cyril speaks, fierce and violent in
his opposition. A wiseman being asked how a man might preserve himself from the
evil eye of Envy, well replied, Si nihil feliciter gesseris, If thou delight
not in the practice of that which is good, and be not happy in thy
undertakings. Extreme Misery has this privilege, that it stands out of the
ken and reach of Envy. Therefore as St. Augustine tells us, Non invident
archangelis angeli, the Angels do not envy the Archangels, because they are
both eminently good. So we cannot think that the evil spirits do envy one
another, because they are eminently evil and equally miserable. It is therefore
the duty of a Christian to make himself an object from the envy of Satan, to
show forth those good works which may provoke him, to build up that resolution
which may anger him, to make that glorious profession which may torment him.
For from his envy we cannot be free till we are like him, till we are Diaboli,
(so his children are called in Scripture) Devils, as miserable as he. Whilst we
lie, like dry bones, at the graves Ezekiel. 37.
mouth, he is quiet and still; he does not admoenire, nor legiones adducere, he
does not besiege us, nor draw forth his troops and legions against us; nec vult
artem consumi ubi non potest ostendi, nor will he spend his art and cunning
there where he cannot show it: But when these dry bones hear the word of the
Lord, when the spirit breaths into them, and they live; when we stand up upon
our feet, and make an exceeding great army; when we make our members the
weapons of righteousness to fight against him; when he hears our songs of
praise, when he sees our alms, when our tears drop upon his fire to quench it;
then the Worm begins to know; then he walks about us, and observes in what part
we are weakest; then he is a Serpent, a Lion, a Devil. Timagenes was well
content that Rome should be set on fire; but it troubled him much that it
should rise higher, and be more glorious then before: So it troubles the Devil
to see him who took a fall and a bruise, to be built up stronger then he was;
to see him who was dead in sin become a new creature, and a child of wrath
become the son of God. And therefore hither he brings his forces, that if he
cannot hinder those beginnings, yet he may stay them there, and stop them at
the first, that they may be no more then beginnings; that a Jew may be
circumcised, and no more; a Christian baptized, and no more; that Judas may be
an Apostle, and no more; and a Christian have that name, and no more. Well, you
may bring out the cornerstone, and cry, Grace, grace unto it; Well, you may
please your selves with the profession of Christianity; you may lay your
foundation than which no other can be laid, a JESUS CHRIST; but you shall build
upon it, not gold and silver and precious stones, but wood and hay and stubble.
Satan will suffer thee to contend for that faith which was once delivered to
the Saints, to be zealous for the Lord of hosts. This man shall stand up for
his Christ; another shall bring him forth in another shape. Thou shall dispute
for the Truth, thou shall fight for the Truth; The world shall be on fire for
the Truth: For all this is but noise: and he is very wellpleased with any noise
but that of Good works: for that comes up into the presence of God. In all
other contentions, though the cry be for Religion, he is commonly one. In these
outcries and exclamations Christ indeed is named, but it so falls out that
every man is for him, and every man against him; every man speaks for him, and
every man contradicts him; every man cries Hosanna, Blessed is he that comes
in the name of the Lord, and every man drives him out of their coasts. Religion
is the badge, and Religion is the word; and indeed it is but a badge and a
word; you see and hear all: The rest is Fraud, and Malice, and Uncleanness, a
wandering Eye, a wanton Ear, a hollow Heart, a rough Hand: and the name of
Christian is taken in by the by to countenance these; to put a gloss upon our
Fraud, that it may be holy; to color our Malice with zeal; to make our
Uncleanness the infirmity of a Saint; as if you drew out the picture of a Devil
in every part, and then write underneath, THIS IS A CHRISTIAN. Hitherto the
Devil will suffer us to name Christ, if we will but name him. For by this he
has advantage, and our guilt is increased. Reatus impii, pium nomen, says
Salvian; Nothing condemns an evil man more then a good name. A common thing it
is in the world to prefix a fair and promising title to books of no worth: And
this art the Devil is busy to teach us, to put a trick upon God, and deceive
him with a fair title page. He cares not how glorious the frontespiece be, so
the work be course. Look into the book of a formal Christians life, and you
shall find many leaves but blanks, a great part of his life lost in sleep, some
blurred and blotted with the Love of this world, some leaves polluted with
Uncleanness, others stained with Blood: You shall see it full of Soloecisius,
of gain-sayings and contradictions of Christ. Only there is a fair title page,
and the name of this Book is, THE CHRISTIAN SOLDIER. And therefore one rule of
our Enemy is, to begin with us, to entangle us at our first setting out. He
deals with us as we are commanded to deal with him. As we are to break his
head, to suppress the beginnings of Sin, so does he break ours, and suppress
the beginnings of Goodness. For, in the second place, the one will increase as
well as the other. Festucam si nutrias, trabs erit; si evellas and projicias,
nihil erit; If you nourish a mote, it may become a beam; but if you pluck it
out presently and cast it from you, it will be nothing. This evil thought may
grow up to Murder; but if you check it, it is nothing: So this good thought may
be Religion, but if the Devil stifle it, it will be nothing: These beginnings
may bring-on perfection; but if you stop them, they are nothing: This grain of
mustard seed, this little grain, this least of seeds, if you suffer it to grow,
may become a tree; but if you choke it at first, it is nothing. Nihil est
fertilius sanctitate; Nothing is more fruitful and generative then Goodness.
For God does not set us upon vain and fruitless designs: he sets us not to plow
the winds, or cast our seed upon the barren rocks; he does not tie us by a
blind obedience to water a dry stick: but as the Prophet David speaks, our line
is fallen unto us in a pleasant place, and we have a goodly heritage, a
fruitful soil, where every seed may increase into many ears of corn, and every
ear multiply into a harvest; where increase makes us more fruitful; where the
liberal soul is made fat, and Prove. 11. 25.
he that waters is watered again. Every good thought may beget a good
Intention, every good Intention may raise it self up to the strength of a
Resolution, every Resolution may bring on Perseverance, every good Action looks
forward to another, and that to a third: Patience begets experience;
Experience, Hope; Hope, Confidence. As it was said of Alexander, Quaelibet
victoria instrumentum sequentis, that every conquest he made, made way to a
second: So every step we make, makes the way more easy; every conquest we gain
over Satan enables us to chase him again. If we overcome him in our Creed, and
believe against all temptations to Infidelity, we may overcome him also in our
Decalogue, and bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life against all
temptations to Profaneness. He that names Christ, may believe in him; and he
that believes in him, may dye for him. He that gives a penny to the poor, may in
time sell all that he has, and at last lay down his life for the Gospel.

And therefore, in the last place, timet ne virtus convalescat, the Devil is
unwilling to suffer Goodness to gather any strength, lest when it is grown up
and settled and established in the heart, it may prove too hard a matter for him
to remove it; lest what he might at first have stolen away as a Serpent, he
shall not be able to take from us though he come like a Lion. For as it is in
Sin, so is it also in Goodness; It grows up by degrees: Our first onset is with
some difficulty; we are almost persuaded to be Christians; After some bruises
and some recoveries, some slips and some risings, some struglings and some
victories, the way is more pleasant; and at last we run the way of Gods
commandments, and make haste to Happiness as to our center. That Fasting which
was my melancholy, is now my joy; that Reproof which was a whip, is now as oil;
that Prophet whom I persecuted, is now an Angel. What does God exact at our
hand, says Salvian, but Faith and Chastity and Humility and Mercy and
Holiness, quae utique omnia non onerant nos, sed ornant, all which are not as
burdens to oppress us, but as rich jewels to adorn us? What does Christ require
but those things which are convenient and agreeable with our nature, the love
of God, and the Love of men? And certainly the custom of doing good, if it be
equal to the custom in evil, is far more pleasant. Far more content is to be
found in virtue then in vice, more pleasure in temperance then in surfeiting,
more complacencie in justice then in Partiality, more delight in piety then in
lust. When I have raised my self so high as to delight in the dictates of
Nature and in the precepts of the God of Nature, then I may look into my heart,
reflect upon my self with joy, and say, I am a man; and, I persuade my self
that neither death nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities nor powers, nor
things present nor things to come, nor height nor depth, nor any other
creature shall be able to separate me from the love of God which is in Christ
Jesus our Lord. Now I can labor in his hard work, and my labor is my joy: Those
virtues which seem to run from me, are my familiars, my friends, (...), says
Basil, my possessions, which none can take from me. Non videtur perfect
cujusquam id esse quod casu auferri potest, say the Civilians; We cannot be
said to have sure possession of that which may be taken away by some chance.
What we are surely possessed of we can hardly lose. And such a possession, such
an inheritance is true Piety, when we are once rooted and built up and
established in it. It is a treasure which no chance can rob us of, no thief take
from us. A habit well confirmed is an object the Devil is afraid of. O the
power of an uninterrupted obedience, of a continued course in the duties of
holiness, it is able to puzzle the great Sophister, the great God of this
world! Deorum virtus natura excellit; says Tully, hominum industria; Nature
confirms virtue to the Gods, but Industry to Men. The Gods cannot possibly be
otherwise then good; and by care and serious endeavors Man may bring himself
nearer and nearer to Immutability, and be so good that he can hardly be
otherwise there good. This our Arch-enemy well knows, and therefore does ipsis
repugnare seminibus, fight against our beginnings. He is that fowl of the air
which picks up our seed: He is that enemy which sets upon us in primis finibus,
when we first set footing in the holy land. He will divert our look, stop our
profer; ne sit inceptio vehemens, that there may be no strength, no activity,
in our first endeavors, no heat, no solidity; but that they may melt before his
tentations, as Snow does before the fire; that we may think that Christianity
is a beginning, a profession, and no more; that if we name Christ, it is
enough, though we do not love him; if we call upon God, it is sufficient,
though we do not worship him; if a voice has come down from heaven, if God
has shown us any grace and favor, we shall do well enough, though we blaspheme
him every day. To conclude therefore; As our care must be obstare principiis,
to stay the Devils beginnings, so it will concern us firmare principia, to
confirm our own. Fides, ut nativitas, non accepta sed custodita vivificat;
Faith, as our Nativity, does quicken and enliven us, not by being received, but
by being kept. We believe, as we are born: We grow up from age to age, from
virtue to virtue, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ. Therefore as our profession must be sincere, so it must be
resolute against this Enemy, to comfort and fence and strengthen our
beginnings. Vera virginitas nihil magis timet quam semeteipsam, says
Tertullian; Pure and undefiled Virginity is afraid of nothing more then of it
self: So say I of our Christian Profession; If it be true and sincere, it will
fear nothing so much as it self, and is therefore watchful to observe the wiles
and enterprises of that cunning enemy whose pride it is to take us in our
altitudes, to meet us coming out of the Font, to be near us when we publicly
defy him, to take of our chariot wheels, to slug and weaken our resolutions,
that we, who talk so big against him, when the time of encounter comes, may not
be willing to strike a stroke. For he never fears when our best weapons against
him are words. O what a sad and uncouth sight it is to see the name of
Christian lead in the Front, and a legion of sins follow after! to see a
Christian come out of the Font, and then take the weapons of Righteousness, and
fill the world with violence and iniquity! to see a man begin in the Spirit,
and end in the Flesh; pressed out to fight against the Devil and the World, and
yet a slave to the Devil and the World all his life; to see Christianity made a
pillow to sleep on in the midst of a tempest, in the midst of those sins which
crucify Christ! to see Christ's name never made use of but against himself! so
many not casting out Devils in that name, but in that name silling the world
with subtilty and deceit! A good profession and a profane Conversation is the
greatest contradiction in the world. Let us be sure then to strengthen our
beginnings, that they may beget a continued uninterrupted course of piety, like
unto themselves; that all the parts of our life may resemble each other; that
beginning well, nothing may hinder us but that we may continue so unto the end;
that a good beginning may not accuse our bad ending, nor a bad end disgrace a
good beginning; that Christ may be Alpha and Omega, the first and the last, in
all our actions; that he may lead us forth, and that in his name we may tread
down all our Enemies under our feet; that Christ may be both in the beginning
and end of our life, advantage; that the Spirit which first taught us to cry,
Abba, Father, may seal us up to the day of our Redemption.

The Six and Twentieth SERMON. PART IV.
MATTHEW. IV. 1. -- to be tempted of the Devil.
IN all combats the first thing we inquire after is, Who are the Parties that
fight. One of the Combatants here we find to be JESUS, a Savior, our Advocate,
our Captain, cujus auspiciis bellum geretur, by whose conduct and advise we
must enter the lists. The Person who assaulted him is in the Text termed the
Devil. An Accuser stands up against an Advocate, a Destroyer against a Savior,
and he that is called the God of this world, because he corrupted it, against
him who is truly the God of this world, because he made it.

Nor can we doubt whether there be such a person or no as the Devil, unless we
will also doubt whether there be such a person or no as Jesus, and so derogate
from the truth of the story, and make it less then a phantasine, less then it
had been done it a vision. Nobis curiositate non opus est post lesum Christum;
When the words of Scripture are plain and positive, Curiosity and Infidelity,
though they differ in name, yet are but one and the same thing. And when
Fancy draws Doctrines out of Scripture, instead of visions it presents us
with dreams. Nor has the Devil a more poisonous tentation then that which
pours into our hearts a persuasion that there is no Devil at all. Yet there
have been found, and now are, those who profess Christian religion, and yet are
of opinion that what is delivered of the Devil in Scripture, and of his
tentations, is not to be understood as if there were any such spiritual
substance to which we truly attribute these, but that it is a figurative kind
of speech fitted to that which the vulgar or common people believe, that there
is nothing which solicitates us to sin, but our own Lusts and Concupiscence,
which by them by a wonderful kind of Prosopopoeia or feigning of the person is
called the Devil, as St. James teaches us, where laying down the manner how we
are tempted, he makes no mention of a person, but attributes all to our
Concupiscence, which is called in other places the Devil, the adversary which
accuses us before God; that Sin alone is the Serpent which deceives us, the
Lion that roars against us, and the Dragon which devours us, that only Sin is
an Accuser. And this St. Bernard seems to lay to the charge of Petrus
Adailardus, Epist. 190. where he calls him Quintum Evangelistam, the fifth
Evangelist, that saw more then any of the four. But this is but commentum
humani ingenii, a fiction of fancyful men, the work of the brain, and may be
well entitled to the Devil himself, who is the Father of lies. By the same art
and skill they may, if they please, make the whole Scripture an allegory, since
we find nothing more historically and plainly delivered then this, That there
is a Devil. But if I forget not, I have spoken of this heretofore, and chased
it away as a fancy of the Devils creating, and the invention of a sick
distempered brain. All that we will now say to those who doubt whether there be
such a person or no, which set upon our Savior in the wilderness, and every
day renews his assaults against us, is, that his conceit can proceed from no
other cause then a strong delusion of the Devil, who they conceive to be
nothing, but like Aesops Fox, and Lion, and Wolf, which carry their Moral along
with them, and, till that be made, are nothing but tales: And whilst they say
there is no Devil, it may be truly said to them, that they have a Devil. That
there is such a person, we may draw an argument from his name here, (...). For
what is a name but a signification of the nature of that thing which it does
express. And he is called here not a Spirit, or the Tempter, as he is verse 3.
but (...), the Devil, from (...), which signifies to Accuse, to Defame, to
Publish infamous reports, to Be the mint where slanders are coined, or else
Credulously to receive them, and pass them from hand to hand as current coin,
to Please himself at the fall of another, as the people of Rome used to delight
and clap their hands at the fall of a Sword-player in the Theater. He has
other names, as the Evil spirit, the Wicked one, the Prince that rules in the
air, the God of this world. But, as Quintilian speaks, Omnia verba alicubi sunt
optima: Words have their weight as they are placed. And here, when he was to
tempt our Savior, DIABOLUS, the Devil, was the fittest name for him. For
indeed every tentation is (...), a kind of accusation: and the Devil tempts us
that he may accuse us, and accuses us when he tempts us. He is, says
Augustine, the accuser of the Saints; and knowing what Judge he is to appear
before, into what Court he is to bring his bills of accusation, even into the
Court of that God who cannot be deceived, though he be the father of lies, yet
he strives to make his bills true, by making us sin. Quia falsa contra nos non
potest dicere, quaerit vera quae dicat and ideo tentat ut habeat quae dicat;
Because he cannot lay to our charge those sins which we did not commit, he
incites us to sin, that he may lay it to our charge. He accuses God to us;
which is his Tentation: and then he accuses us unto God; which makes him a
complete Devil. And as St. Hierome shuts up his whole discourse against
Jovinian with a Caveat; Cave JOVINIANI nomen, quod ab idolo derivatum est,
Beware of the name of Jovinian, which is derived from an Idol, from Jupiter;
so will I begin mine, Cave DIABOLI nomen; Beware of the Devils name; Beware of
accusing and defaming thy brethren. Remember the Devils name, that thou be not
like him. Remember that when thou have drawn a false accusation against thy
brother, thou have drawn out a true one against thy self, which the Devil will
be ready to take up, and present before the Tribunal of God. And now, that we
may make some use of his name, we will show you 1. that he is an Accuser, 2.
the Motives or Causes which move him to be so; and 3. lastly, we will apply all
to our selves, and parallel our defamations with his, as proceeding from the
same root of bitterness, and so learn to detest them.

For the first, as Christ is an Advocate pleading for Man, so the Devil is an
Accuser pleading against him; (...), first walking with us that we may sin, and
then accusing us for sinning: First accusing God to us; which is the cause of
all sin; and then accusing us to God, which is the cause of all punishment:
Omnia agens accusatorio spiritu, as Livy speaks of Appius; in all his
proceedings breathing forth malice and railing accusations. And first, because
all sin proceeds from error in judgment, at least in the practick faculty of
the soul, (Nam si homo poterit intelligere Divina, potest and facere, says
Lactantius; for if man could rightly understand the things of God, he might
easily do them. But our practick determinations are sooner vitiated and
corrupted then our speculative conclusions, because those present Truth and
Goodness, these Truth alone) the Devil instills his poison, and infects the
Understanding with an evil report of God. And though we cannot deny God or his
attributes, yet we seldom sin but we say in our hearts, There is no God. Here
in this Chapter the Devil does excaecare providentiam Dei, strive to put out
the very eye of Gods Providence, that he might shake Christ's Faith, as it were,
and drive him to distrust. He accuses his Wisdom in our retirement and secret
sins, and that with some scorn; Tush, God does not see it; nor is there
knowledge in the most High. He accuses his Justice, and puts stout words into
our mouths when we deny our obedience; It is in vain to serve the Lord: and
what profit is there that we have kept his ordinances? He defames his Mercy,
when remembering our sins we fall under them, as a burden too heavy for us, and
as if God had forgotten to be merciful. He roars loud against his very Power in
the mouth of a Rabshakeh, and would persuade the Israelites that to say God
should deliver them was nothing else but to deliver themselves up to famine and
thirst. He casts his venom upon all the Divine Attributes, and makes them the
inducements to sin, which are the strongest motives to goodness. He never
presents God to us as he is, but in several forms, and all such as may drive us
from one attribute to run us on another. He presents him without an eye, that
we may do what we list; without a hand, that we may trust in a hand of flesh;
without an Ear, that our blasphemies may be loud. He makes us favorable
interpreters of him before we sin, and unjust judges of him when we have
sinned. He makes him a Libertine to the presumptuous, and a Novatian to the
despairing sinner; being a liar in all, whose every breath is a defamation.
Nulla apud eum turpis ratio vincendi, as was said of King Philip; He is not
ashamed of any lie that may lead us from the truth. And as he defameth God unto
us, so in every sin almost he accuses us unto our selves. In the heat of our
Zeal he accuses us of Madness, that we may be remiss; and in our Meekness he
charge us with Folly, that we may learn to be angry. In our Justice he calls
us tyrants, that we may yield it up unto unnecessary Pity; and in our
Compassion he urges the want of Justice, that to put on the New man, we may
put of all bowels of mercy. He accuses our Faith to our Charity, and persuades
us that for all our good works we are none of the faithful; and our Charity to
our Hope, as if it were so cold it could kindle no such virtue within us. From
Religion he drives us on to Superstition, and from the fear of Superstition
into that gulf of Profaneness which will swallow us up. And then, when he has
us in his nets, when he has by accusing us unto our selves made us guilty
indeed, when by accusing our virtues he has brought to sin, he draws his bill
of accusation, and for one sin writes down an hundred. He makes every sin of
Infirmity a monster; writes down sudden Anger in letters of blood; makes a Word
in our haste, a resolution in earnest; Confidence, Presumption; and Doubting,
Infidelity. He writes down evil for good, but not good for evil; for that is
his work before, not after, our sins. And these his accusations he tenders to
the Judge of all the world, and is more importunate with him then the Widow
with the Judge in the Gospel, Luke 18. (...), troubles and buffets him, as it
were, with his loud cries, and will not give over, interitus nostri avarus
exactor, being a rigid and covetous exactor of our destruction. This he does,
thus he accuses. But the manner how he tenders his accusations is not easily
expressed. We may safely say that as he is a Spirit, so the manner of his
accusing us is spiritual. We, when we accuse one another, must do it by voice
or writing. For when we condemn or censure others but in our heart, we are but
as men that stand behind a wall, and must come forth per linguae januam, as
Gregory speaks, through the gate of the Tongue and door of the Mouth, and
outwardly manifest what we are within. But Spirits are of another nature, not
compounded, as we are, of two diverse parts, Body and Soul. And, as their Nature
is, such is their Speech. Sublimes and incogniti modi locutionis intimae; Their
speech is inward and within them, and the manner of it sublime and unknown.
Animarum verba sunt desideria, says the Father; The words of our souls are our
Desires, and by them we cry and call unto the Lord, and he hears us. And if we
should say that (...), those malicious desires of Satan to devour our Souls
were his accusations, we speak not much amiss. For God sees what the Devil has
treasured up against us as plainly as he does our thoughts, and understands
them more fully then we do a Bill which we hear read in any Court of Justice.
Dicere Diaboli est contra bonos intra cogitationum suarum latibula conqueri;
The Devils speech is that inward grudging he has against those which are good.
And of that nature is his accusation of the wicked. Dicere Diaboli est
omnipotenti majestati Dei posse nihil celare. He watches our steps, and
ponders our goings. He is with us when we sin, and he registers our sins down
in his malicious thought. And his speech is, Not to be able to hide it from the
eyes of God, which at one view sees both our sins and his malice. Howsoever he
accuses us, the manner is unknown unto us: and if it be more then that I have
showed, I am sure it stands out of sight: and amplius quaerere non licet quam
quod inveniri licet, It is not lawful to seek after that which before we set
forth we know we shall not find. That which nearly concerns us is, so to look
to our ways as that we help not the Devil to accuse us, that he may come and
find nothing in us, no sin not washed away with the tears of repentance and the
blood of the Lamb. For as God bids us to thirst after the joys of heaven, but
does not tell us what they are, but only by telling us they are unspeakable; so
he bids us take heed that this Jailer take not hold of us, and hale us and
accuse us before the Judge, but does not set down the manner how he will tender
his Bill; that so we may lose no time in seeking the one, and avoiding the
other. For who will not hasten to joys unspeakable? or who will not fear to
have his name in that Bill which he is sure will be heard? I will conclude all
with that excellent consideration of Hilary, Stultum est calumniam in eo
inquisitionis intendere in quo comprehendi id unde quaeritur per naturam suam
non potest; It is but a piece of vanity to strive and contend about the
searching of that which cannot be comprehended, or to look after that which
has no light to discover it.

It is enough for us to know that the Devil is an Accuser, and in his best
shape, in his Angelical habit, but a Promooter to catch us, and that all his
tentations to sin, though they be fair to the eye, and pleasant to the taste,
and music to the ear, are nothing else but so many means to procure so many
sins to fill up this Bill. And so I descend to that which I proposed in the
next place to lay before you the Causes or Motives which makes the Devil our
accuser.

And first, we cannot imagine that it proceeds from any delight or ease he can
take in our blood. For this were to seek Joy in Hell, where there can be none
at all. The number of the damned are so far from diminishing the Devils pain
that they increase it; but yet in the Devil, though there be no true joy, yet
there is something like our joy in evil, which is in him not in the nature of a
passion; but as an act of his will, as Aquinas says. When we sin not, he is
grieved, because it is against his will; and when we yield to his tentations;
he is said to be delighted, because his will is fulfilled. For something he
would have which is not; and this is his grief: and something he would have
which is; and this is his joy. In him, as in us, Joy is nothing else but the
perfection and complement of those actions which are natural unto him. And
because he is naturally a hater of God and Men, he is said to take delight when
God is blasphemed, or Man made guilty of death. Quantus Diabolo luctus inest?
says the Father; How is the Devil grieved when the Prodigal returns, because
his desire was to have had him choakt with his husks. And quantum Diabolo
gaudium? What joy is it to him to see a child turn Prodigal! for this is
natural unto him, even the work of his hands. Such is his malice unto us that
mavult perire quam non perdere, he had rather be destroyed himself, then that
we should not perish, and had rather Hell were hotter then we not come there.
And this his obstinate Malice proceeded from his pain, from the sad
apprehension of an angry Power and an offended Majesty. Inviderat, quia
doluerat, says Tertullian; He did envy us because he was grieved; and his Pain
increases with his Malice: The first desire which threw him down was, That he
might be God; and the next, when he was fallen, That there should be no God at
all. And being now in chains of everlasting darkness, he hates that light which
he cannot see: And since God himself is at that infinite distance from him, so
full of power and majesty that his Malice cannot reach him, he opposes himself
to the works of his hands, and seeks to destroy him in his image; as the poor
man, when he could not get his enemy into his hands, whipped his statue. Being
much troubled, says Tertullian, that God had given Man dominion over the works
of his hands, in Dei imagine quo sit in Deum odio ostendit, he manifests his
hatred to God in his image, which he strives to deface. Some think he envied
the Hypostatical Union: but this conjecture is not probable. Most certain it
is, his extreme Misery enrageth his Malice, and his Malice whets his Will and
endeavors, and makes him very subtle to invent strange stratagems; by which,
if we be not very wary, he will steal our names from Christ, to whom we have
given them up, and put them in his roll. Nor is the working of his Malice
hindered by the bad effect it produces. For the more he suffers, the more
malicious he is; and the more malicious he is, the more he suffers. He grieves
and is troubled that Men, built up of flesh and blood, should keep the love of
God on earth, which he, being a glorious Spirit, lost in heaven; that mortal
Man should ascend to that pitch of happiness from whence he being an immortal
Angel was flung down. And though he know that his pains are increased by the
condemnation of those whom he has prevailed with to sin, yet he strives to
increase the number, though with the increase of his pains; and is content to
suffer more so that more may suffer with him. Nor need we wonder that the
Devil, who is so subtle a Serpent, fails in such a point of wisdom. For as his
Subtlety and Wisdom is great, so is his Malice, which even in Man does darken
the eye of Reason, and makes the Devil every day more a Devil to himself: so
that though he be very cunning to bring souls unto punishment, yet he has no
wisdom to keep off the increase of it from himself. Very busy he is to frame
his accusations, though, when we come to the bar, he must also be condemned as
accessory.

Now as these two, Malice and Envy (which we have jointly handled and together,
because they are so like) are as inward incitements unto the Devil to accuse
us, so also is his Pride. For he is king over all the children of pride, as Job
speaks. And this may be one cause, though not the chief why he cannot repent.
Hoc vitio misericordiae medicina respuitur; This is the sin which shuts down
the portcullis to Mercy: So that if God should have provided a plaster for his
Malice, his Pride would have refused it. Infelix superbia dedignatur sub
praeceptis coelestibus vivere; Such is the infelicity of Pride that it can
never be induced to be brought unto obedience of the heavenly commandments.
This was the sin which plucked off his Angels wings, and flung him down from
heaven. For not content to be no greater then he was, he was made less then he
was. Ob hoc minus est quam fuit, quod eo quod minus erat frui noluit, says
Augustine; Being not content to be an Angel of light, he became a Devil; and
when heaven would not hold him unless he might be a God, he was thrown into
hell. Nor is his Pride the less because his Malice is great. For the Schools
conclude that he preserved his naturals entire, as his subtilty and agility. He
was a Spirit still; and Pride, as Malice, proceeds from infirmity, from decay.
And though we say that Pride, as a moth, will breed even in Humilities mantle,
yet it rather proceeds from our unnecessary gazing on it and misconstruing it,
then from the virtue it self. The Devil is a spirit, of an excellent essence;
and it cannot be said unto him, says the Father, as it may be to Man, Why art
thou proud, Dust and Ashes? Again, there be many sins which Men are subject to,
of which he cannot be actually guilty, as Adultery, Luxury, Covetousness, and
the like, therefore he is the bolder to accuse us. And to this he incites us,
thinking his sin more hurtful to us then his punishment. And this he is ready
to lay to our charge, that we, as he, have an ambition to be like unto the
Highest, and in every sin affect a kind of equality with God. Still he would be
as God, our ruler and king, the God of this world, to lead or drive us at his
pleasure. And as God commands obedience, that it may be well with us; so does
he proclaim us rebels, and since he cannot be our judge, takes a pride in being
our accuser. Here his Art and Skill magnifieth it self, that he can destroy
what God was willing to save, that he can make him hate what naturally he
loved. Here his Will and Eloquence is seen, in drawing out arguments to which
Man cannot answer; in making our Sins, our unrepented Sins, cry louder then the
Blood of Christ; in laying before Gods eyes those wounds which his mercy cannot
heal. Here he striveth to pluck God out of his throne, by telling him he cannot
be God and pardon such offenders: Here he is wise and just, still that Angel
which would be equal with God. Variis quisque causis ad accusandum compellitur;
There be diverse causes, says Seneca, which move men to accuse one another:
Some are spurred on by Ambition, others by Hatred, some by Hope of reward. But
the Devils motives are his Malice and Envy to mankind, and that which made him
a Devil, his Pride. And now having showed you the Devil as an Accuser, we pass
to the Application, That we may learn to hate and detest that sin of
Defamation, lest if we leave our Brotherhood with our Advocate, we get no
better a Father then the Father of lies.

For we must not think the Devil is an Accuser only in defaming of us, but also
in teaching us to defame and accuse one another; in speaking by us as he did by
the Priests of his Temples, and through our mouths breathing forth slanders as
oracles. He was an Accuser in the Jews, and taught them to call Christ a
wine-bibber, a companion of publicanes and sinners; to disgrace his Miracles,
and call them the works of Beelzebub. He taught Elymas, his own child, as St.
Paul calls him, to pervert Acts 13. 10.
the right ways of the Lord. He taught the Heathen to call the first
Christians Impostors, and Traitors, and Atheists; to lay to their charge the
Murder of Infants, Incest, and those crimes which were not only false but
incredible; accusare vocabulae, to accuse the very name of Christian. And,
which is most to be lamented, he has taught Christians to perform this vile
office one against another. For no sooner had God freed them from the terror of
Persecution, but they raised a worse amongst themselves, one Christian placing
a great part of his Religion in laying some foul imputation upon another; and
finding Heresy in the roll of carnal sins Gal. 5. 20. calling them Heretics
whom they could not otherwise defame; pronouncing Anathema's one against
another; as if all who would be Christ's Disciples were not to be sons of
Consolation, but of Thunder. I may be bold to say, Scarce any Father or holy
man which past without his mark. Augustine was defamed by the Donatists and
Manichees; Hierome called a Magician, a Seducer, as himself complains.
Chrysostom had no less then nine and twenty accusations tenderd against him,
as we find it recorded in Photius. Cyprianus was turned into Coprianus, as one
who in his tracts of Christianity had applied his elagant wit to women's tales.
And this before Superstition had gained much footing in the Church. But when
the Pope did once rerum potiri, when he had gained a Kingdom in the Church, and
was acknowledged the Primate of the Christian world, then not to receive his
determinations as Oracles, not to fall down and worship him, not to obey him in
all things, was to be an Heretic.

In the year 713. Philippicus the Emperor was branded with the name of
Heretic, because he had removed Images out of the Church. Leo the third was
condemned of the same crime, and had a nickname, and was called Iconomachus.
Henry the Fourth Emperor was no less, because he would not grant the Pope the
investure of Bishoprics. Frederick the Second was a Heretic, for that he held
the Popes stirrup on the wrong side, and withstood the tyranny of that See.
Philip the Fourth King of France was condemned to the same crime, because he
would not go to war when Pope Boniface did beat up his Drumm. Charles the Sixth
had the same doom, because he would not suffer the Churches of France to pay
tribute to Martin the Fifth. Lewis the Twelfth, who was called Pater populi,
the Father of his people, was styled a Heretic, because he would not yield to
Julius the Second, that Sword-man, who flung St. Peter's Keys into the River of
Tiber, and took up St. Paul's Sword. Heresy is a sin; and indeed in their
account there was no other sin but Heresy, no sin of so foul an aspect: And
therefore whatsoever was the offense, that was the sin. And though a man were
no-whit guilty, yet was it in the Popes power to make him so: As it is
haereticare propositiones, to make those propositions false which are true. Nor
is the Devil a Devil at Rome only, or in the streets of Babylon; but he has
showed himself in Jerusalem, even in the Reformed Churches. For what have the
Writings of the Lutherans and the Calvinists been but bitter satyrs of one
side against the other, where, like Aeschines and Demosthenes, they
reciprocally lay open each others filthiness to the eyes and scorn of the
world; where they fight not with the tongue of Men and Angels, but of Devils.
The Calvinist says to the Lutheran that he is Diabolificatus, Diabolified; and
the Lutheran replys to the Calvinist that he is Superdiabolificatus, more then
diabolified. And thus their contention was not so much for the truth, as who
should be most diabolified. For sure the Devil cannot have worse language,
though he speak by the whore. This in these latter days has been the method
of finding out the Truth, to accuse one another of error. And hence finding out
a strange Beast in the Apocalypse, we are ready, if any offend us, or will not
be of our opinion, to say he is that Beast. What mutual stabbings, what
digladiations amongst Christians, not who shall be best, but who shall be
loudest! Par pari refertur, and invicem nobis videmur insanire; We give scorn
for scorn, and reproach for reproach, and each side and faction seems mad to
the other; and to a discreet good Christian indeed they are both so. For in
this eager pursuit and inquiry after the Truth, Christianity is quite lost; and
we leave the cause, and fall upon the person; like choleric men, who in the
fierce and hot persecution of a quarrel at last forget the beginnings and
ground from whence it arose. So that as Petrarch once spoke of Rome, Nusquam
magis Roma ignoratur quam Romae, That Rome was no where less known then at
Rome, so may we of Christianity, That it is no where less preached then amongst
Christians, who have a name that they live, but are dead, are but statues and
representations of Christians; so that what was written by Cato of Brutus may
be fastened upon many Christians, CHRISTIAN, MORTUUS ES, O Christian, thou art
dead. All the members he has are the members of a carnal man, Lips invenomed
with the poison of Asps, his Tongue a sharp Sword, his Mouth an open Sepulcher:
Such a creature is many a Christian to another, ridente Turca, nec dolente
Judaeo; Which makes the Turk laugh, and prefer his Mahomet before Christ, and
the Jew to pluck the vail closer to his face. Ac nunc miseram licet aetatis
nostrae laborem, and praesentium temporum stultas opiniones congemiscere; And
here give me leave to lament the business of this our age, and so bewail the
ungrounded opinions of the men of these present times; as Hilarious once spoke
in a case somewhat like. What wantonness in Religion! what religion in railing!
what disgrace flung on Learning! what honor to Ignorance! what hardness of
heart and contempt of Gods word and commandments! How many scurrilous, witless,
unsavory, unchristian Libels! more, I believe, within the compass of one year
then have been published before in three times the age of a man. So that we may
say of the common people of this our Nation as Seneca speaks of Egypt when it
was a Province under the dominion of the Romans, Loquax and ingeniosa ad
contumelias provincia, in qua qui vitaverunt culpam, non effugerunt calumniam;
They are become talkative and witty in telling of lies, and filling one another
with reproach: and he that lives amongst them may peradventure keep himself
free from fault, but he can hardly be exempt from infamy. Hoc Ithacus velit;
This is it which the Devil would have. If he were to be incarnate, and live
amongst them, he would know his own dialect, and speak as they do. Amongst the
rest, the Ministers of the Church, who might well challenge their prayers, have
felt the lash of their tongues, and for a, Lord bless them, have heard, Down
with them, Down with them, even to the ground. Some there are who complain that
their souls are starved for want of good preaching: And I can hardly see how it
should be otherwise, since their Pastors feed them with nothing but their own
idle phansies, which are no better then the husks which the Swine and the
Prodigal fed on. Others, who can but make eight of the Hundred of their moneys,
can make Two hundred drunkards of less then Eight, peradventure of none: And
though they are in Porters frocks, they are willing to believe that they are
Priests: Not but that their Covetousness may be as great as their Malice; but
they find it easier to multiply Faults then their Money. In a word, some
condemn their Pride, others, their Idleness; and many, their Covetousness:
Which were it true of them all: yet they were but like many of them, and
especially those that accuse them. Et certe magis nos amarent si tales essemus:
essemus enim de armento suo: And certainly if they were all such as they say,
they would love them more then they do: for they might well meet and go
together as beasts of the same herd. Amongst the Romans they used to brand all
calumniators and false accusers, and mark them with the letter K, to make them
infamous for defaming of others, that so they might find no man to accuse but
their own fortunes alone. I will never wish any infamy to these men who thus
delight in the infamy of others: For then I should be like unto them, and
triumph in that which I should lament. But I persuade my self that if this
Roman Law should be put in execution amongst us, we should see plures literatas
frontes, many a head lettered without which has little wit and less learning
within. I had rather they would remember whose profession it is to accuse, and
for his sake learn to detest it; or if they will accuse their brethren, let
them accuse them as God does them, not till they are forced to it. In omnibus
accusationibus hoc agendum est, ne ad e^s lubenter descendisse videamur; All
accusations must be put up with an unwilling hand, and we must make it appear
that we were forced to enter our action. Therefore that of Cassius Severus, Dii
boni, vivo, and quo me vivere juvat, Asprenatem reum video; Oh you Gods, I
live: and my life is more pleasant unto me because I see Asprenas arraigned,
was a speech which did much offend Quintilian, a good Orator and a judicious
Advocate. But so it is many times, defamers have this advantage of their
fulfilling a malicious will, they find some ease and delight in it. For as it
is in other passions, so is it in Malice; it brings ease in the vent. It is a
flame in our bones; but when we have breathed it forth at our mouth, it is
light. A strange thing it is to observe what content some men receive in the
sharp and severe censuring of their brethren, how they lay their hand to their
mouth, and wipe it, when they lay the whip on their back, and lash them; how it
is health unto them to say their brother is sick. Maledicere omnibus signum
bonae conscientiae arbitrantur, says St. Hierome of some of his time; They
count it a sign of a good conscience to speak against all men: Remedium poenae
putant, si nemo sit sanctus; and they esteem it as a remedy of their smart, if
no man be holy, and hope to escape punishment by another sin. He that wears
the patrimony of the poor on his back, will forget the sin quickly after a
volley of curses discharged against the Clergy. He that walks and talks away
his life, may be very confident that he is Gods child, because a great part of
that talk was against lazy Ministers. He that prodigiously spends more at a
supper then will keep a College a month, yet thinks himself a very pious man
because he hates drones, and therefore is well minded to pull them all down;
and, if any will join with him, he is ready with a Petition against them. Oh
what a garment of righteousness would these men think they had put on, if they
could take from Paul both his cloak and his parchments! How do many sit down
together, and sigh, and cry down the sins of the times, and then say in their
hearts, O how holy are we! Oh what a rare art has the Devil taught us, to
extract a cordial out of our brothers disease! How have we learnt to stuff a
pillow with other men's sins, and sleep upon it, and dream of the Kingdom of
Heaven! How does this man hide his Covetousness with that man's Pride! How is
the Profaneness of the Atheist lost in the Superstition of the Idolater, and
the Luxury of the Layman forgot in the Idleness of the Clergy! But let men
flatter themselves as they please; By this we know whose Disciples they are,
and whose side they take: Imitando eum siunt ex part ipsius, says St.
Augustine; even his whom they imitate. They may call themselves what they
please, the Elect, the Saints of God; But if they delight in the defamation of
others, and build up their faith upon the ruins of their brethren, and think
themselves holy because they can call their brother Ungodly, the Scripture has
given them a mark, which is as the letter K in their forehead; FILII DIABOLI
SUNT, They are the children of that great Adversary, that Accuser, the Devil.
Unusquisque cujus opera exercet in hoc seculo, illius erit in altero; Every man
shall be his in the next world, whose works he does in this. He that will be
his brothers Advocate, will plead for him, will pardon, will forgive him, will
make his compassion as a mantle to cover him, shall follow Christ, shall follow
that meek Lamb whithersoever he goes. But he that delights in the ripping up of
the bowels of his brother, in mangling his name, and murdring him alive; he
that measures his Piety by the curiosity of his Malice, and makes it his
Religion to say such a one has none; he that is a false accuser, and a
calumniator of his brethren, shall follow -- but I tremble to speak it; and had
rather beseech God for his infinite mercies sake to give them grace that they
may search their own hearts diligently; that they may learn to be judges of
themselves, and advocates for others: that they may lash their own sins, and
weep for others: that they may accuse themselves: which brings on absolution;
and not slander others; which hastens condemnation, and we conclude this point
with that which has been the prayer of the Church, From all blindness of
heart, from pride, vain glory, and hypocrisy, from envy, hatred, and malice,
and all uncharitablebleness, Good Lord, deliver us. And let all the people say,
AMEN.

Now to make some application of what has been delivered: Since this desire to
accuse and defame others is a property so natural to the Devil that from it he
has his name, so that the Accuser and the Devil are the very same, it will
concern us to be very wary that we calumniate not our brethren, lest we
resemble him our Enemy, rather then Jesus our Advocate. When Michael the
Archangel contended with this Devil, and disputed with him about the body of
Moses, he brought no railing accusation. And why should one Jude 19.
Christian do that to another which an Archangel would not do to the Devil
himself? Why should not our words rather kindle at the fire of Heaven then of
Hell?

In the second place, let us take heed to our own ways, that this Enemy throw
us not down, and then accuse us for falling. Let us watch over our own steps,
that when he makes his approach, he may find nothing in us, no malice, no
bitterness, nothing which he may put into his Bill. Let us say within our
selves when he comes to tempt us, This language is fair; but if we hearken to
it, he will change his dialect, and be that Lion which shall roar against us.
He smileth in this Beauty; but this Beauty will be a snare. He courts us in
this Honor; but, if we go up with him to the pinnacle, he will tumble us down.
He shines in these Riches; but, if we come near, we shall find him a consuming
fire. The fairest speech he gives is but a kind of prologue or preface to an
Accusation: and when he speaks friendly to us, we may be sure he will strike us
through the fifth ribb. Let us then say with Joseph, How can I commit this
wickedness, and sin against God, who would save me? and how can I commit this,
and help the Devil my enemy to accuse me? In the affairs of this world we are
very sly and cautelous, and will not give any advantage to those whom we
suppose to be no wellwillers unto us. Nay, many times we abstein from things
not unlawful in the presence of those we do not love, because we fear
whatsoever we do will be misinterpreted, and can expect no better gloss then
that which Malice will make. And shall we be so confident on the greatest enemy
of mankind as to help his Malice, and to further and promote the desire which
he has of our ruins. Shall I fill this Accusers mouth with arguments against
my self, and even furbish and whet the sword of my Executioner. This is a folly
which we cannot but be ashamed of; and yet in every sin we commit, we commit
this folly.

But yet, in the last place, as St. John says, If we sin, we have an Advocate;
so say I, If we sin, and the Devil put up his bill of Accusation against us,
(as most certainly he will) let us learn to accuse our selves, and that will
make his Accusation void, and cancel his Bill. From a broken and a contrite
heart let us say, We have sinned, and he has nothing to say. Let us confess
our sins, and we have put the Adversary to silence. Let us plead Guilty, and
Christ is ready to blot out the handwriting which is against us, and to take
it away, and nayl it to his cross. When I slander my brother, I do the Devils
office: When I yield to him, I help him: When I sin, I do but prompt him what
he should say against me, and as much as in me is, make the Devil no liar. But
when I rip up my heart, and lay it open to God, when I breathe forth my sins
and my sorrows before him, when I tender up a Bill against my self, a Bill of
my sins bedewed with my own tears, and colored with my Saviviours blood, the
Devil may roar, but not prevail; he may accuse me, but not be heard, because I
am quit already by proclamation, They that believe and repent shall be saved.
Confessio poenarum compendium. Our serious acknowledgment makes a short work,
prevents our Enemy, sets a period to Sin and Punishment. If we accuse our
selves, no accusation shall hurt us; and if we judge our selves, no sentence
shall pass upon us; and whatsoever libel this Accuser shall put up against us,
JESUS shall cancel, who is our Advocate. To whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost be all honor and glory for evermore.

The Seventh and Twentieth SERMON. PART I.
MATTHEW. XXII. 11, 12. And when the King came in to see the guests, he saw there
a man which had not on a wedding garment:

And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding
garment? And he was speechless.


GReat Feasts have their solemnities great. Not such attendance at the marriage
of a Peasant as of a Prince; not such noise and pomp at Nabal 's sheep-shearing
as when Ahasuerus feasted his Nobles in his palace at Shushan. Ever as the
person is, such is the state of celebration and ceremony. We have here the
Feast of a King at the marriage of his son, the dinner prepared, the fatlings
killed, the viands and dainties on the table, all things ready; A royal Feast,
not to some few provinces, but to every nation and to all people; not to the
Nobles and Princes and Captains alone, to honorable men of high place and
employment, but to the Farmer and the Merchant, men taken up and drowned in
worldly affairs; to those in the broad streets and highways, men that walk
and talk away their life, men that have little to do; and to those in the
by-lanes of the city, men that can do little; to the halt, the maimed, the
blind, to men knit and revitted to the world, and to men little better than
cast out of the world; to all sorts, to as many as could be found, both bad and
good. The King invites all, because the Feast concerns all. And that the house
may be filled, and the wedding furnished with guests, he takes the cup of
blessings, the cup of salvation, and drinks a Health to all the world. A royal
Feast indeed, where the gates lie open to all comers. And as it is a royal
Feast, so it is a lasting, a standing Feast, perpetuae incorruptibilitatis,
says Fulgentius; not, as the King of Persia 's, for a hundred and fourscore
days, but, as the Marriage is, for ever. As Desponsabo Hos. 2. 19.
te mihi in aeternum, so Feriabitur in aeternum. The Marriage is not to be cut
off by a divorce, nor the Feast by time: It is an everlasting Marriage, and an
eternal Holiday. IN PRINCIPIO, In the beginning, there it begun, and, if we
take in the purpose of the King, ANTE PRINCIPIUM, before the beginning, before
there was a Before, before the foundations of the Ephesians. 1. 4.
world were laid. But take the calculations we hear of it In Paradise the
symbolum is cast in, and notice given; The Seed of the woman shall break the
Serpents head. After, Abraham is plainly invited to this Feast; I will be Genesis
17 7.
thy God, and the God of thy seed. To this give all the Prophets witness. Acts
10. 43.
Isaiah composeth the Epithalamium or Marriage-song, I will sing to my Beloved
Isa. 5. 1.
a song of my Beloved. And indeed almost his whole Prophecy is but a descant
on that Song. In Jeremie we find the Bridegrooms name, THE Jer. 23. 6.
LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. In Ezekiel He is a Ezekiel. 34. 24.
Prince: in Daniel, a great Prince. Hosea tells of his Espousals, Dan. 12. 1.
Hosea 2. 19. Mic. 5. 2.
Micah of his Birth. At last, in the fullness of time, the Wedding is chaunted
forth by a full quire of Angels; Behold, now all things are ready: come unto
the marriage. Of all these things we are witnesses, say the Apostles. Take the
Morning of the world, and take the Evening of the world; take them of the first
age, and take them of the ast; Fides utrosque conjungit, says St. Augustine,
Faith draws and linketh both together, and presents them all at this great
Feast.

I have told you before I was aware what this Marriage Feast is, and who the
guests. Saint Paul delivers himself plainly, where speaking Ephesians. 5. 32.
of that indossoluble tie of Marriage, he calls it (...), a great mystery; but
then adds, but I speak concerning Christ and the Church. Now Nazianzene happily
joyneth together (...), the name CHRIST and the substance and reality of that
name: For as Christ's name is not a bare and naked name, but there ^ie wrapped up
in it Grace and Peace and Salvation; so Christ's Marriage is no^ a bare
marriage: No; he has left dotem Ecclesiae, he has plenteously endowed his
Spouse with graces from above, he has articled and covenanted with her: Nor is
his feast a common feast: No; he has prepared his table, and set on it (...)
the bread of Angels, bread to nourish and strengthen us till we grow up to an
angelical estate; and castas delicias, those chaste delicates, his Word and
Sacraments; a Cup running over, calicem inebriantem, an intoxicating Cup, that
overcomes us, and transports us beyond our selves; (Ebrietas ista magis sobrium
facit, says Cyprian. Let us therefore drink of this Cup, no^ guttatim, by
drops, but as we do our Sin, or as an Ox does water: for Intemperance here is
the best sobriety.) And the Kings Son, Christ himself, Legis and gratia mola
aptatum in farinam, ground between the Law and his Grace and tender Mercies
into fine flower, and kneaded into good Bread. In a word, he sets before us not
only (...), strong meat, but (...), cakes and dainties; meats to nourish us,
and meats to delight us; cordials and antidotes, and pleasant wine; the bread
of life, and the rivers of his pleasures.

So this is the Feast, and we are invited to it. Now all the King desires of us
is, as the Apostle speaks, that we would keep the feast, keep it as such a
feast should be kept; no^ (...), according to the letter; that is Jewish: no^
(...), according to our sensual affections; that is heathenish: but (...),
spiritually, (...), as the Spirit would have it kept. Now the Spirit and the
Bride say, Come; Come unto the marriage. But come not naked, but come prepared,
but come with a wedding garment; not with our clouted shoes and old garments,
as if we were on a journey, or going into the field or vineyard to labor for
the meat that perishes: But observe (...), a decorum: Yield an awful reverence
to the Person, the Master of the Feast, a King; to the Place, the Princes
Bride-chamber; to the Feast, a royal lasting feast. At least for his loves sake
that invites us, come like guests, not spies; like friends, not traitors: come
as to a wedding, not a market: come vestiti apparelled, that we be not naked;
and, that we be not unmannerly, vest nuptiali, with a vesture suitable, with a
wedding garment.

Indeed a great pity it is, nay a great sin it is, that so high a Feast should
be slighted, that we should come ragged into the Kings Court, or like Ruffians
into the Presence Chamber. But in the parable we read it, and in the moral and
practick exposition of the parable we find it, that slighted it was; that some
were angry that they were invited, angry there was any such feast at all; that
they entreated the servants spitefully, and slew them. And we know what became
of them; Armies were sent forth to destroy those murderers, v. 7. But in my
Text we find one that dealt not so roughly, drew not his sword: at the
invitation, gave good words yet, and came; but so unprepared, so ill qualified,
that being asked why he came so, his tongue would not serve him to give an
answer, but he was struck silent and dead with a question; And he said unto
him, Friend, etc.

This is the sum of these words. But we can hardly divide them. For here is a
Question without an Answer, Quaestio ducens ad absurdum, a Question that draws
and binds either to silence or to an absurdity. Answer what he will it was
(...), absurdly done, so to come. And Quaestio ducens ad impossible, a
Question that shuts up his mouth in silence, or drives him to a flat
contradiction. He is come, and he is not come; invited, and not a guest; in the
Church, and not of the Church. We see the King asks the question, How he came
thither? (...), capistratus est, he was muzzled. It was a question that
muzzled, that thrott^ed him; in a word, a question unanswerable.

But for our more orderly proceeding we will first take the words in that form
and habitude they lie, as they are a Question. Then we will resolve the
Question; for so a question may be resolved into a Syllogism. And there we
shall fill our mouth with arguments against him that came so unprepared. But
before we can ask the Question, or reason against him, we must lay down certain
(...), positions eminent in the Text, and send them before to make way to the
right understanding of the Question. And then the points will be these: 1. That
clothed we must be if we come to this marriage feast; 2. What this
wedding garment is; 3. That one of the guests had it not; 4. That he was
questioned for it; together with the Compellation, Friend: And then 5. in the
last place, we will look upon the party questioned, not able to reply, amazed,
muzzled, silent; (...), but he was speechless. Of these in their order.

The Marriage is of Christ and his Church. And he that will be partaker of the
Feast must be clothed. In Christ all fullness dwells, and he Col. 1. 19. and
2. 9.
loves not emptiness and vacuity. He is clothed with righteousness; and he
would not have us come naked to him. The holy Ghost seems to delight himself
with this Metaphor. He apparels God as it were; He puts on Righteousness as a
breast plate, and a helmet of Salvation on his head: he puts on the garments of
Vengeance as a garment, and was clad with Zeal as a cloak. Isa. 59. 17.
Nuditas notat Diabolum, says the Father; Nakedness is a mark of the Devil. We
never read of his clothing. Stripped he was of his Angels wings, of his eminent
Perfection: And our first parents, he stripped in Paradise of that rich robe of
original Justice, and left them so naked that they were even ashamed of
themselves, and sewed fig leaves together to make them aprons: And us he
strippeth every day, and leaves us nothing but fair pretenses and false excuses
to shelter u^, scarce so good a covert as their figleaves. We read of
Belshazzar, that he was weighed in the balance, and Dan. 5. 27.
was found minus habens, too light, wanting something: And in the next verse,
PEERS, his kingdom is divided from him. At the entrance of the King here, the
guest that was found to be (...), not having something that he should have, was
thrust out of doors, and cast into utter darkness. Christ gives not to wilful
bankrupts: No; HABENTI DADITUR, To him Matthew. 25 29.
that has it shall be given, and he shall have abundance; and vestitus
supervestietur, he that is clothed already shall be clothed-upon with a robe or
immortality. 2 Cor. 5. 4.
But every garment fits not a Christian. Every garment is not worth the
keeping. There is strange apparel, and the Prophet tells us Zeph. 1. 8.
who they were that wore it, v. 5. even they that worshipped the host of heaven
on the house-tops, and swore by Malcham; that leaped on the threshold, and
filled their masters houses with violence and deceit. A garment fitter for
Micah in his house of gods, fitter for Judas, or Barabbas, at a plot of
treason, or an insurrection, than for a true Disciple of Christ. This is not
the wedding garment. We must then take a true pattern to make it by, or else
fitted we shall not be. And where can we take it better than from Christ
himself? Summa religionis est imitari quem colis, says the Father; It is the
sum of Religion, all the piety we have, to imitate him whom we worship, to be
Christiformes, to keep our selves in a uniformity and conformity to Christ; Sic
oculos, sic ille manus, sic ora ferebat; Thus He looked, thus He did, thus was
He apparrelled? Now what was Christ's apparel? The Prophet will tell us that it
was glorious; that he was Isa. 63. 1.
formosus in stola, very richly arrayed; and St. Mark, that he had a white
garment, Chap 9. 3.
whiter than any Fuller could make it. And St. John tells us of his retinue,
that they were clothed in white linen, white and clean. Look into Rev. 19. 8.
Christ's wardrobe, and you find no torn or ragged apparel. No: old things are
done away. The robe of Righteousness, the garment of Innocence, 2 Cor. 5. 17.
(...), the spotless coat of Temperance and Chastity, these Christ had, and
with these he went about doing good. Out of this wardrobe must we make up our
wedding garment. We must, says the Apostle, put on the Lord Jesus Christ; put
him on all, his Righteousness, his Obedience, Romans 13. 14.
his Love, his Patience. We must be conformable to Christ, (...), according to
proportion. In the Rule of our Obedience; we must not wear a garment of our own
phansying, an irregular unprescribed devotion: In the Ends of it, to glorify
God on the earth: and in the Parts of it; not John 17. 4.
a parcel garment: It must fit every part; it must be universal. The Schoolman
must be speculum Christi, a Looking-glass reflecting Christ's graces upon
himself, presenting to him his own image in all righteousness and holiness. We
will not say, with Fastus Socinus, that Christ was married to his Church only
to this end; that Christ came into the world non ad satisfactionem, sed
exemplum; not to be the way to life, but to cut one out; not to pay down our
accounts, but to teach us an art of thrift to be able to pay them our selves;
not to be a sacrifice for sin, but an ensample of godly life: A most horrid
blasphemy! But this we may say, That Christ's fulfilling the Law was not to that
end that we should break it; That he satisfied not by death but for those who
would be conformable to his death. Phil. 3. 10.
That he dyed not for Traitors and Rebels; That he married not to the Church,
sealing it with his blood, to let in Ruffians and Fools and men of Belial to
the wedding; to let in those that will rip up his wounds, and cast his blood in
the dust, and trample it under their feet. No: he that comes to him must know
that he is, and that he is a lover of righteousness. He that comes to him,
must come, not with spotted garments; his Soul defiled with luxury: not with
torn garments; his Soul divided and pulled in pieces by Envy and Malice; his
Reason distracted, and his Affections scattered and blown abroad; his Love on
the World, his Hatred on Goodness, his Anger on good Counsel, and his Desires
on Vanity: but with a garment of the Bridegrooms spinning, even Righteousness,
Obedience, and Sanctity of conversation. And thus the Fathers make it up:
Charitas est vestis nuptialis, says Gregory; and so says Augustine. Hierome
composeth it of Christ's Precepts. Others bring in gratiam Spiritus Sancti, the
gracious effects of the Spirit. Basil, on Psalm. 9. tells us it is Faith;
Vestiri in Christo est fidem habere. In this variety there is no difference. He
that takes in Charity, leaves not out Faith as a ragg fit to be flung to the
dunghill: and he that entertains Faith, shuts not Charity out of doors.
Methinks the disputation held up this day in the world with that eagerness and
heat is uncharitable, Whether should have the precedence, Faith, or Good works;
Whether is the better piece to put into a Garment; and as uncharitable, so
unnecessary. Why should I question which is the best piece, when the want of
either spoils the garment? When both reflect upon each other by a mutual
dependence, what talk we then of priority? Heat furthers Motion; and Motion
increases Heat. Faith begins Good Works; Good works elevate and quicken and
exalt our Faith, give it growth as it were, promote and further it, not in the
act of Justification, but in the Knowledge of God, in the Contemplation of his
Majesty and Goodness, in the dilating and enlargement of our Love and Devotion.
Faith is the mother of Good works; and Good works the nurse of Faith. Can you
separate Light from a burning Taper? or Brightness from the Flame? Then may you
divide Faith and Charity. A good Work without Faith is but a worthless action,
and Faith (...), without works is dead. Non James 2.
negant poenitentiam and bona opera, says Bellarmine; The Protestants deny not
Repentance and Good works. And our Charity will say, Non negat fidem, The
Papists do not casheer Faith. Let us take them both, and make them up, like
Christ's garment, in tunicam inconsutilem, into a seamless coat, and the
question is stated, the controversy at an end.

But may we not seem here to spin a thread of our own, to make an intertexture,
and weave-in between our own inherent Righteousness; and then the Apostle comes
in with a (...), not having the righteousness by the Law; Phil. 3. 9.
And he will not be found in that apparel. Put in our Passions to our Actions,
our Afflictions to our Alms, our Martyrdom to our Prayers, and it will not be
worth the while to put them on. Our best Righteousness is but of a course
rotten thread. Stillamus in patinam bonorum operum saniem concupiscentiae, Our
natural Corruption drops upon the webb of our Good works; and that rots them.
Our Chastity; a wanton thought defloureth it: our Prayers; a wandering
imagination scatters them: our Liberality; a grudging mind, vainglory and the
noise of a trumpet drowns it. Our best Righteousness is but pannus menstruatus:
(It is the holy Ghost's phrase) but as menstruous rags: ill materials to make
up a wedding garment. Isa. 64. 6.
They that talk so much of JUSTITIA PROPRIA, of their own Righteousness, when
they see how ill it becomes them, put it off, and are ashamed of it. In the day
time they wear it for fashion: but at night, when they are about to ly down in
the grave, then, JUSTITIA NOSTRA EST INJUSTITIA: then away with it; it is not
worth the wearing. Before it was the more honorable wear; but now, propter
incertitudinem propriae justitiae, because there is no sure harbor under the
covert of our Good works, Christ's Righteousness is called-in with a TUTISSIMUM
EST, as the far safer ware: And here they will abide till the storm be overpast.

All this is true: Yet we must remember that Christ's Righteousness, though it
be a large cloak, as St. Bernard calls it, yet it covers no unrighteous
person. His Feast is not for every rude unmannerly guest, male cinctis, male
Sanctis, for men that little set-by what habit, what garments they come in.
Imputative Justice, our Elder Brothers robe, is our own shelter; but inherent
Righteousness is a decent wear. Christ's Righteousness without a lively Faith,
like a garment in the press, neither covers nor adorns us. It is like a Pardon
about the neck of an executed traitor: He is condemned already, says Christ.
He is under the power of darkness; and the brightness John 3. 18.
of Christ's Righteousness cannot shadow him. St. Jude tells us he is twice
dead; and it is to small purpose to cloth a dead man: He receives neither
warmth nor life; but rot he will and stinck in the richest vestment, in cloth
of wrought gold. But then our Righteousness without Christ's is but a thin wear:
mox perpluet; it will keep out neither wind, God-wot, nor weather; not irae
stillicidia, not the droppings of Gods wrath; What say we then to his hail
stones and coals of fire? It is a moth-eaten garment; nay it is but a moth;
levi tactu teritur, a ^ight touch dashes it to nothing: Or, if it be a garment,
it is a garment rent and torn to pieces with the riots of our youth, with the
frowardness of our age; with the intemperance of our first age, and the
covetousness of our last: and the least breath of Gods displeasure blows it
asunder, and scatters it before the wind, and leaves us naked to the great day
of wrath and retribution.

Men and brethren, what shall we do? Why surely seeing we cannot be as the Sun
in the firmament, and shine with our own light, let us strive to be stars, and
be resplendent with a borrowed one, and in Christ's ^ight see light. Let his Day
complete our twilight, his absolute Perfection our weak endeavors, his Fasting
our feeble abstinence, his earnest Supplications our faint devotion, his Death
our mortification. And seeing the sheep of a thousand mountains cannot cloth
us, seeing, nothing we can do nothing we can suffer, can shelter us, let us put
on the Lord Jesus Christ and offer up himself to himself, that our Faith may be
enricht with his merits, our Hope dilated by his promises, and our Charity
resplendent in his excessive love; and that so we may make up this glorious
vestiment, this wedding garment, and with boldness inter into the Kings Court,
and sit down at his table.

And now we may freely speak that Faith and Good works, or Faith working by
Love, make up this wedding garment. These are traduces capessendae
aeternitatis, derive and deliver to us a capability of eternity, yea eternity
it self. They present Christ to us comfortable in his Sacraments, faithful in
his Promises, bountiful in his Rewards; and they present us back again to
Christ, reverent at his Table, waiting on his Word, filled with his abundance,
and running-over and diffusing our selves by an overflowing gratitude. O vestem
auro contra non charam! O garment inestimable above pearl and precious stones!
I am sure David would not have left it for the richest robe in Saul's wardrobe.
It was better to him than Psalm. 119. 72.
thousands of gold and sylver. St. Paul speaking to Women, who, as Hierome
says, are (...) genus, much affect trimness in apparel, and are glad of a
Holiday to be seen in their best clothes, tells them plainly that broydered
hair, and gold, and pearls, and costly array are not so becoming a 1 Timothy 2. 9,
10.
wear as good works. These we are bidden to be very charie of, to keep Rev. 16.
15.
them as our best apparel; lest Christ steal in upon us at unawares, and find
us naked, and discover our shame. Garments then these are. But we shall better
understand the Metaphor, if we stay a while, and take notice of the ends and
uses of Apparel. And first, Clothes are for covert. Vestis, quasi domus
corporis, says Tertullian; A garment is as a house; the body dwells in it. So
are Faith and Sanctity of life unto us. The rain descends, the winds blow, and
beat upon the house; but we are safe, safe from those winds which blow out of
the Devils treasury, from all his insinuations, suggestions, and strong
temptations. But alas when we are without this house, we are tectum jugiter
perstillans, a house with the roof open, dropping thorough, wherein we can
neither eat nor sleep quietly, but are driven from one corner to another. Every
step is a snare, every drop a tempest; every assault, an overthrow. But put
this garment on, and we have shelter.

And as Clothes are for covert, so are they also for warmth. And so is Faith,
not only like Fire, purifying the heart; but like Clothes, warming Acts 15. 9.
the affections to a temperate and active heat. An unbeliever, Lord! what a
frost there is at his heart! how cold and chill and denumn'd he stands, not
able to pull his hand out of his bosom, as Solomon speaks! Lay the whip upon
the fools back, yet he moves not, in better case to suffer than to be up and
doing* But Faith strikes a heat through us. It is active in the Hand, vocal in
the Tongue, compassionate in the Heart; It sets the brain a working, seeking
and pursuing opportunities of doing good; It makes our Feet like hinds feet,
and enlarges the soul, that we may run the way of Gods commandments.

Again, Garments, as they are indumenta, for covert and warmth, so are
ornamenta too, for decency and ornament. And sure Faith and Holiness of life
are a comely wear. (...), says Nazianzene, Goodness is equally venerable to
all men. It is not so much that good men hold her in esteem: Her very enemies
praise her in the gate. Qui tot argumentis scripserunt; They who by their black
deeds have prescribed her, and sent her a bill of divorce, will be ready enough
to tell you that she is the horn of beauty, fairer than the children of men:
Judge of her by her contrary. (...), Sin is shy of the light, and keeps least
in sight. She has a foul face, and her best friends fling dirt at her. Hoc
habet; sibi displicet, says Seneca; They that put her on are ashamed to walk
abroad with her, but fling her off in the streets, as ready to disgrace Sin as
to commit it. The Profane gallant thunders out an oath, and the next breath is
a prayer that God would forgive the villainy. The Superstitious wanton watche^
her sins as she does her beads; but drops them faster. Her first care is, an
opportunity to commit sin; and then to deliver up the full tale to her ghostly
Father. The Adulterer and the Priest, like the Sun and the Moon, have their
seasons; in the night, Uncleanness; and when the Sun is up, Confession. Ashamed
she is of this loose garment but unwilling to put it off: nay, put it off she
does, but not to fling it away. An argument of some dislike; she so often
changes. Tertullian says well, Omne malum aut timore aut pudore natura
perfudit; Nature has either struck Vice pale, or dyed it in a blush. When we
sin, we either fear, or are ashamed. But Righteousness and Charity are of a
good complexion, and, like a healthful body, inde colorem sumunt unde vires,
from thence have their beauty from whence their strength. Righteousness is
amiable in her going: The young men see her, and hide themselves; and the aged
arise, and stand up. Job 29. 8. 11.
The ear that hears her, blesses her; and the eye that sees her, gives witness
to her. If the whole world were a Sun, and all the men in it one eye, yet she
dares come forth at noonday, before the sun and the people: Ad medium
properat, lucemque nitescere poscit. We see then, this is not only a Garment to
cover us, but also an Ornament to deck us; not for necessity alone, but for
decency also. St. Paul goes further, and tells us it is an Armor to defend us,
a complete armor, (...), Ephesians. 6. 11.
Take the whole armor of God. And he furnishes the spiritual Soldier with
Shoes, Girdle, Breast Plate, Helmets and all necessary accoutrements from top
to toe. (...), Take it, non ad pompam, sed ad pugnam; not to make a glittering
show, like Darius, but to fight like Alexander; to demolish strong holds, to
cast down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against us
in our way: non ad resistendum, sed ad proficiendum, says Augustine; not only
to beat back the enemies darts, but to gain ground of him; to take-in those
places, those corners of our souls, which he has beleaguerd; to enlarge in us
the kingdom of grace, that so our passage may be free to the kingdom of Glory.

To these we may add a fourth. Garments are not only for Necessity, Decency,
and Security, but also for Distinction. So says St. Augustine, Charitas
dividit inter filios regni and filios perditionis; Charity puts a distinction
between true heirs and sons of perdition. The character and mark of a
Christian, says Nazianzene, is the letter Tau in his forehead, by which God
does know his, and is known of his. Bellarmine has no less than fifteen marks
of the true Church: but this one here is worth them all. We talk much of the
book of life, but we never read it, and whose names are written therein we
cannot tell. All the light we have is from this fire of Charity. He that has
her has, if not written his name in that book, yet subscribed to it: he that
casts her off, has drawn out to himself those black lines of reprobation. All
the mark we know good Christians by here, all the marks we shall know Saints by
hereafter, is Charity: Rank and order Gods Decrees how we will, and tell them
at our fingers ends, all the light our Savior gives us is this, They that have
done well, that have this mark, shall enter into everlasting life; and they
that have done evil, that have it not, John 5. 29.
into everlasting fire.

So then this is a Garment, and does cover us; and not only cover, but adorn;
not only adorn, but defend; not only defend, but distinguish. Take them
together, they are an antidote against Fear, which does so often stagger the
best of us. They wipe-out (...), the fancy and conceit of some evil drawing
near; whether it be (...), a destructive evil, or (...), a troublesome evil.
Fear? what should we fear? A storm? Here is a Covert. Shame and contempt, which
David so feared, and would Psalm. 119. 22.
have removed. Here is a rich Robe to adorn us. The chill cold of Temptations?
This is the endromis, the Winter-garment. The violence of the Enemy? Here is
Armor of proof to defend us. To be numbered with the transgressors? Here is a
Mantle with a badge upon it, to distinguish us. No: Fear not, says the Angel,
when he delivered the Gospel. And Faith makes it Gospel unto us. We need not
fear in the evil day, in our worst days: not let go our hold-fast, not cast
away our confidence. Here is that Hebr. 10. 35.
that confirms and radicates and establishes us, and sets us, not only upon,
but (as the Wiseman speaks) makes us an everlasting foundation. Or, Prove. 10.
25.
to keep us to the Metaphor, a Garment it is for all uses. If we have this on,
neither storm, nor cold, nor disgrace, nor the enemy, nor ill company shall
hurt us.

But, in the next place, it may be for all these uses, yet not a
wedding garment. Every garment is not for a feast. There are sackcloth, and
sables and blacks; but for mourners: not for guests. These are not for our
turn: We are going to a wedding, not to a funeral. Now we go to a wedding with
joy: And this is a garment of joy. It makes the face to shine, and the heart
to leap, and the tongue to glory. He that invites us, joys that we come, and
we come with joy. (...), Rejoice with Luke 15. 6, 9.
me, say they. Let us eat, and be merry, says he: and he takes in the Luke
15. 23.
Angels to bear a part in that mirth. And, (...), says the Apostle, Rejoice in
the Lord always. And lest we should forget it, he adds, And again I say,
Rejoice; O aureas vices! O happy interchange, Phil. 4. 4.
when the Bride-grooms voice is Joy, and the guests Joy the echo of that
voice; when he delights to call, and we are forward to come, when the feast is
a feast of joy, and we are merry at the feast. To enter a triumph in blacks, to
come to a feast as if we were going to a charnel-house, to sit down at table as
if we were in gives, to loath the bread of life, to be afraid of the
Sacraments, to have our stomach turn at Christ's Dinner as if we were to take
down gall and aloes, is but an ill sign, a sign of one ill affected. Vestis
affectum indicat; The Garment, as it covers the body, so discovers the mind
and affections. He that has a wedding garment on, goes with joy and triumph to
the wedding.

Again, as by our attire we express our Joy, so do we our Gratitude. The best
thanks we can give the King, the best amends we can make him, is to come in our
best clothes. Grate ad nos pervenisse indicamus effusis affectibus, says
Seneca; Then a benefit meets with a grateful heart, when it is ready to pour
forth it self in joy and respect; when the affections cannot contain
themselves, but are dilated and break forth; when they are visible in our eyes,
our hands, our tongues, our gesture, our garments. Will you think him grateful
that takes a fish with the same countenance he would take a serpent? that is no
more affected with the gift of a pearl, than of a peblestone? What is his
estimate of the feast, think you, that comes thither as if he cared not whither
he came thither or no, as if it were not worth the coming to? that hears the
Preacher as he would hear a song? reads the Gospel, and is no more affected
than with Aesops Fables? we receive the bread in the Sacrament as if it were no
more but, as the Papists scoff is, Calvin's loaf? in a word, counts the blood of
the Covenant a common, an unholy thing. Hebr. 10. 29.
Away with such bold neglect. A garment we must come in, and in a
wedding garment. Sanctity of life is our best retribution. The best payment is
when we pay God out of his own mint, with his own coin, when we show him his
own image and superscription: the price he values himself at is a QUOTQUOT
RECEPERUNT, only to receive him. The price he puts upon Aeternity is but to
prefer it before a span of time. His blessings, do but think them so, you have
purchased them. All the thanks he expects for his great dinner is but a short
grace, a few days drawn out and spent in a thankful acknowledgment, an open
hand for a gift, a minute for eternity, a desire for a blessing, a heart for
himself. (...), says Clemens. Fear not upbraiding. He thinks his great cost
well spent, if thou come but mannerly, if thou bring with thee (...), a
wedding garment. For by our having this garment on we are not only grateful,
but we also publish our gratitude. We do it not in a corner, remotis arbitris,
as if we were afraid or ashamed to be seen and to have some witness nigh. Upon
the sight of our garment all the country can tell we are going to a feast. And
this is it the King expects. Gaudet beneficium suum latius patere; His Benefits
he would have as large as all the world, his Graces increased in thee, and
diffused and spread abroad upon others; thy Grain of mustard seed grow up into
a tree as high as heaven, thy Talent become ten, that thy growth, thy thrift
may be seen and taken notice of. God has not made us only vessels, to contain
water, but conduits, to convey it; no brokers of his blessings, to improve them
for our selves, but stewards, to distribute them to others; like beacons, not
only burning our selves, but giving notice to the whole country; one example of
goodness being kindled by another, and a third by that, and so multiplying
everlastingly. Thy habit and attire may draw others to the feast; and then thy
welcome is doubled, because thou bring in company. Good examples bear with
them a command: Therefore Philo the Jew, in his Book which he writ De Abrahamo,
calls the lives and acts of the Patriarchs Leges and jura Patriarcharum non
scripta, The unwritten Ordinances and Laws of the Patriarchs; as if they had
(...), a compulsive power, and were as forcible in their command as
statute law. God loves these ocular Sermons, and would have the Eye catechized
as well as the Ear. Look upon the high Priest under the Law; his gesture, his
motion, his garments, all were vocal. Quicquid agebat, quicquid loquebatur,
doctrina erat populi, says Hierom; His Actions were didactical as well as his
Doctrine, his very Garments were instructions, and the Priest himself was a
Sermon. Goodness is neither Anchorite nor Hermit, neither for the closet nor
the wilderness; but she expounds and publishes her self, she cries in the
streets; so that he that has ears to hear may hear her, and he that has eyes
to see may see her; the hungry taste her, the naked feel her, and the smell of
her is like the smell of a field which the Lord has blessed. If thou art not a
very Idol, thou must needs be the better for her. To conclude; She is a garment
for use to our selves, and a weddinggarment to be looked on by others: The
fashion and beauty of the work may chance to take a stander-by, and win him to
a liking. She is a garment to defend us from fear; and she is a wedding garment
to cloth us with joy; (...), a wrought garment: a Covert, a Wear, a Defense;
these are in the cloth: to Become, to Separate and Distinguish; these are in
the making and the fashion: Joy, and Gratitude, and Respect, and the Reflection
of its glory and brightness upon others; these are the colors and embroidery.

We have now made-up this wedding-garments; and should proceed to the Party
questioned for his not having it on. But I fear I have been too troublesome: I
will leave him therefore at the bar to be examined the next opportunity.

The Eight and Twentieth SERMON. PART II.
MATTHEW. XXII. 11, 12. And when the King came in to see the guests, he saw there
a man which had not on a wedding garment:

And he says unto him, Friend, how came thou in hither, not having a wedding
garment? And he was speechless.


THE wedding garment we made up as you have heard, out of our Saviors
wardrobe, of Innocence and Sanctity, of Faith and Charity, and whatsoever else
was praiseworthy. The glory of it struck our eyes, the beauty of it awak't our
affections, the necessity of it rowsed our desires. We may now proceed, and
see, in the next place, Though it were a rich robe and glorious; a comely wear,
to adorn us; a coat of mail, to defend us; though it were better stay at home
than appear before the King without it; yet one there was that thought it not
worth the putting on. To the feast he goes, in he rushes, and down he sits,
(...), in outward appearance, a guest as well disposed as any of the company;
but what he was (...) in the heart, as the Apostle speaks, and within, no
discovery was made till the King came in; and then there was. Then
discalceatur, he is stripped, and flung off the stage. (...), his visour and
mask of godliness, as St. Paul calls it, falls off; and (...), as St. Peter
calls it, the cloak of his evil intents, is plucked off. He is made a spectacle
to men and Angels; who cannot but confess that tenebrae exteriores, a dark
dungeon, is a fitter place for such a guest than a Kings table. The King with
but one cast of his eye marks him out, and singles him from the rest: And, for
his welcome thither, he hears, Quomodo intrasti huc? is strictly questioned how
he came there.

But we may say, It was well yet the King spyed but one, amongst such a
multitude but one to be thrust out of doors, the rest to sit down, and taste of
his dainties. ONE is no number: and that the streets and highways and hedges
should yield so many good guests, and send but one who might justly be
questioned, but one who might be excepted against, certainly it cannot but
stagger our belief, and question not only the story of the Parable, but the
mythologie. But one naked guest in the Princes bride-chamber? that is, (will
you have it plainly?) but one bad Christian in the Church? The Moral is of less
probability than the Parable.

Sure more than one there was. Unus dicitur, plures intelliguntur, says
Augustine, contra Donat, but one mentioned; yet more employed. This UNUS here is
nomen multitudinis; This One is a name of Multitude; This One, for ought we
know, is GAD, an host, more than all the company besides. The Epiphonema, the
last clause and shutting up of the Parable warrants as much; MULTI VOCATI, Many
invited to the feast, but few found worthy, few accepted. Origin helps us out:
Omnes mali sunt unius generis, says he: All the wicked in the Church are of
one kind, a generation of vipers, vipers all. What the Apostle speaks of
Christ's members, is true of the Devils limbs; They are many, and yet but one.
To the same place they tend, though they take diverse paths. Though they look
several ways, like Samsons foxes, yet tied they are fast to the same
firebrarnds, which will burn-up the whole harvest. As the Congregation of the
first born, which are written in heaven, have the bond of peace to collect and
tie them all in one, to make them populum adunatum, as Cyprian speaks, an
united people; so the firstborn of Satan have catenam peccati, the Devils
chain, to link them together. Though Pride swell one, and Despair contract
another; though Ambition lift-up one, and Anger fling-down another, yet in malo
they agree, in evil they are brethren. There is a communion of Saints; and Why
not a communion of Devils?

Now out of this thus much we learn, That all that come to the Kings feast are
not welcome guests: Some may be asked how they came in thither? All that give-up
their names to Christ are not true Christians: some are (...), but ill-lovers
of Christ. They love him rather for the loaves then the miracle; love him not
as Christ, but for some by-end or respect, for their credit, or conveniencie.
Like the guest here, they will not stay behind, but be as forward as the best.
To the Feast they will, though by their rude behavior it appears how little
they set by either the Feast or the King himself. I say, Amongst the company of
guests some are to be questioned: In the Church of God some there are who are
no true members of Christ. St. Augustine, when he had divided all the world
into two Cities, of Good, and of Bad, says, Perplexae sunt admodum istae duae
civitates in hoc soeculo: These two Cities are much entangled and perplexed,
that in this world we can hardly distinguish them, or their citizens. But
ultimo judicio dirimentur, at the day of judgment, at the entrance of the King,
they shall both have their proper Arms and Scutcheons. We judge, but according
to the appearance, and our eyes pierce no further. But the Kings eyes are ten
Eccl. 23. 19.
thousand times brighter than the Sun: and uno intuitu, at one view, he
discerns in this medly and mixture, and makes a separation between those who
must sit down at his Table, and those who must be cast-out into utter darkness.
Here, as it is in the Gospel, a multitude throng Christ, and press upon him;
and there seems to be a kind of competition and holy emulation who shall be
nearest to him. Every man is a true member of the Church, and thinks no less:
We defy him who does but doubt of it. And this we see; we see every man in
post, and hastening to the Kings Court. But tangentem quaerit Rex, non
prementem; Christ likes better of our touch than our assault. Faith comes
behind, and keeps a distance, and does but touch: and upon the very touch
Christ himself turns round, and demands, not who thronged him, but who touched
him: This touch behind, this fearful touch of Faith, is more available than the
saucy forwardness, than the noise and stir of the multitude who are ready to
over-whelm him. What talk we of our care and haste in coming? of our courteous
entertainment of his messengers? of our attendance in the Princes
bride-chamber? Blandimenta sunt ista, non officia: These are but complements,
and fair language. Nudo nihil prosunt: These fig leaves will not cover us. If
the wedding garment be not on, better stay at home than come: Better not come
than be thrust out. Better a great deal dwell at Tire and Sidon, than be
Infidels at Chorazin. What? come we to a marriage feast without a
wedding garment? Yet we see many so come, with their old clothes; and torn
apparel, with the works of darkness not cast off, but hanging still fast about
them: so that though they be there, we may make a stand, and doubt whether they
be guests or no. We may doubt whether all be Christians in Christendom,
whether all in the Church be parts and members of the Church. Did I say we
might doubt Ecclesiam in Ecclesia quaerere? Why? no doubt Guests they are. They
were invited to the wedding, and so guests; They are in the company of those
who were called to the feast, and so of that Church and Congregation. All this
they may be, even guests cum privilegio; they may partake of all
Church-prerogatives, be washed in Christ's laver, frequent his house, sit-down
at his table, and yet for all this be questioned, nay be thrust out of doors,
and cast into utter darkness.

The Cardinal makes it a controversy, and methinks a needless one, Whether
magni and manifesti peccatores, great and open sinners, and reprobates, be not
members of the true Church. And it is the Heresy forsooth of Wickliff, Hus and
Calvin to deny it. Novum crimen, Cai Caesar! Shall I say, a new heresy, and
till of late unheard of? No; a plain truth it is, and St. Augustine long since
cried it up with an Absit; Absit ut monstra illa in membris illius Columbae
computentur; Lib. 2. contra Crescon. Don. God forbid that these monsters should
be reputed members of that innocent Dove? Can we conceive Christ's body with dry
arms and dead parts? and the City of God to be inhabited by devils? Or is it
possible Christ's members should be thrown into hell? Indeed let the Church be,
as he makes and presents it, visibilis and palpabilis, a Church that may be
seen and felt. Let her have a body, as well as a soul, as St. Augustine gives
her: And then members they are, but not intrinsecus, and in occulto intus, as
St. Augustine speaks, not intrinsecally, in that Collection of Saints; not
veritate finis, as himself confesses, to that end and purpose they are called;
Nominals, not Reals; numero, non merito; in number, not in weight; equivocal
members; as we call a painted hand a Hand, and a dead man a Man. But we had
rather let the Cardinal tell us what members they are. Capilli sunt, ungues,
mali humores; they are his own words. The true Christian is placed in the body
as an Eye, or an Ear, or a Hand, or a Foot: But the wicked, what are they? Even
as the Hair, or Nayls, or bad Humors in the body: Cives non cives, such members
of Christ's Church as Traitors are of a Commonwealth, as Cataline and Cethegus
were at Rome; members that would eat-out the very bowels of their body, and
subvert Church and Christ and all.

But we will not funem contentionis ducere, as Tertullian speaks, teaseout the
controversy too far. Upon the upshot we shall find that we are fallen upon
that fallacy which by the Logicians is called Ignoratio elenchi. We fight in a
mist, and mistake the question quite. Let us join issue, agree upon the (...),
the matter in hand, let the face of the Church be the same, and not vary and
change color in our alteration, and the question is stated, the controversy
at an end. For it is agreed upon on all hands, That Christ has a Floor to be
purged; That there are Tares amongst his Wheat; That at the marriage of the
Kings Sons, though the guests perceive it not, the King when he comes will spy
some one or other that has not on his wedding garment; That in the Church of
God mali miscentur bonis, the Evil are mingled with the Good, to file them to
an edge and brightness, says Gregory. Call them Guests, Friends, Christians,
Members of the Church; give them what titles you please: syllabae non salvant;
Heaven we may gain by violence, but not by spells and enchantment. Names and
titles will not save us. Write the Devil, says Bid, calculo candido, in a
fair character, in white silver letters, yet he is a Devil still, and his
signification is Darkness. Write out an Egyptians name with chalk, yet who
will say an Ethiopian is white? Paint Thersites in Achilles 's armor, will it
style him valiant? A lame commendation it is to be a Christian in a picture; to
have a name only that we live, to give-up no more than our names to Christ, and
take no more from him than his; to come into the Church by the water of
Baptism, and to go-out by a deluge of sin. A poor comfort, to be the Kings
guest, and be questioned; intrare ut exeamus, to enter into his courts, and
then be turned out of doors. This is the cafe of the Guest here, who in a
throng was as good as the best, as well apparelled, as well prepared as any;
but coram Deo, in the Kings eyes, naked and miserable; and is therefore
questioned, Quomodo HUC INTRASTI? How came thou in hither? Which is our next
Part.

The King is moved at the sight of the guests; and one of them he questions.
Affections are commotions, says the Philosopher. They make an earthquake in
us: they move us to speak oftentimes what otherwise we would not. Commonly then
the language is violent and peremptory; not in cold terms, and by way of a
plain declaration of our mind, but by a sudden and abrupt interrogation. Thus
in Fear, What shall I do? says the Steward, in Love; How fair art thou, oh my
beloved? says Christ to Luke 16.
his Church: in Anger; Who made thee a judge? say the to Moses; in Acts 6.
Admiration; (...), says the Apostles of the Temple, Mark 13. 1.
What stones, and what buildings are these. And here the King comesin, one
would think, to welcome his guests; but upon the sight of an unpleasing object
he is moved; spying one there who had not on a wedding garment, he is quick and
round with him. He says not, It is not well done to come naked: If you will
taste of my dainties, you must bring your garment with you: but, How came
thou in hither?

But what moved the King? What raised the storm? May we not set up a Quare
against the Kings Quomodo? May we not ask why the King asks how he came
thither: How came he thither? Why? he was invited to come, he was sent for, and
entreated kindly to come; and he had been very unadvised if he had stayed
behind. We know it cost some their lives; slain they were that refused. Quomodo
in the dining room is a strange question: v. 7.
but a cold welcome, to invite a guest, and then ask him how he came thither.

But this King we know is never angry without cause: He is not as Man, Numb.
23. 19.
that he should lie; is not as some men are, qui irascuntur quia irascuntur,
who are angry because they are angry, whose Anger runs round in a circle,
and begins and ends in it self. Much less is God angry to show his power, and
to make his Anger the herald of his Authority; as it is observable in some men
who have crept into some place and power, more than they merited; Angry they
will be, angry they must be, if it be but to show what mischief they can do,
what wonders they can work with a frown. No; this King non nisi laesus
irascitur; If he be angry, he is provoked: If he be moved, there is cause for
it. And here is good cause indeed; we have touched upon it before. It is not in
(...), his being there; it is in (...), his not having on a wedding garment.
This moved the King; this forced him to his (...), to his harsh interrogation;
this called up the tempest, the wind, a wind that blows out of the Devils
treasury. O quale spectaculum malus in Ecclesia! Oh what a horrid spectacle is
an ill-apparelled, an unprepared at a wedding in the bride-chamber, a bad
Christian in the Church of God. God cannot come near him, but a tempest is
moved round about him. At the very sight of him he begins to ask questions, he
is at QUOMODO straight. And we cannot easily say whether it be QUOMODO
exprobrantis, or indignantis, or dolentis, or admirantis, or accusantis. Indeed
it includes all: For by way of upbraiding, in grief and anger, full of
admiration at so strange neglect, the King proceeds against the Guest ex
formula, formally and legally, as we use in our Courts of Justice. Quomodo huc
intrasti? it is stilus curiae, the set-form he uses at that great day of
Judicature, at that day of wrath and retribution. It is a plain indictment:
Quomodo huc intrasti? is the bill of accusation; and non habens vestem
nuptialem, the main article.

We have now brought this Guest to his trial, and must plead against him.
Therefore we will resolve this Question (for so a Question may be resolved)
into a Syllogism. And here the conclusion is primae veritatis, very evident,
No man ought to come thus torn and ragged into the Kings court; No man to come
to this marriage feast without a wedding garment; No execrable thing to be in
Israel, no wicked profane person in the Church. A very principle in Divinity,
one would think, undeniable, unquestionable, and which needs no demonstration.
Saul amongst the Prophets is not so absurd and strange a sight as Judas
amongst the Disciples of Christ, or an Infidel amongst Christians. I say, a
principle it is in Divinity, No coming to Christ without Faith and Charity. But
(...). Such is the unreasonableness of Sin and Impiety, that it denies
principles, corrups and perverts the Gospel, rejects the truth, gives the lie
to Scripture, contradicts Christ, and would overthrow the whole body of
Christian policy. The guest here no doubt knew the Kings coat and colors,
what garments he was to come in: But in an obstinate rudeness he thinks them
not worth the wearing. To the King he goes in his old rags, to the feast with
his rebellion and ingratitude about him. How came thou in hither? Why ask we
him the question: He is condemned already. Let the next Verse take hold of him,
TOLL, ET LIGA, Take him away, bind him hand and foot, cast him into utter
darkness.

But we must follow the Kings method here. The King, we see, does not punish
before he questions; nor does he question without reason. There is a QUARE to
this QUOMODO, a Why to this How, Why he came thither, and, How he came thither.
Upon just calculation we shall find there be many arguments and unavoidable
reasons against him, why he should not thus have come. And we draw them first
from the Persons; the Person inviting, a King; and the Persons invited, no
Kings, I am sure, but beggars rather, poor and maimed, taken out of the
highways and streets, places of no refuge or shelter. And these lead us to
the rest; the invitation, gracious, and by an honorable way, his servants; the
Feast, a royal feast; the Place, the Bridegroom's chamber; lastly, the Garment,
an honorable wear taken out of the Kings own wardrobe.

The King came-in: That is the first. A working word, full of efficacy, able to
becalm a storm, to allay a tumult, to quench rebellion. It is the KING. The
very word strikes revenge thorough us, and remembers us of our duty and
allegiance. The Stoic tells us, (...), All duties are measured by relations.
And of all relations the first and highest is that of a Subject to a King. If I
be a King, where is my honor? says God And if God says it, who is King of
Kings, not to fall down is Treason; to neglect him, Rebellion; and Rebellion is
Witchcraft; and Witchcraft implies a compact with the Devil, the enemy of God
and all Goodness: And such a league is Treason. Where Nazianzene tells us that
Christ is a King; he adds withal, Ecquis hoc nomen incassum audierit? Shall
any hear or take this name in vain? Is God our King? Then every word of his
must be our motion, and drive us about. If he say, Come, we must come; and if
he say, Go, we must go; and if he say, Do this, we must do it. Now his word is
CUSTODI VESTIMENTA, That we should keep our garments, and look what apparel we
come in. If when the Devil has stripped us, or has put upon us strange apparel,
upon I know Zeph. 1. 8.
not what presumption we approach God's courts, it is a slight; and a Slight is
Treason. It is a plain NOLUMUS HUNC REGNARE, We will not that this King should
reign over us. We will not admit of his absolute power, that he shall enjoin us
what apparel he please, and entertain us upon conditions. If we may not break
our fast with God, and surfeit at the Devils Table; if we may not come to his
feast with the Devils livery; then nolumus hunc regnare, we groan under him as
under a cruel Tyrant, we cast-off our allegiance, and un-king him; his requests
and his commands, his letters and his proclamations, his counsels and his
precepts, all are hard and harsh sayings; who can bear them? And now tell me,
Is not this to decree for Satan, to prefer Sin before Grace, and the Devil
before God, and in a strange contempt to declare the precedencie for our
adversary? Is not this, in Clemen 's phrase, (...); to make God contemptible?
Sure this argument a persona will reach home, and warrant us to meet the Guest
with a Quomodo, and ask him the question, How he dares thus come to a King? It
makes up the Imprimis against him, and brings him in guilty of no less crime
then Treason and Rebellion.

But we may exalt this consideration, and reinforce the argument, by
transferring the QUOMODO from the person of the King to the Guest, QUOMODO TU?
how came Thou in hither? Thou my liege-servant and sworn subject? For we
know, though Gods kingdom be as large as the whole Universe, though God be
King of all the Earth, yet his name is great in Israel. His throne is in the
Church. In our PATER NOSTER we begin as Sons, and call God Father; but we end
as Subjects, and acknowledge the kingdom to be His. Again, QUOMODO TU? How
came Thou in hither? Thou, who have given thy name to Christ, and wast a
Christian, when thou could not name Christ: Thou, who should shed thy blood
for him, yet trampled on his, and, as much as in thee lies, crucify him
afresh? This is circumstantia aggravans, a circumstance that has weight in it,
talent-weight. For the Grammarian will tell us, Plus est prodere quam
oppugnare, to Betray is more than to defy, and a Traitor worse than an open
Enemy. That Malice which whispers in a corner, or works in a vault, is more
dangerous than that which is proclaimed by the drum. Judas was worse than the
Jews, his Kiss more piercing than the Spear, and this Guest here more bloody
than those Murderers. It was v. 7.
a charitable wariness and a wary charity in that holy Father St. Augustine to
suspend his censure, and not suddenly to give sentence against a Heretic whose
conversation was pious. Whether were more damnable, a bad Catholic or a just
Heretic, he would not by any means determine. But Aquinas lays it down for a
positive truth, Gravius peccat fidelis quam infidelis propter Sacramenta fidei,
quibus contumeliam facit. The same sin makes a deeper dye in a Christian then
in an Infidel, and leaves a stain not only on the person, but also on his
Profession, and flings contumely on the very Sacraments of Faith; whereas in an
Infidel it has not so deadly an effect, but is veiled and shadowed by
Ignorance, and borrows an excuse from Infidelity it self. For Ignorance is
circumstantia allevians, a lessning circumstance, and does abate and take off
from the sinfulness of Sin. Which makes our Savior give sentence against
Capernaum even for Matthew. 11. 23.
Sodom it self. Though Sin be Sin in all, yet the person does aggravate, and
extend, and multiply it. Oh the paradox of our misery! Our Christianity shall
accuse us, and our Happiness undo us. At the day of judgment it shall be easier
for a miscreant Turk, than for a bad Christian, and the King be more terrible
to this Guest here, than to a stranger.

The Person, ye see, is a main circumstance; a King to be slighted, and his
Guest to slight him, his Subject to contemn him: A high contempt. But, in the
next place, the Invitation will heighten it. Tantus tanti tantillum; That a
King should invite a Beggar, send his servants to entreat him to a feast, and
that at the marriage of his son, makes the benefit a wonder, and the neglect as
strange, and that all should be thought but a parable, no history; no history
ever yielding the like example. For what is this Man, that he should thus be
honored? or what is this King, that he should invite him? Was he bound by any
prae-contract or prae-obligation? Did his justice or his honor lie upon it? or
could he not feast without him? We cannot conceive thus of the King. No; He
might have left this man in the streets and highways, amongst the poor, the
blind, and the maimed, naked to every storm and tempest, open to the violence
and shock of every temptation, amongst men as impotent as himself, not able to
succor him, not able to succor themselves. But (...), says St. James, of his
own will, (...), James 1. 18.
according to the good pleasure of his will, he sends for Ephesians. 1. 5.
him; messengers are dispatched; and they bespeak him in the same form they do
the rest, Come unto the marriage. But this may be but a complement, and no
more. And there are that make little more of it. What say we then to Go,
compel them to come in. This, I hope, is in earnest: And this Luke 14. 23.
he did. His invitation was so hearty, his beseechings so vehement, his request
so serious, that it might seem to be violence, and did bear the show of a
compulsion. Not that God compels any, or necessitates them to that end he
intends, as some conceive; Who, because all power is his, will needs have him
show it all in every purpose, so irresistibly, as if that of the Baptist were
true in the letter that God out of stones did raise up children unto Abraham.
For as he is powerful, and can do all things, so he is wise too, and sweetly
disposes all things, accomplishing his will by those means he in his eternal
wisdom knows best; using indeed his power, but not violence; working
effectually upon our souls, that we do not actually resist; per suaviductionem,
say the Schools, leading us powerfully, but sweetly, to that end his
prae-determinate will has set down. When he invites us to his Church militant,
mittit servos, he sends his servants: and when he establishes and builds us
up for his Church triumphant, mittit servos, he uses that means also: He
instructs, he corrects, he exhorts, he commands, he threatens, and he
promises: He is (...), says Clemens, various and manifold in his operation.
There is lightning with his thunder, counsel in his threats, light with his
fire, discipline in his trials, honey with his gall, and his most bitter
prescripts are not only sweet, but cordials. Now all these will make it an
invitation at least; and if we rightly weigh them, lay them in the balance,
and they will put it out of all doubt that this Invitation was serious; that
the King sent for the man ad convivium, non ad notam; not to commit him, as
some fancy, but to entertain him; not to a censure, but to a banquet; to have
made him a guest, not a spectacle. We cannot then (to press this argument) but
lay the blame on the Guest, and implead him of perverse obstinacy. His neck was
stiff; no persuasions could bow him: his heart was adamant; no love, no fear
could soften it. And withal we must acknowledge that Faith and Charity are a
useful wear, without which Gods purpose to us is frustrate, and his love lost;
without which we come to his table, and are not fed; without which his earnest
beseechings, his bowels, his compassion, his promises, his threatenings, all are
in vain. And further we carry not this consideration.

The Invitation leads us to the Feast. (And that is our next point.) (...), as
the Father calls it, a splendid and magnificent feast; (...), a delicious
banquet; COENA MAGNA, that great Supper, with an emphasis; in which the bread
is Manna, and the Manna everlasting; the water Wine, and the wine Nectar; in
which the cates are Antidotes, and the Antidotes pleasant; the Food is Physic,
and the Physic restorative; where He that makes the feast is the Feast, and he
that feeds thee is thy Bread. This is the Feast. And the King has spread and
prepared his table, that we should taste and see how gracious he is. For, as
God made Light first, that he might make his other creatures in the light; so
St. Augustine: and he made that first, ut cernerentur quae fecerat, so St.
Ambrose; that the creatures might see one another: for frustra essent si non
viderentur, says the Father, they had been to no purpose if there had not been
light to discover them: Even so the King here has made ready his dinner,
prepared his viands, that we should taste how sweet they are. If they be not
tasted, they are not dainties; and if it be not digested, it is not a Feast.
And as by Light we see God in his creatures, so by Faith we taste him in his
benefits. If there be no Light, his creatures are in vain: and if no Faith, his
Feast is lost; Is the King deluded, who is the very formal object of our Faith.
Facit multorum insidelitas ut non omnibus nascatur qui omnibus natus est, says
St. Ambrose. Christ is born to all, is a true proposition. Infidelity only
makes it heretical. Joy to all people, the Angels song, a true ditty;
Infidelity drops on it, and so it is false pricked. The Feast here is a public
feast; the want of a Garment only, Nakedness and Unbelief, thrust the guest out
of doors; and so to him the feast is no feast, the meat is no food, the wine is
no drink, and heaven is no paradise. Now to be a guest, and spoil the feast; to
have leave to sit down, and not be prepared to eat; to make Manna unpleasant,
and Christ himself unsavory; is a foul rudeness and a rude ingratitude: But
then if to take away the relish from a feast be so, what is it to poison it? If
this Manna by the Guests negligence breed worms, and stink; if he make his
Physic his bane, and Life it self deadly; what thunder will be loud enough?
what QUOMODO, what Interrogation will serve to accuse him? QUOMODO HUC, How
came he hither, ad coenam Agni, Leoninis dentibus? to the Supper of the Lamb,
with Lions teeth? nay, viperinis dentibus, with viperous Ingratitude and
Infidelity, to poison the very fountain of life? Oh the want of a Garment,
Nakedness, and Disobedience to the Gospel, what mischief it works! It not only
depriveth of a benefit, but makes a benefit a punishment. It turns my bread
into stone, and my wine into wormwood, and this wormwood into poison; It makes
the Gospel as killing as the Law, Christ an adversary, and Jesus a destroyer.
And further we need not press this argument, but carry our meditations to the
next, the circumstance of the Place. It was Sponsi thalamus, the Bridegrooms
Bedchamber.

QUOMODO HUC, How he came hither thus ill apparalled, he may well be asked the
question. The Orator tells us, magna vis loci, That the circumstance of Place
carries with it a command, and forbids rudeness and uncivility. To dance in the
marketplace, to sport it in a charnel-house, to wanton it at the altar, is a
soloecisme in behavior: To do a thing (...), says Basil, without respect to
the place it is done in, is a great absurdity. DE NON TEMERANDIS ECCLESIIS,
That holy places should not be profaned, is a good Title, a whip to drive
profaneness out of the Temple. Now this place here is holy, the Princes
Bride-chamber, the Church of God. What should any do here then without a
Garment? To come to the Lords Feast, and behave our selves as if we were at the
Devils table; To be profane in Bethel, and Devils in the House of God; To be in
the light, and walk as children of darkness; I know not what to style it: But
certainly we may set a QUOMODO upon it, and ask this Guest how he came hither?
For as this place is sanctus, holy, so is it terribilis also, a dreadful place,
as Jacob speaks. The presence of God, of his Angels, Genesis 28. 17.
of his elect, makes the Church, as Solomon speaks, terrible as an army Cant.
6 4. 10.
with banners. Now in this army not to sight; in this order to break rank;
where I should be terrible, to be afraid; where I should conquer, to run away;
is a strange forgetfulness, a forgetfulness of the ground whereon I stand: St.
Paul calls it a walking disorderly, and a plain despising of 2 Thessalonians. 3. 6, 11.
1 Cor. 11. 22.
the Church of God. Such a place should have such apparel; a Bride-chamber, a
wedding garment. For without this garment no staying in the chamber. Want of
Faith brings an Anathema with it, and shuts out of the Church without an
excommunication. And so the Guest here does not only depretiare ecclesiam, as
Tertullian speaks, slight the Bride-chamber, undervalue the Church, but may
be further challenged for letting slip the opportunity of his own welfare. Not
clothing of the poor is one of the articles against them on the left hand: And
being in the room, and not tasting of the feast, will thrust this Guest out of
doors into utter darkness. Good God! what an incongruous thing is it to be made
a prisoner in the Princes Bride-chamber? to be clogged with fetters in a place
of liberty? to gather stones where we might take-up Diamonds? to be drowned in
the Ark? to dye in our Physicians arms, with our cordials about us? to go per
portam coeli in gehennam, through the gates of paradise into hellfire? The
very Place, the Church, is a great motive, a remembrance unto us that we put on
our best apparel. But if we come thither, naked and unprepared, then it will be
a terrible argument against us.

We pass from the Place, to our last circumstance, the Garment it self, taken
out I told you, of the Kings own wardrobe. For as God presents unto us our
happiness under most sweet allurements, and calls it a Feast, so he tenders
unto us the means of our happiness in the name of a Garment; a garment, not of
Sackcloth, but a wedding garment; not tunica molesta, a garment to torture us,
a garment of shame, but an honorable wear, that we should be as willing to put
it on as our own cloths. Let us view the materials of it, and we shall find it
worth our wearing. Made-up it is not of the hairs of Beasts, or the labor of
the Silkworm, but e visceribus Jesu Christi, out of the very bowels of the
Kings Son. His bowels were torn, his flesh harrowed, his blood shed. What? to
make us a Feast to sit down at. It is true: But withal to weave us a garment to
wear. Clavus penetrans factus est mihi clavus reserans, says St. Bernard; The
Spear that opened his side is made a Key to open his bowels and compassion, the
materials of this Garment; a Key to open his Wardrobe, as well as his
Bedchamber. Will thou make a Feast of Christ? Thou must make a Garment of him
too. Will thou feed on him? Thou must put him on also as the Apostle speaks.
For we cannot imagine that our Salvation is finis adaequatus, the Romans 13. 14.
sole end of Christ's sufferings. That we should be partakers of his glory, 1
Pet. 5. 1.
that is one end indeed, the very Feast: but there is another, that we should 2
Pet. 1. 4.
be partakers of his divine nature, that is the Garment. Called to glory and 2
Pet. 1. 3.
virtue. Not to virtue without glory: that were against the Goodness of the
King: Nor to Glory without virtue: that were against his Justice. Take our
Election: We are chosen to obedience through sanctification of the Spirit. 1
Pet. 1. 2.
Take our Redemption: We are delivered, that we might serve him without Luke 1.
74.
fear. Take our Calling: We are called unto holiness. In all our passages, 1
These. 4. 7.
in all our approaches to happiness, an eye is to be had to the Garment as well
as to the Feast: For though every step to heaven be a type of our eternal
station there, and our Garment of Grace a fair representation of our robe of
Glory; yet is not every step Heaven, nor Grace Glory. Christ, as he is the
Foundation to build upon, so is the Way to walk in. As he is (...), the price
of our redemption, so he became so (...), that he might be a pattern of sanctity
for us to take-out and follow, that we may be (...), holy and unblamable. The
Garment is the condition, and certainly no hard one. For it is facilis and
parabilis, easy to be procured. Difficultatis patrocinium praeteximus
segnitiei: If thou think it hard to work or wear it, it is because the fashion
likes thee not. We may boldly say, Nothing makes Christianity more difficult
than the conceit that it is difficult. We should more freely run the ways of
Gods commandments, if we did not laborem singere in praecepto, too often imagine
a Lion in the way. What need we any further witness? The guests that came with
this man shall rise-up in judgment against him. It was as hard for them to
procure or wear the Garment, and yet they did not complain of the condition.

Thus have we pleaded against this unprovident Guest, drawn articles out of
this Interrogation, and set a QUOMODO upon each several circumstance: QUOMODO,
How, to a King? How, a Subject, a Beggar to a King? How, being so graciously
invited? How, to such a Feast? How, to such Place? Lastly, QUOMODO INVESTIS,
How, without a garment, so fit a garment, so glorious a garment? How came
thou in hither, not having on this wedding garment? All these Motives, (...),
the greatest and most winning, able to rowse up Stupidity it self, able to
awake our most dull and dead affections; the Majesty of a King to awe him, his
Invitation to win him, the Feast to delight him, the Place to entice him, the
Garment to affect him; a King to awake his Fear, the Invitation to kindle his
Love, the Feast to raise his Desire, the Place his Admiration, and the Garment
his Diligence: And yet see, not any of these, not all these, could move him;
but to the King he is irreverent, to the Invitation stubborn, to the Feast
contumelious, at the Place profane, and the Garment he esteemed not. All
these, Irreverence, Ingratitude, Stubbornness, Profaneness, Neglect, Contempt,
Rebellion, meeting and concentring themselves in a disobedient and unbelieving
heart, are represented unto us under Nakedness and the Want of a Garment. And
indeed this is all. Peccatum infidelitatis, quae tenentur omnia peccata, says
Aquinas: Infidelity is the abridgment and summary of all. For if the Gospel be
hid to me, I am in darkness, and cannot discern the King from a common person,
nor his Invitation from a complement, nor his Feast from husks, nor his Table
from the table of Devils, nor Bethel from Bethaven. And therefore our Savior
says, If I had not come and spoken to them, they should have had no sin. John
15. 22.
St. Augustines gloss is, Magnum aliquod peccatum sub generali nomine vult
intelligi, That this general name of Sin did include some great sin, some sin
paramount: And that sin is Infidelity. This makes the Gospel as killing as the
Law, and the blood of Christ as vocal and loud for vengeance as that of Abel.
The Infidelity of the guest was far worse than that of a stranger.

We see here it brought the King to his QUOMODO, to question the Guest, and to
silence him with a question, so to question him that he was to seek for an
answer. Of whose Silence we shall say no more at this time but what St. Ambrose
spoke of AMA; It was negotiosum silentium, a busy, vocal silence. Conscientia
loquebatur, ubi vox non audiebatur; His Conscience cried aloud against him,
when Shame and Sorrow had shut up his lips. But he is placed here in this
parable for an ensample to us on whom the ends of the world are come; that, if
we will not be muzzled and tongue-tyed, if we will have no (...), no
linguarium, no muzzle to shut up our lips and stop our mouths at the coming of
this great King, at that great day of Judicature, we be careful now to keep our
garments, to reverence the King, to run when he calls, to make haste when he
invites, to delight in the Feast, to fall down in his Courts, and to worship in
the beauty of holiness.

To this end let us consider, that God, who made us after his own image, cannot
endure to see our souls naked, or clad with rags: and to be clothed with rags
is Nakedness. Disobedience is Nakedness: by this our first parents were
bereaved of the image of God, deprived of their glory, and made subject to
shame. Idolatry is Nakedness. Moses saw that the people were Genesis 3. 7. Exodus
32. 25. Ezekiel. 16. 8. Hos. 2. 3. Rev. 3. 17.
naked after they had worshipped the molten calf. So Hypocrisy, which is a
mask and disguise, is Nakedness: Thou say thou art rich; but art poor and
naked. There is no shame in the world but this, to be found naked. Let us
therefore cast off the cloak of Hypocrisy and Dissimulation, and put-on the
robe of Sincerity. God desires truth in the inward parts, in the hidden parts,
Psalm. 51. 6.
at the heart-root, in the secret and closed parts. And then if it do eructare
se in superficiem, as Tertullian speaks, evaporate and breath it self forth
in the outward man, and make every part and member of us a weapon and
instrument of righteousness, then it does adorn and beautify us indeed, and
God looks upon it as a glorious ornament, and upon us as guest, whose praise is
not of men, but of God. Without this, though we enlarge our phylacteries never
so much, though we have HOLINESS written in our foreheads, all will be but like
Bellerophon's letters; We may take them for a passport or letters of
commendation, but in them our doom and our condemnation is written. We are
condemned by our wilful neglect and contempt of the marriage feast as by our
own confession, so condemned as that nothing remains but sentence and
execution. If it had been mine enemy, says David, Psalm. 55. 12, ^3
I could have born it: But it was thou my familiar friend. If it were one who
never had heard of the Feast; one of the Heathen, who knew not the name of the
King; the neglect would not have been so foul. The times of their Acts 17. 30.
ignorance God wincked at, (...), saw as if he saw not; he did not threaten
eternal death, as he does now under the Gospel: but now he commands every man
every where to repent, to fit and prepare himself for this great Feast. And if
we do not so, we are the worse Christians by being so much Christians, more
guilty for our profession, in more danger then Infidels in that we are not so,
and more unpardonable for our belief. Irascitur Deus contumeliis misericordiae
suae; God is never more angry then when his Mercy is abused, and his Grace
turned into wantonness. Let us then look-up to the Author Heb. 12. 2.
and Finisher of our faith; Hear his voice, follow his direction: I counsel
Rev. 3. 18.
thee, says he, to buy of me white raiment, that thou may be clothed, and
that the shame of thy nakedness do not appear. And we may buy of him without
Isa. 55. 1. Heb. 2. 11.
money or money-worth. The Apostle says, Both he who sanctifies, and they who
are sanctified are all of one. Now Christ sanctifies us by his doctrine and
example. And as he was conceived by the holy Ghost, so are we made new
creatures and clothed with the wedding garment by the virtue and power of the
same Spirit. And then Christ will not be ashamed of us, not ashamed to call us
Brethren, when, as brethren, we wear the same apparel. When he sees our
garment entire, the same in every part, universal, uniform, like it self
throughout, the whole of the same thread; not here a piece of silk, and there a
menstruous rag; not obedience to this command, because it fitteth our humor,
and disobedience to another, because it sits too close, and is troublesome
to flesh and blood; When he sees us not bow in the house of Rimmon, because
our master does so; not (...), beat and wound our conscience, for fear of those
higher Powers who else will beat us with many stripes; When he sees not our
Faith enfeebled by our Trust in uncertain Riches, nor our Charity cooled by
those tentations that blow from that treasury, nor our Hope swallowed-up in
victory by our Ambition; When he sees our Garment made by that pattern which
himself showed, shining, not like the Pharisees fringed garments, but like the
pure fine linen of the Saints, well woven with spiritual wisdom, and well worn
with care and diligence; When he sees us, according to the Greek proverb, yea
according to his own charge, Quem matter amictum dedit solicit custodire, to
Rev. 16. 15.
keep that garment with which God our Father and the Church our Mother has
clothed us in the day of our marriage, that garment for the making whereof He
himself afforded materials, and that e visceribus suis, out of his own bowels;
When he sees this, I say, he will change our wedding garment, into a robe of
glory. Coming thus apparalled like guests, we may have (...), confidence and
boldness toward God. Then shall our mouths be filled with laughter, and our
tongues with joy. Then shall we not, as he here, be speachless, but speak unto
the King, and the King will speak unto us. We shall speak to him as Children,
Abba, Father; as Subjects, Let thy Kingdom come; as Servants, Master, it is
good for us to be here. And the King's Son shall speak for us, Behold I, and
the children which thou have given me. The Feast shall speak for us; even the
Blood of Jesus shall speak good things for us. And Hebr. 2. 13.
the Garment shall speak for us; our plea of Faith shall be more eloquent and
powerful then the tongues of Men and of Angels. And our plea shall be answered,
not with a QUOMODO, but with an EUGE, Well done, my good and faithful guests.
Your wedding garment is on: Sit-down at my table, sit-down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob, with all the Patriarchs, and with all the Apostles, and with the
whole Church, in the kingdom of heaven. Which happiness God grant unto us
through Christ Jesus our Lord.

The Nine and Twentieth SERMON. PART I.
MATTHEW. VI. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye; Our Father which art in
heaven, etc.
A Preface concerning Catechizing and Prayer.
BEfore I come to the plain and familiar explication of these words, which I
intend, it may be expected perhaps that I should speak something by way of
Preface. For we live in that age, wherein every man almost is (...), as the
Sophister speaks, malevolous and jealous, making his surmise a formal
endictment and sufficient testimony against Superiors, whilst himself alone
stands guilty; and there can be no crime found but this, that he is suspicious.
Nihil tam sacrum quod non inveniat sacrilegum. What good order can there be (I
will not say, established, but) revived, which is not straight marked out as a
novelty? No sooner can it receive influence from Authority to grow up and show
it self in the Church, but Malice lays its axe at the very root of it: And
where Power is wanting to digg it up by the roots, there Ignorance and Clamor
shall shake it, as a plant that will not grow in any Christian ground, because
they suppose it was brought from Rome. We cannot be so blind, we cannot be so
charitable, as not to observe this in those things which the wisest in the
Church have thought to be of great importance. And it were to be wished that it
would rest there, and rather spend it self upon some one particular, then
multiply it self by degrees, and gather strength to quarrel and endanger all;
But as fire seizes on all matters that are combustible without respect,
whither it be a palace or a cottage, a stately oak or a neglected straw; so
this Jealousy, which not Conscience but Self-will and wilful Disobedience
has kindled in the Church, feeds it self not only with mountains, with matters
of greater moment, but atomos numerat, takes-in even atoms themselves, things
which can have no show of offense but what men's prejudice shall cast upon them.
I will yet increase upon you, and grow a little bolder, and so draw all this to
our present purpose. You who come hither to receive that food which must
nourish you up to eternal life, and in the strength of which you must walk
forward to perfection, ought not, so you have the food you come for, to stand
too much upon circumstance, or the manner how it is divided to you. St. Paul
tells us that some preach Christ out of envy, some of good will; some not
sincerely, others Phil. 1. 15-18.
of love What then? Notwithstanding every way, whether in pretense, or in
truth, Christ is preached, and I therein, says he, do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice. Beloved, whether Christ be preached by public reading or by Sermons,
whether in the Pulpit or at the Desk, whether with eloquence or plainness of
speech, are things in themselves almost not considerable. So the truth be
preached, we may say with the Apostle, Herein we do rejoice, yea, and will
rejoice. My brethren, says St. James, have not the faith of Jesus with respect
of persons; I may add, not in respect of place, or any other circumstance.
Lactantius will tell us, that this was the main cause that the Gospel of Christ
found not that entertainment amongst the Philosophers and wise men of this
world which otherwise it would have found: Nemo rem veritate ponderabat, sed
ornatu; No man weighed the Gospel by the truth which it carried with it, but by
those complements and ornaments of speech which it wanted. Many now-adayes
Wonder and complain that so much preaching has begot so little knowledge, so
little amendment; and, though Doctrine drop as the rain, and wholesome
instruction distill as the dew, yet many who profess Christianity remain, like
Gedeons fleece, dry, when there is dew on all the ground besides them. Many
reasons may be given, but I persuade my self the chief is this; We come to hear
the word of God as men come to fairs, not to buy, but to look about us, to see
fashions, to hear some novelty or some curious discourse. Some come indeed to
buy, to profit; but they find not the ware they look for, they hear not that
Doctrine they come to be informed in, and so return home empty, with no other
purchase then the loss of time, and, I fear, of their souls. St. Hilary in one
of his books de Trinitate reports of some so obstinate and so obdurate in
error that they would not so much as hear any reasons which might be brought
against it, for fear of being convinced. And St. Hierome complains of the
heretics of his time, Quis haereticorum non despicit ecclesiasticos? Who is
there amongst the heretics that does not slight the instructions of the
orthodox? St. Basil calls them (...), men who could sit down and deliberate,
and build up some new opinion, which by no care of the Church could be
afterward demolished. We are not now, beloved, to deal with Heretics, but
with some men even as perverse and obstinate as they, whose mark also it is
dogmata patrum contemnere, to despise the instructions of their Governors; who
will give ear to no truth but out of the Pulpit; nor out of that holy place
neither unless some Prophet of their own cry aloud from thence, and lift up his
voice like a trumpet. Why this Exercise (if you so please to call it) is
changed both in respect of the place and of the manner, from the Pulpit to the
Desk, from a popular Sermon to a Catechistical Lecture, I need yield no other
reason but the command of those whom it especially concerns. It is enough for
me ex praescripto agere, as near as I can to observe what they enjoin, and, as
it is in the proverb, quem matter amictum dedit, solicit custodire, to keep my
self to that form which the Church has prescribed. And yet I see no reason
that any should complain of change. For what difference between this place and
the other? I know they who deny it to the Altar, can attribute no holiness to
the Pulpit. And I am sure every Sermon is or should be a Catechism; Which is
nothing else but institutio viva voce, an instruction by word of mouth. Yet
though I can give you no reason for this so scarce markable change, yet I will
crave leave of them to give you my conjecture. Perhaps they have just cause to
stand in some jealousy and fear lest the overvaluing of Sermons, has brought
the price and estimation of Scripture, so often read in this place, to fall;
that there is a conceit too much taken up, That Faith does so naturally grow
from Sermons that it cannot possibly be the effect of any other teaching; That
the doctrine which conveys this saving knowledge never breaths so comfortably
as from that place; That it cannot have its true stamp and character but at
this mint; If it be tendered in any other place, Truth it self does either want
of its weight, or is but counterfeit. Now by this, what gold, what pearls, what
treasure, what riches of knowledge are we deprived of? How do we tye-up and
confine the blessed Spirit, who is as various in his ways of entrance as in
his operation, sometimes passing through the Ear, sometimes piercing the Eye,
nay, sometimes felt and tasted; who breaths in any air, in any coast? He that
never heard Aristotle, may yet, we see, by reading of his books gain that
knowledge which may style him a Philosopher: And why do we search the
Scriptures and read them in our closets, if Sermons only be the means of our
Salvation? Faith is nothing else but a voluntary assent to any truth for the
authority of him who speaks it: And in sacris, in this our holy Faith, though
we acknowledge no Author but God himself, yet there be many motives and
inducements which may strengthen us in the apprehension of that truth which we
believe, and to which we have given up our assent. Now why this may not be done
by disputations, by friendly intercourse, by letters, by familiar conversation,
by instruction at any time, in any place, as well as by Sermons, and in the
Pulpit, is so far beyond the conceit of any reasonable man, that it may justly
be thought a wonder that any man can be so unreasonable as to think the
contrary. I do not prejudice this holy custom of speaking out of the Pulpit to
the people; but yet I think it will be a hard task for any man that shall take
it upon him, to prove by Scripture that teaching is confined to that place. For
as it is plain that our Savior and the Apostles went into the Synagogues, and
there expounded Moses and the Prophets; so it is as plain that wheresoever our
Savior and the Apostles opened the will of God, whither it were in the Temple,
or in Synagogues, or in private houses, or by the way-side, whither to one or
many, upon what time soever, in what place soever, upon what occasion soever,
they did truly and properly preach. When our Savior conferred with Nicodemus
by night, with the woman of Samaria at the well, with his Disciples on the way,
when he reproved the Pharisee at his table, when he spoke to the people out of
the ship, when Philip taught the Eunuch in the chariot, when Paul went teaching
from house to house, what did they then but preach, and discharge their
Ministerial Duty? Not the Pulpit, not the Synagogue alone, but the House, the
Well, the Table, the Ship, the Chariot, every place was a Pulpit, every
occasion a Text, and every good lesson a Sermon. Nay further yet, if I should
say this teaching by private and single conference were the more useful of the
two, I persuade my self I have reason ready to come in and second me. This
indeed is more solemn, and it costs us many times more pains and labor than you
are easily sensible of: But how often do we cast our seed upon the rocks! how often
do our words perish in the air wherein they were sown! How little of that we
speak is understood! How unwilling are men to conceive further of things than
they do already! Or can we here in general so effectually urge and press things
home as we may in private conference? Who has so learned that which the Orator
commends, temperare vires suas, and ad intellectum audientis descendere, so to
temper himself, and take from his own strength, and descend to the capacity of
the meanest, as that he can assure himself that he is understood thoroughly of
his Auditory, though his discourse be never so plain? It fares with many
hearers of Sermons as it does with small and narrow-mouthed vessels; either we
pour too fast, and so much runs by; or else too much, and so much runs over.
This we may deplore, but cannot so easily help, when every man takes upon him
to be as skillful as his teacher; it being the common disease of all mankind,
malle dedicisse quam discere, rather to pretend to skill already purchased than
to be willing to learn any thing at all. Now this may be one reason why men are
still left in darkness and ignorance in the midst of so much light and so
frequent instructions. For here we speak to you from above indeed, but so that
you that sit under can raise your thoughts and censures above us; can erect a
tribunal, and arraign and condemn every word we speak: But in private
conference we may chance to urge your modesty, and plainly show you that
absurdity which you must needs run upon unless you yield. Here you give us the
hearing; but there we may be bold to demand satisfaction. Many other reasons
may be given why men do not rightly judge of things. Isidore has given us
three: The first is, (...), because of the narrow compass of men's capacities;
which cannot be enlarged by our general and popular discourses; which, unless
they please the ears, like those sports which children make in the water with
square stones, are drowned in the very making. There needs much time and many
attempts and particular administrations to redeem men from such an infirmity:
and we shall find it a harder matter to strive with men of weak abilities than
with seven wise men who can render a reason. Unto these we must rather be as
Nurses than Physicians: We must submittere nos ad mensuram discentium, manum
dando, and gradum minuendo, submit our selves to their capacities, by lending
our hand, by lessning our steps, to keep them in equipage with us till they
come to fuller growth. The second is (...), because of our sloth and neglect.
Venit ignavia, and ea mihi tempestas fuit, says he in the Poet; Sloth came
upon me, and that was the tempest. which spoiled me of all my crop. And Sloth,
as it has been an enemy to all the humane Arts and Sciences, so has it been
to the knowledge of Divine truth, and left it (...), as Aelian speaks of
painting, in its cradle and swathing-bands. For what other cause can there be
of men's weakness in these days, when so frequent teaching takes from men all
pretense of weakness and ignorance? Number aliud agimus docendo vos quam ne semper
docendi sitis? For what is the end of all this labor and pain in teaching you
but that you might at length not need a teacher? You will say all men have not
the same readiness of apprehension, nor can every man make a Divine, (...), It
is not for the vulgar to propose their opinion and defend it. It is true: but
yet St. Peter requires thus much at every Christians hands, When he is asked, to
be able to give a reason of the faith that is in him. And if men were half so
diligent in pursuit of the truth as they are in managing their own affairs, if
men would try as many conclusions for knowledge as they do to atchieve riches
and honor, we should have small reason to complain of the ignorance of the
times. Quisque in Dei causa facere potest quod in sua facit; Every man may do
that for his soul which he does for his body. And I see no reason but he that
can learn to drive a bargain for his advantage, may as well learn both to know
and defend the truth. The last reason Isidore gives is, (...), Because our
minds are prae-occupated and taken-up before with such opinions which we have
taken-up upon trust, and have given sudden credence to, because they sort well
and comply with our particular humor. Not that Opinion can arise from our
natural constitutions, but because we are ready judicium tradere affectibus, to
forfeit our Judgments, and deliver up our Reason and Belief captive to our own
Affections. The Schools tell us, Affectiones facile faciunt opiniones, that our
Affections will easily draw on our Opinion to close with that which presents a
pleasing shape and outside to them. And hence it comes many times that a man
may have strong evidence for one opinion, and yet for some ends he has
secretly adhered to another. Desire of pomp and glory will build up that
Monarchy in the Church which the evidence of Scripture lays level with the
ground; and Love of freedom and to be uncontroull'd will help the factious to
set up an Anarchy. Every man almost makes his Opinion follow his Passion
against that proof and evidence which should correct and settle both. Now
these, and whatsoever other hindrances there can be named which stand in our
light that we cannot behold objects in their own likeness as they are, are more
likely to be removed by Reading, or private Conference, or plain Catechistical
instruction (which comes nearest to them) than by those general Discourses
which in respect of the most find both their birth and death at once; which are
seldom entertained but when they please, and when they please do as seldom
profit. I speak not this to disparage Preaching. I know Faith comes by hearing,
and hearing by the word of God. I confess with the Fathers, Principale munus
est aedificare ecclesiam and docere populum; That it is the greatest office
upon earth to edify the Church of Christ and teach the people; an office which
the Angels themselves do reverence. But all that is spoken is to no other
intent but to root-out opinionem tam insitam, tam inveteratam, so settled, so
inveterate an opinion, which has gained place and power in men's hearts, That
Preaching is nothing else but ad clepsydram perorare, to speak an hour out of
the Pulpit. Look into the primitive times, and there you shall see a particular
office and calling in the Church, of Catechizers. And these were then the two
solemn ways of teaching the people, per catechesin, and conciones, by
Catechism, and Preaching. Of the which that of Catechizing seems to be the
more ancient. Not children and infants, but men of ripe understanding and
perfect use of reason, together with grave and ancient matrons, were brought
unto the sacred Lavatory to be baptized into that Faith which they had already
entertained, but were not yet perfectly instructed in: Who being yet but
strangers in religion, and not well skilled in those sacred mysteries which
Christianity is enriched with, were sent in cryptas and solitudinem, into the
wilderness, unto caves and dens, to those whose office it was to instruct them,
whom the fear of cruel and bloody tyrants and of the sword of persecution had
confined to those grots. But when this tempest was over, and peace did shine
upon the Church, when Religion began to spread it self through the Kingdoms of
the world, then every Church almost had one allotted for this office, (...), by
chawing as it were and breaking to pieces by exposition to give light to the
tenants and doctrine of the Church. A laborious and troublesome calling in
those times being performed every day, and the same or like things being to be
inculcated and urged so often in that variety of men and manners, whereof some
were rude, some perverse, some proud in their opinion, to teach whom many times
was but to loose labor; and all the fruit, the doing of it: Which did weaken
and infeeble that glorious contention and ambition of teaching which before was
strong amongst them. A Deacon of Carthage put up his complaint to St.
Augustine, That in those large and cold expressions in which he was forced to
instruct the Catechumeni, he many times grew not only tedious to others, who
thought themselves ripe for more accurate discourses, but to himself. And this
occasioned that tract of his De Catechizandis rudibus, Of the manner of
instructing the simple and ignorant; where he tells him that there is not so
great difference between a weak expression and a quick and lively apprehension
as there is between a mortal Man and God; and yet Christ, who was equal to God,
took upon him the form of a servant, that he might become weak to them who are
weak, and so gain the weak. Why then should men of deeper reach think it
tedious to descend to low expressions, quum charitas, quanto officiosius
descendit in infima, tanto robustius recurrit ad intima; whenas true Charity,
the more officious it is to condescend to the lowest, the more strongly it
reflects with comfort upon the inward man, through a good conscience, which
seeks nothing from them to whom it does descend but their salvation. Nor did
this office confine it self within their Temples, but was brought into their
Schools: Amongst which that of Alexandria was most famous, where Origin at
eighteen years of age, took upon him that office; (Who was (...), as Eunapius
speaks of Socrates, a living and a walking statue of spiritual wisdom.) Where
Pantaenas, Heractas, Dionysius, and Clemens Alexandrinus were glorious in this
respect. And indeed what else is Clemens his Paedagogus but a Catechism? For
we must not think that it is only to Catechize, when we instruct by way of
question and answer, because our common Catechisins are shaped out unto us in
the form of Dialogues. No; (...) is no more then (...), to be catechized no
more than to be instructed. In which acception we find the word used in
Scripture: (...), whereof thou have been instructed, says St. Luke to
Theophilus. (...), Luke 1. 4. Gal. 6. 6.
Let him that is taught in the word make him that has taught him partaker in
all his goods. When St. Augustine took the Epistle and Gospel and Psalm for the
day for his subject for one Sermon, he did then Catechize. When Athanasius made
one Sermon, and that a very short one, contra omnes haereses, against all
heresies, he did then Catechize. St. Chrysostom has diverse Orations
catechistical. When Chrysologus makes six or seven several Sermons upon the
whole Creed, and not one of them a quarter of an hour long, what does he then
but Catechize? What need I tell you of the several constitutions of Councels
and provincial Synods decreed for the institution of the Catechumeni? The state
and face now of Christendom is altered; nor have we Converts of the Jews and
Gentiles, on whom to bestow this necessary labor: but yet, I fear, we have
many as weak and ignorant as they, and here is as much need of this kind of
instruction as then. I will no longer insist upon this argument; nor did I
think so much as once to have touched upon it, but to have begun without a
preface: Only I was willing to remove all jealousy out of such men's minds as
are ready to believe that there is a snake under every leaf, and who from the
most happy conjunction can presage some dangerous effect; and withal, to take
off all expectation of any curious discourse. My discourse shall be like my
subject, Prayer; which, as Quintilian spoke of Grammar, Plus operis habet quam
ostentationis, is a painful work indeed, but is then most truly performed when
it has nothing of ostentation. It has always been my aim and labor that what
I delivered from the Pulpit should be catechetical; but I will now affect it.
Nor will I strive to help my speech by art or fancy, but there where it may
perhaps be needful. Abunde dixit been quisquis rei satisfecit; In these kind of
discourses the language must be equally proportioned to the matter in hand; and
he has spoken well, that has fully spoken all. And to this end I have chosen
the Lord's Prayer for my subject, which conteins whatsoever we should request
and desire; as the Creed does whatsoever we must believe; and the Decalogue,
whatsoever we ought to do. And yet in this short Prayer upon due observation we
shall find both the Creed and the Decalogue. Tertullian, I am sure, calls it
Breviarium totius Evangelii, the Compendium of the whole Gospel; and St.
Cyprian, Praeceptorum Christi grande compendium, a Collection of all Christ's
precepts. Some prejudice it may be perhaps that it is common in every man's,
nay, in every child's, mouth. For things common and ordinary do lose their
credit and price amongst men for no other reason but because they are common
and ordinary; like the Jews Manna, which their souls abhorred because it was so
common, and they could gather it every day. Indeed this is no prejudice at all
to this Prayer, but serves rather to commend it. Quid non commune est quod
natura optimum fecit? says that witty but lascivious Author; Those things
which Nature has made most useful are most common, yea therefore are common
because they are useful. The holy Father Nazianzene applies it to Divine
mysteries; (...), Christ is our King, and he has made his Law, his Grace, his
Gospel, his Miracles, his Sufferings as common as the Sun: Faith, Hope, and
Charity are for every heart that will entertain them. Only those things which
are valid and secret are least necessary; (...), says he, they are to be
placed in the second rank, because least useful. Were not our Pater noster of
such use, it had not been so common as it is; but now it is made common because
it is of weightiest and greatest price. I will not urge the superstitious
numbering of Pater Nosters by tale, as if our Prayers were to be mustered up
like Xerxes 's army, ut numero vincetur, to prevail rather by number than by
weight. I need not tell you out of Rupertus and Amalarius Fortunatus, that this
Prayer was always uttered in the Church (...), with a loud voice, when others
were pronounced (...), with more secrecy and silence; nor trouble you with the
reasons they allege. I need not commend the laudable practice of our Church,
which has often inserted it in her Liturgy, and has placed it at the
beginning both of first and second Service. Animata suo privilegio ascendit
coelum, commendans Patri quae Filius docuit; The greatest privilege it has
is, That it had Christ himself for its Author; and being quickened and
enlivened with this prerogative, it ascends the heavens, and commences those
petitions to God the Father which the Son himself has taught; SIC ERGOO RATE,
After this manner therefore pray ye. Which words are taken as they lie for a
plain precept, not to pray, which is employed, but to pray after this manner.
For though it be in St. Luke, (...), When you pray, say; yet here in St.
Matthew we read it in the Imperative mood, (...), pray ye thus For although
Christ may seem only to prescribe what we must desire of God when we pray, and
not command that we should thus pray; yet the very subject of this prayer, and
the nature of the things we are to pray for are such, that we cannot but
conceive that Christ did enjoin both; Prayer is employed in Religion, whether
true or false, grounded by the very Heathen on Gods Care and Providence by
which he governs all things. The Stoics appropriated it to their sect; (...).
As they thought that none but a wise man could be a Priest, so they imagined
that none but a wise man could pray. And indeed all Philosophers accounted it
their proper praise to know how to pray. None ever denied that God was to be
prayed unto but the Cyrenaeans, as Clemens tells us, and the Epicureans, who
acknowledged no Divine Providence at all. Indeed all Religions agree in this,
That we must pray. But to pray amiss has been the error not only of Pagans,
but of many also who called upon the name of the living God. Been orare, gratia
spiritalis; To pray well we can learn from none but from Christ alone. We may
find perhaps the truth which teaches some other virtue, if not entire in one
Philosopher, yet diffused and scattered throughout their several sects and
writings: but Christ alone, as he is the author and the finisher of our Faith,
so is he also of all true Devotion. Laertius tells us that Aristotle wrote
(...), concerning Prayer; and one of Plato's Diologues is extant upon that
subject. And the very light of Nature directed them so far that they did
acknowledge Reverence a companion of Prayer; that they esteemed and judged of
men by the manner of their Devotion; that they accounted them profane who
desired things unlawful of the Gods, and them foolish whose prayers were for
trifles; that they could deride the superstitious rites and ceremonies which
they used in their devotion: But to pray for those things which will procure
eternal happiness, to pray for a Kingdom, he alone can teach us whose most
precious blood has purchased it for us. I cannot now proceed to the further
handling of these words; for time will prevent me. I intended to make this
Lecture only an Introduction. For the main I must remain your debtor till this
day seven-night, because I have already engagements lie upon me for the next
Sunday; and then, in this place we shall, Godwilling, meet again. In the mean
time I commend you all to the Grace of our Lord Jesus.

The Thirtieth SERMON. PART II.
MATTHEW. VI. 9. After this manner therefore pray ye; Our Father which art in
heaven, etc.
THose things which degenerate are so much the worse, by how much the better
they had been, had they retained that primitive rectitude which God and Nature
put into them; they being withered and deformed by that irregularity and
unnatural motion which swayes and wrests them from the rule, as Beauty is with
Age and Violence, which write deformity deeper in that countenance whose
composition and native complexion was most exact and elegant. In this very
Chapter here we find mention of three principal virtues, which are as wings to
lift a Christian up to heaven, giving of Alms, Fasting and Prayer; All which
have a CAVE, a Take-heed placed in the very front of them; as if there were as
great danger in them, as in their contraries, which are clothed with Death. By
our Alms and Liberality we do, as the Apostle speaks, sow in blessings, in a
fertile place, 2 Cor. 9. 6.
where for one we receive a thousand, or, as Nazianzene, (...), sow our piety,
which will bring in increase a hundredfold. But yet we see Vainglory and the
sound of a trumpet will blast all our crop, and rob us of our harvest.
Castigation and beating-down of the body by Fasting is that which g^ves life
and growth unto our Devotion, and by which we do humilitatem animae Deo
immolare, make our Humility an holy and acceptable sacrifice to God: But when
it appears only in a sad disfigured face, it brings no reward with it but that
of the Hypocrite. To instance in our present theme of Prayer. It is (...), the
head and fountain of all the good which is derived upon us, and (...), as
Chrysostom says, the end and complement of all blessings: Yet when Hypocrisy
tenders it in the open streets and synagogues, it has no such force, and
finding better reward then such acts do as abuse and violate good Duties. Two
faults there are which our Savior reproved here in Prayer, vain Ostentation,
which made it open; and Superstition, which made it long: the one of the
Hypocrite, the other of the Ethnic and Heathen. The former we will pass by as
not so pertinent to our purpose. The latter is that which our Savior corrects
in these words, and in the form prescribed. For it is in Prayer as it is in
artificial employments; It consists not only (...), in the outward performance,
in breathing out it self by words and vocal expressions, but also (...), in
contemplation of those rules and directions by which we must make our Prayer
regular. To pray, is the duty of a Christian: but we must have an eye upon the
manner how we pray. For that of Tertullian is most safe, si quid determinandum
est, ad Dei regulas dirigatur; In all our actions of piety we must have
recourse to those rules which God has prescribed. Reason indeed is the light
of the soul, and (...), as Nazianzene speaks, the first law which is written in
our hearts. But our Reason is not a rule, no not when she is unclouded of all
encumbrances of passions and opinions, but the eye of the soul, which directs
us by that rule which is set down to regulate our Reason. The whole power of
man is in his Reason; and the whole force and vigor of Reason in Judgment, by
which we weigh and examine every thing. But experience tells us that men's
judgments are as various as their complexions, which though they look upon the
same end, yet find out diverse means and ways. Whence it comes to pass that
this man makes more haste, another is more slow; this man's way is more plain,
another more rugged: and therefore a rule is necessary, which must reconcile
all, and make the way as manifest as the end. The Hypocrite prays, the Heathen
pray, all pray: sed literata devotio praestat devotae rusticitati; Learned and
regulated devotion is far more powerful than devout ignorance. Therefore he who
has taught us to pray, has also taught us how to pray; After this manner
therefore pray ye. In the handling of which words we will observe this plain
method. First, by way of introduction we will enquire what Prayer is; Secondly,
what those Battologies, those repititions, are, to which our Savior has set
this (...), this Form of his, in opposition; Lastly, to whom this Form was
prescribed. Of these in their order.

What Prayer is no man can be ignorant who knows his own wants. For our wants
do dictate to us, and teach us both to pray, and what to pray for. Postulare
inferioris est, say the Schools; Prayer is an argument of want and inferiority.
For though we cannot but grant that Prayer may be made sometime to an equal,
yet the very nature of Prayer is such that it cannot be directed to any but by
that very act of praying to him we make him our Superior and more powerful
than our selves. We confess our selves unable to perform that for which we
entreat another help. Now Prayer is never so right as when it is directed to
God, and turns the point of the Compass unto him: for there is none higher
than he. And this is set out unto us diversely. It is called the Ascent of our
mind unto God; a Petition of those things which we want put up to God; an
Elevation of the mind unto God, by the Pythagoreans; Pius animi affectus, a
pious and religious affection of the soul to God: It is called the Calves of
our lips; and, a rich Present, which carried up to heaven does testify our
dutiful affection, and the undoubted means to purchase all fame at Gods hands.
All these are rather lauds Orationis quam definitiones; rather the
commendations of Prayer, by which we manifest her effects, than proper
definitions to show what it is. Some difference we find in the Schools, whether
Prayer be an act of the Understanding or of the Will; but indeed it is but
(...), a question of words. Some will have it to be of the Will alone. But they
too narrowly confine it: For my Will may incline to those things which I never
seek by Prayer. Volumus impossibilia, says the Philosopher; Our Will is
carried to impossibilities. But yet no man prays for those things which are
impossible. Others make it an act of the Practick Understanding, which does not
apprehend things alone, as the Speculative does, but has some force and
causality in it, and has the act of willing joined with it: which both must
jointly concur in Prayer. For if I desire a thing and do not request it, or
request it when I do not desire it, it is no Prayer. So that Prayer is nothing
else but an act of the Understanding manifesting and expressing the will and
desire we have to something which we want. And here the Understanding both
begins and ends, has the first and last part. For till our wants present
themselves to our Understanding, we can have no will to have them supplied: and
when our Will is moved, our Prayer is not yet complete till we make our Reason
and Understanding the interpreter of our Will. For Desire is not Prayer, but
the cause of it. Sighs and Groans and Desires are great furtherances and helps
of Prayer; but every sigh and groan is not properly a prayer, but gives live
and activity to our prayers. And in this sense we must take that saying of St.
Hierome, that truly and effectually to pray is not verba composita resonare, to
utter a certain composition of words, sed amaros in compunctione gemitus edere,
to send forth the bitter groans of compunction. So that as in other virtues
there is a double act, one of the Will, by which we will give an alms, or do
some act of justice; another of that power and faculty which perfects and
consummates the act: so in Prayer there is one act of the Will and Affections;
but that is not enough till by another act of the Understanding this Will is
manifested. So that with some change of that of the Apostle, we may say that we
pray with the Will, and we pray with the Understanding also. Whether 1 Cor. 14.
15
this be done by voice or no is not much material to the definition and nature
of Prayer, but in respect only of time and place and some such circumstances.
For though Voice and Speech be given us to this end, to conveigh our minds to
one another, and to communicate our selves; yet in respect of God there is no
necessity of Speech, to whom our most secret thoughts are open, and who knows
the language of our minds, qui mutum intelligit and non loquentem exaudit, who
understands the dumb and hears him that speaks not. The Pythagoreans thought
it necessary to use the voice in Prayer; but their reason was, says Clemens
Alexandrinus, not that they thought God could not hear us unless we speak, but
that our prayers should be just and free and ingenuous, and such as we need not
fear to pour forth (...), though all the world did hear us. But though Speech
be not necessary in respect of God, yet many times it is in respect of our
selves. Private prayer indeed may sometimes be more available when the
vehemence of our desires binds the organ of speech, when no language is equal
or carries a just proportion to our Devotion, when those (...), those
unspeakable groans, will not suffer us to speak. Here Romans 8. 26.
God respects modstiaum fidei, the modesty of our faith, and will more
graciously attend to that prayer which comes (...), from the very center of the
heart, then that which is made and proceeds from the mouth. For by this we do
not only confess that unspeakable desire which we cannot express, but also that
God is (...), and reads and understands our very thoughts* We do not only
tremble at his Majesty, but acknowledge his Omniscience. But yet we do not
exclude the Voice, lest we should make Man (...), dissonant from himself. God,
who made the Heart and Soul for his temple, did also fashion the Tongue for his
glory. And this member may not only help, but conveigh our devotion. By our
voice, says St. Augustine, acrius excitamus desiderium, we rowse and exalt our
desire; we do not only pierce the heavens, but our own hearts also, and make a
deeper impression into our souls, which gain heat by these outward signs, as
bodies do by motion. Therefore Athanasius, in one of his Epistles, where he
gives reasons why Music was brought into the Church, makes this his first,
Because we are commanded from God to serve him and pray unto him (...), with
might and main. In public prayer none can so forget reason as to forbid
Speech: for without Voice how can prayer be public? Public prayers are (...),
the strong weapons of the Church, and cannot be brandisht with power unless;
the Voice does help to manage them. They are made in persona ecclesiae, in the
person of all the faithful people of God gathered together, and therefore must
be uttered and heard of all them for whom jointly they are made. Here we invade
God as it were in whole troops and armies; and haec vis grata Deo est, this
violence finds a gracious welcome at Gods hands. He hearkens to the cries of
our hearts, and bows his ear to the voice of our prayers. In the primitive
times St. Hierome will tell us that their Hallelujah was like the noise of many
waters, and their Amen like a clap of thunder. Oh when shall we hear this
noise, this thunder? As God has made the Body and the Soul, so he requires the
tribute of them both; a Soul, says Isidore, which can (...), by its operative
devotion call down God from heaven, and frame to her self a representation of
his presence; and a Body which by voice and gesture may lay open the characters
of the souls devotion. As he requires the sacrifice of our hearts, so he does
the Psalm. 51. 16, 17
calves of our lips also. Besides, even in private prayer we add the Voice
Hos. 14. 2.
ex quadam redundantia ab anima in corpus ex vehementi affectione, says
Aquinas, as a resultance of that harmonious devotion which has filled the
soul. For when the Heart is glad, it is fit the Tongue, which is our glory,
should rejoice. To conclude this point then; That Prayer may be full Psalm. 16.
9.
and complete, we must keep our Reason awake, and not suffer it to be charmed
by the incantations of vain and wandering imaginations. We must not be (...), as
St. James speaks, men of double minds, which look diverse ways, upon God, and
upon the World. Quomodo te audiri a Deo desideras, cum teipsum non audias? How
can thou hope that God should hear thee, when thou give no attention to thy
self? Whilst thou do thus (...), wander from thy self, and follow thy flying
thoughts, whatsoever part thy Devotion has of thy Will, it has more of thy
Understanding. Galen reports of a Physician, one Theophilus, who was otherwise
a prudent than, that when he was sick thought he heard music in his chamber
night and day: And this he calls (...), a continual infirmity and distemper.
Now such a distemper in a Christian scatters his prayers before the wind. For
how can our Understanding at once be taken up with such contrary and opposite
objects as are God and the World. The counsel of the Wiseman is good, Compose
and settle thy mind before thou pray, and be not as a man Eccl. 18. 23.
that tempeth God. Again, when thou prayest for those graces which may make
thee wise unto salvation, do not contradict thy self. Inconsultissimum est ut
quod affectu and voto volumus, id ipsum re and actu nolle videamur, says
Salvian; It is the unadvisedst thing in the world to beg that at Gods hands
which by thy life and conversation thou show plainly thou would not have.
Such a prayer may perhaps take-up some corner of the Understanding; but cannot
be an act of thy Will. Velle non dicitur qui quod potuit non fecit; He was
never willing to have a blessing who did not strive to procure that blessing
which he desired to have. Many properties there are of Prayer delivered to our
hands from the learned out of Scripture; but they are all wrapped up in this one
definition of Prayer. For if the Will be serious and the Understanding intent;
if the Object be right, the Will truly affected, and the Understanding elevated
to its due pitch, there may be perhaps some difference in degrees, but not in
the thing it self; but he truly prays whose mind and affections are carried
level to obtain the thing he prays for. I might here enlarge my self, but I
have said enough by way of introduction.

Our next inquiry must be, What those Repetitions are to which our Savior
has opposed this (...), this Form here, which he has purposely drawn that we
the more easily may discern what he dislikes in our prayers. Rectum est index
sui and obliqui; That which is straight does manifest not it self only, but
that also which is irregular. After this manner pray ye denies and forbids any
other manner which is opposite to it.

Here by the way give me leave to tell you that Christ gives no direction for
our Gesture. He teaches us not in what posture we should pray, but what the
subject of our prayer must be. Religion and Reason both teach us that Prayer is
an act of adoration, and must be done with reverence. Where these fail,
Profaneness and Self-will soon rise up against Religion and Reason, and quarrel
with those things which no Wiseman would ever call into dispute. The manner of
gesture has been various in all ages; yet all ages have acknowledged Reverence
an inseparable companion of Prayer. When the Christians prayed toward the East,
the Heathens said that they worshipped the Sun. But the Fathers reasons were
these; (which are not indeed reasons of a necessitating force, but only motives
and inducements.) In honor to our Savior they look that way, because when He
was on the Cross his face was turned toward the West, says Justin Martyr.
Divinis rebus operantes in eam coeli plagam convertimus a qua lucis exordium;
says Ambrose, In our Devotions we turn our eyes to that part of the heavens
from whence we have the beginning of light. Lastly, they prayed that way, not
to adore the Eucharist, but Christ himself. These reasons, although not
convincing to demonstrate that it must be thus, yet to quiet and devout minds,
are sufficient motives to persuade that God will rather approve than dislike it
if it be thus. We may use any lawful means to express our affection to God and
to our blessed Savior; and these things can trouble none but those qui
erubescunt Deum revereri, who are ashamed and afraid to do too much reverence
to God. I need not mention the Elevation of their eyes to heaven; which the
Heathen derided also, and said they did but number the clouds; nor the
Expansion and Spreading abroad of their hands; for which they give no other
reason but this, They did it that by this gesture they might confess the
passion of Christ, who was stretched upon the Cross; a reason of no more force
than the former, which yet prevailed with the blessed Saints and Martyrs and
the wisest of the Church. The Ethnicks prayed with their heads covered, as
Plutarch observes: The Christians uncovered theirs, because they were not
ashamed to pray unto God. The most common gesture amongst Christians was
projici in genua, to fall upon their knees. And this (...) was (...), from the
very Apostles times, says Justine, and memoris ecclesiastici, says Hierome,
the perpetual practice of the Church. To this they added (...), to cast
themselves upon their face: and this was used in rebus attonitis, says
Tertullian, when the Church was astonished with the rage of persecutions, and to
show how unworthy they were to appear before the great Majesty of heaven and
earth. These and what other gestures soever which Reason or Reverence commend
we may safely use: and it will prove but a weak Apology for our neglect, to say
they are superstitious. Suppose the very Pagans used the same, yet this will be
no good argument to make us abhor them. For if they thought that by these they
did best express their reverence, why may not we civitate, nay ecclesia,
donare, admit them into the Church, and exhibit as great reverence to the true
God as they did to the false? If our Savior, when he bids us not be like the
Gentiles, had meant Matthew. 6. 8.
we should not be like them in any thing, he had also excluded Prayer it self.
I will insist no longer upon this, but conclude with him in Plantus, qui nihil
facit nisi quod sibi placet, nugas agit; He is a very trifler which will do
nothing but what pleases himself at the very first sight; or rather with St.
Paul, If any man mind to be contentious, we have no such custom, neither 1
Cor. 11. 16.
the Churches of God. After this manner pray ye, was not spoken to teach us
what gesture we should use. For he that knows what Prayer is, unless he mind to
be perverse and obstinate, cannot be in this to seek. But it is opposed to the
vain babbling and multiplicity of words which the Heathen used, as if God could
not hear them nisi centies idem sit dictum, unless they spoke the same thing an
hundred times. Which Cyprian most properly says is not to pray, but ventilare
preces and tumultuosa loquacitate jactare, to toss up and down our prayers, and
cast them as those that winnow use to do from one hand into another; and Cyril,
(...), nothing but to make a noise and babble. The word in the Text is (...),
taken as it may seem, from Battus the herdsman in the Poet, who took delight in
such vain repetitions; -- Sub illis
Montibus, inquit erant, and erant sub montibus illis?
(...), or, as Prodicus in Aristotle's Topics: divided Pleasure (...), which
three signify one and the same thing. This the Greek has a proper word for,
(...), from one Dates a Persian, who being in Greece, and affecting the Greek
tongue, was wont to heap up Synonymas, as, (...), which words are all one. Two
Interpretations we find of Christ's words; one, That by this he forbids all vain
repetition of the same words; another, That he cuts off all multiplying of
words. Which both may be well confessed if we rightly consider our Saviors
words, where he gives the reason why we should not in this be like the Heathen;
For they think they shall be heard for v. 7.
their much babbling. Now to have affected (...), as Theophylact speaks, long
and inconsiderate expressions of their mind, or vain iterations of the same
words, as if God were taken with such babbling, had been to be like the Heathen
indeed. For this Elijah mocked Baals Priests, Cry aloud; for he is a God:
Either he is talking; or he is pursuing; 1 Kings 18. 27
or he is in his journey; or peradventure he sleeps, and must be awaked. To
this does our Savior oppose the (...), and commands us not to pray so, but
after this manner. And this exposition is grounded upon the cause which our
Savior gives why we should not use such repetitions; For your Father knows
what things you have need of before you ask. And if our heavenly Father can
prevent our desires, what need we speak so often, when he can hear us before we
speak? This precept then non consistit in puncto, is not to be strictly urged
as opposed to all repetitions of the same words; but we must weigh and rightly
ponder our Saviors intent. For as he sins not against the former precept, who,
as occasion shall offer it self, and for the glory of God and the edification
of his brother, shall pour forth his prayers in public, before the Sun and the
People; so neither is he guilty of Battology or vain repetition, who out of a
vehement and ardent affection of obteining what he desires shall use many
words, or the same words often. (...), says Periander in Clemens; Meditation
purges and refineth all things. Nay, (...), says the Philosopher; Meditation
is all. Now this, as it is ready to frame our petitions, so is it increased by
them; and being frequent, though the same it presents us with occasions of more
nearly contemplating the Wisdom, the Goodness, and the Power of God, with whom
he that prays, speaks; and the oftener he speaks with him, the nearer is he
drawn, and even transformed into his image. There is no difference in this
respect between the Old Testament and the New: yet in the Old Testament,
especially in the Psalms, we find many examples of repetitions: yet Christ does
noth not impute this Battologie to the Law of Moses, or to any custom of the
Jewish Nation; no, not to the Hippocrites amongst them; but only to the
Heathen, who measured God by themselves, and thought he would be won with words
and speaking one thing often. Omne multiloquum a gentibus, says St. Augustine;
All affectation of words come from the Heathen: Who because they saw the
constancy of Wisemen often shaken by no other art or violence but that of the
tongue, profanely thought that the same art might prevail with God, who is in
ultimitate stabilitatis, who is immovable, and has commanded us to pray
rather to fit and qualify us for his blessings, than to inform him that we
stand in need of that without which we cannot subsist. Christ has commanded us
to pray continually without intermission: Which St. Augustine interprets thus,
ut nullo tempore intermittantur certa tempora orandi, that we ought to observe
certain times of the day to pray in. As he that eats but one meal a day is said
to fast the whole day, so he that prays at appointed hours may as truly be said
to pray always. Neque enim deficit a quocunque opere, qui id suo tempore and
loco exercet, says the devout Schoolman Guilielmus Paerisiensis; For he is not
said to leave his trade who follows it in due time and place. What though our
prayers be solemn or set? yet this does not bring them within the compass of
Battologie. For it is impossible we should pray often, and not repeat. Nay,
Repetition may improve our devotion, and drive it home, as a nayl fastened by
the masters of the assembly. Cassian speaking of that Prayer, O God, make speed
to save us, tells us it is well seconded with it self in the next words, O
Lord, make haste to help us; and that it is impossible to speak it too often. I
know no hour in which we may not pray and use the same words. Astronomers have
told us of some fatal days and hours; but they could never point out to an
hour so unfortunate or unlucky in which we may not pray. The ancients set
themselves a certain task of praying: and being either weary of the world, or
not willing any longer versari in rebus, to entertain the affairs of the times,
they betook themselves to Deserts, and allotted to themselves certain hours for
prayer, which they constantly observed. From them this manner of praying was
brought into the Cloisters. From hence those Preces horariae, as Cassian calls
them, or Horae canonicae, those Prayers at certain hours, which we call
Canonical hours; which are cried down with a great deal of noise, and termed
Battologies; which have been too much esteemed, and are too much slighted. It
is time to observe days and hours, to attribute virtue and power to the times
when we pray, or to the number of our prayers, or to the bare repetition of
them, has some near affinity with that superstition of the Heathen which our
Savior here forbids. But to set-by certain hours to pray in, (suppose it be in
remembrance of those passages of our Saviors Passion, and with some conformity
to the very times, as near as we can collect) is so far from coming under this
heavy censure, that I may call it (...), a reasonable service of God. We must
not be superstitious, but we cannot be too canonical in our devotion. That the
same prayers are repeated often is not there censured by our Savior, but the
placing of our devotion in the bare repetition. Otherwise we cannot be too
instant. Have mercy upon me, O God; for I am weak: O Lord, hear me; for my
bones are vexed: and again, O Lord, I pray thee, now save: O Lord, I pray thee,
now send prosperity. These and such like are the monuments of piety and
devotion; and not only put us in mind what those blessed Saints did, but what
we ought to do by their example. I appeal to your very souls and consciences:
How do these reiterations many times ravish you and transport you beyond your
selves, O thou Son of David, Have mercy upon us. Thou that take away the sins
of the world, have mercy upon us. Thou that sit at the right hand of God
the Father, receive our prayer! How do these ingeminations warm your piety and
devotion, and make it active! Tell me, are they not like Elijahs fiery chariot
to carry-up your thoughts to heaven? When we would speak, and cannot; when our
heart is larger then our tongue, and we think more than we can speak; when we
begin to speak to God, and a pang does silence us; and then we begin again, and
a deep sigh interrupts us; and then we cry out again, and our tears drown our
language; with such Soloecisms God is delighted. When we cry, and cry again,
and multiply our prayer, as the Sun does its Species; when we use the same
words instanter, instantius, instantissime, as the Lawyers speak, with all
instancy of reiteration; with such Importunity God is pleased. When we call,
and are not answered; and then call again till we are answered; and when we are
answered, call again; when we pray that we may obtain; and when we have
obtained, pray again: when we love to petition him who loves our petitions, and
though he is more willing to give than we are to pray, yet withdraws his hand
that we might multiply our prayers: when we call for mercy, and never think we
can call often enought for it: with such Tautologies God is won. And this is it
which St. Paul, (...), Romans 15. 30. Col. 4. 2.
to strive and contend and fight in prayers, as a Soldier, who being earnest
for victory lays on his blows thick; and (...), to labor and sweat, and even
thresh in prayer. If the Spring be clean, let the waters flow: If thy Heart be
prepared, pour forth thy supplications as frequently as thou may; thou
need not stand in fear of making Soloecisms and Tautologies. Christianorum
soloecismi, turpe quid dicere vel facere, says Hierome; The worst Tautology of
a Christian is continuance in Sin; and the greatest Soloecisme, to speak or do
what is not warrantable. Those frequent iterations in our devotions are not
Battologies, but like those studs in little buildings which, though they be not
continuae, all one, yet are contiguae, and are joined in the same frame, and do
uphold the building. When we call, and call again, and never think we can call
enough, when our prayers and devotion fall like the flakes of Snow in winter
(as Homer commends Ulysses 's eloquence) or rather like the Rain, which though
it fall in many streams, yet is but one shower, with such Babbling, with such
Battology God is wrought upon. Muta cantus simulacrum repraesentat ingrati,
says Ennodius: Depretiat genium suum quae in vocem non erumpit amicitia, We
must not so be afraid of babbling as to neglect prayer, nor be so unlike the
Heathen as not to be Christians. Where our Love is dumb and silent, there our
Devotion must needs be but a statue; for that friendship is of no value which
cannot speak. Dicuntur fratres in Aegypto breves habere orationes, sed
creberrimas, says St. Augustine; The Monks in Egypt are said to have very
frequent, but short prayers. And Cassian gives the reason, That by often
praying they may the more firmly knit their souls to God; and again, That that
attention which is required in prayer abate not by being prolonged; ne calor
cogitationis nimia intention pereat, lest that heat of devotion vanish by
intending and stretching it too much. It is never dulled sooner than when the
edge of it is most keen. David sends up his prayer as Incense, Let my prayer,
says he, be set before Psalm. 141. 2.
thee as incense; whose fragrant smoke still ascends upwards. But many times in
the very ascent, whilst it strives up higher and higher, infimo phantasmate
verberatur, says Gregory, it is beat back again by earthly imaginations which
intervene, and then is extenuated by degrees, and vanishes to nothing.
Therefore the Prophet prays ut dingatur oratis, that his Prayer may be set
before God, ut stabiliatur, so some render it out of the Hebrew, that it may be
established, that it neither evaporate it self nor be whift about with the wind
of vain and contrary imaginations, which come ab extrinseco, and may corrupt
it. Reason and Devotion are in this alike, that they are as tender as the Eye,
which by too earnest looking upon the object grows weary, and loses the object
whilst it looks upon it. Saepe vehementius tentata succedunt segnius, and nimia
voluntas effectum negat: We see it comes many times to pass that when we press
forward with too much haste, we miss our mark; and we come sooner to our
journeys end when we make not too much speed. Reason may eclipse it self: and
Devotion, like that meteor which Philosophers call stellam cadentem, may be
lifted up on high, and represent the shape and brightness of a Star, but, being
not fixed in the firmament, suddenly shoot and fall to the ground, and turn to a
gelly and slime. And therefore these two, says St. Chrysostom, not to speak
much and to pray often, are not contrary, but may well consist together. Our
Prayers may be short and often; which if we too far extend, we give the Devil
leisure and boldness to set upon us, and to supplant our Devotion when we think
it most invincible. Saepe homo, cum est in se, non est secum, says the Father;
A man may be in himself even then when he is not with himself. To help this,
Nazianzene Orat. 21. has found out (...), a golden chain; and has taught us
to join together (...), to make our actions devout, and our devotions practick.
For Prayer is of that nature that it will mix it self and comply with every
action. Ipsa sibi templum facit quo Deum adoret; She can make every place a
temple for the worship of God. Other actions hinder one another: I cannot walk
and sit down; I cannot build, and write; I cannot travel, and sleep: but
Prayer, as Logicians say of Substance, nihil habet contrarium, has nothing
contrary to it, but applies it self to every thing. I may walk and pray, I may
build and pray, I may write and pray. And St. Hierome will tell us, Sanctis
etiam ipse somnus est oration, that holy men do pray even when they sleep. Those
Monks of Egypt we before mentioned, did work incessantly in their private
cells, says Cassian; but yet they omitted not Prayer, per singula momenta
orationes miscentes, making their Devotion keep time with their Work; The
Fathers had their prayers which they called Jaculatorias, sudden and often
Ejaculations, Deus meus, and omnia; Amor meus, crucifixus, and the like. Which
were like that golden Dart of Abaris in Jamblichus, with which he used to fly
aloft, and so got the name of (...); a Climber of the heavens; or rather like
Pythagoras 's short symbolical sayings, which he calls sparkles of fire, sent
up by Devotion, and falling down back upon it to increase it. Of this nature
are those short Prayers and Collects which the Church has framed, not shreds
and short cuts, but celestial sparkles, which both kindle Devotion and nourish
it; which are built upon the true foundation, this Form which Christ has
given; which help our weekness, that we may pray; and being short and many,
strengthen our Devotion, that it never fail. To conclude this point then; Not
often praying, not repeating of the same words, not heat of devotion, not
fervency, not frequent ejaculations fall under the censure of our Savior here,
nor are to be accounted babbling; but garrulous and talkative zeal, tumultuous
impudence, which speak to God as if he were ignorant, and make a noise as if he
were asleep. These are but squibs to make a noise: But those other are
radiations and glorious illustrations, which may every where present
themselves, quae inter medios rerum actus inveniunt aliquid vacui, nec otium
patiuntur, which find a room in the very throng of our actions, and are never
idle. Post magnum sonitum tinnitus quidam; When the Clock has stricken we hear
after a glowing and a quivering sound: The actions of the day are presented and
repeated in the dreams of the night; which are (...), the echo and
reverberations of our customary behavior. So when we have begun in prayer, and
lodged our petitions in the bosom of our gracious Father, they are presently
poured back upon us in the midst of our common actions, and we resume them
again, and one prayer is made the resultancie of another, and this music is
like that of the Spheres, perpetual and everlasting.

But when our Savior prescribes this manner, does he not exclude all other
forms? No; but he requires rather that our prayers be succinct and short;
opposing this Form to the Heathens vain babbling, and leaving it as a pattern for
us to pray by. Jus est superstruendi extrinsecus orationes; We may build other
prayers by this model, those which are extra, which have not the same words,
but not contra, none that ask any thing which is contrary to the Petitions this
Form contains. Our Savior, the Apostles, and the whole Church ever practiced
it. And it plainly appears that it was (...), our Saviors chief aim and intent
to exclude vain repetitions; but that he had any second intent and scope to
shut out all other it does not appear. It has befallen the Church of Christ
what is observed of Drusus in Paterculus, In iis ipsis quae pro senatu
moliebatur, senatum habuit adversarium; He never attempted any thing for the
honor of the Senate, but the Senate withstood him. So though there be nothing
more useful to the Church than the framing of Liturgies and common Forms of
Prayer, yet is there nothing censured with more bitterness and scorn then
these, especially by those for whose use and benefit they are framed. To insist
upon particulars were but, with Ruth to glean after their sheaves who in this
argument have made a plentiful harvest. The Christian desire of those good men
who by evidence of argument have endeavored to reclaim them, has but more
provoked them. And I may say with Cyprian, lacrymis magis opus quam verbis, We
shall more profitably bestow our tears and our prayers than our arguments on
such men, with whom to dispute is but to strengthen them in their error, and
to whom though seven wise men render a reason, yet their most evident reasons
serve only to make them yet more unreasonable.

We proceed now to enquire To whom this Form of prayer was prescribed, and Upon
what occasion it was instituted. And here there seems to be some difference
between the two Evangelists, Luke and Matthew. For we read that one of his
Disciples came unto him as he was praying Luke 11. 1.
in a certain place, and said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray, as John also
taught his Disciples: But here, without any entreaty, in the midst of his
Sermon, which he made not to the Disciples alone, but to the multitude, he
prescribes this Form. Some say he prescribed this Form at two several times.
But this occasions another scruple. For it is not probable that after he had
openly taught this Form to his Disciples and the whole multitude, that any, of
his Disciples especially, being present at his Sermon, should ask him to teach
them that again which he had taught already: Which had been to deny what was
most manifest. And Christ himself is silent, nor makes any mention that the
Desciple demanded that which was done already. A doubt this is of after-ages,
which none of the Ancients fell upon. And we cannot better clear it than by
that which is most probably true, That St. Luke is not so exact in the history
of Christ as is this our Evangelist St. Matthew, but, without any strict
observing of the order and series of the times, thought it sufficient that what
he wrote of Christ was true. Matthew was present with Christ, and wrote what he
saw: But Luke, who by some was thought to be one of the Seventy Disciples,
confesses in the very beginning of his Gospel, that he wrote as they deliverd
it who were from the beginning, (...), eyewitnesses and ministers, of the
word. Nor can we blame him, whilst he delivers the truth, though he do not
always punctually set down the time; or tell us that Christ did institute this
Form after those things which he before declared. To say no more is enough to
satisfy any mind that is not overcurious. There may be in Scripture many
appearing Achronismes, nay (...), seeming contrarieties: But this is not enough
to argue the Scripture of Imperfection, because we cannot reconcile them. The
treasures of the written Word of God are rich Minerals, quae assidue before
respondent fodienti, which the more they are dig'd the more plentifully
evermore do they offer themselves, so as that if all the wits of Men and Angels
should combine themselves, yet should they never be able to draw near the
bottom, or follow to an end the smallest vein. Tanta est profunditas
Christianarum literarum, says St. Augustine, Such is the depth and variety of
Christian learning contained in the Scriptures, that I could every day profit
in them, if I should endeavor to study them alone with all my leisure, with
all my pains, with all my wits, from my childhood to my last gasp. Not because
of any strange difficulty in attaining to such things as are necessary to
salvation: but because after that is gotten which concerns Faith, there remain
so many things that even to the eldest and acutest and most earnest in the
study of them, it happens when he has done then he begins. Besides, as
Gregory Nyssen says, that Christ spoke in parables and in obscure and covered
narrations, that he might exercise (...), the wit and understanding, of his
Disciples; so may we safely think that, having placed that truth which brings
salvation in a tabernacle, as the Sun, that all eyes might behold it, some
things and some circumstances he left obscure, ut in eorum discussione and
intellectu immensum nobis exercitii ac solicitudinis campum reservaret; as
Cassian speaks, as a large field for our industry and care to show it self in;
ut difficultas intellectus gratiam Dei quaereret, as Gregory speaks, that the
difficulty of apprehending it might force us on our knees to beg further
illumination from the Father of lights. Ipsa natura, says the Orator,
proposuit pulcherimo cuique operi difficultatem; Nature it self, as she has
with a free and open hand dispensed things necessary, so has she withdrawn the
best things that we might sweat for them. So God has left some mists, some
darkness, in Scripture, that our Industry might strive to dispel it; and, as
Heraclitus speaks of the Oracle of Delphos, (...), he does not plainly relate,
nor yet hide the truth, that we may search and find it out. In this difference
we find it so: The Truth, like the Be in the Gumm, and latet, and lucet,
appears, but hidden; is seen, but with some obscurity; that we may neither
despair of finding it, nor be overconfident. Prayer is a principal part of our
service of God, a tribute which we must give him, a sacrifice which we must
offer, an acknowledgment that he is the Fountain of good, and that all
blessings are but (...), defluxions, from him; And all men, of what rank and
condition soever, are bound to perform it; all are bound to pray. This Form of
prayer therefore was prescribed both to the Disciples and to the Multitude.
None so wise who must not, none so ignorant who may not learn this Form.
Blanditur nostrae infirmitati; It is fitted to the capacity of the weak. Being
a short form, it is no burden to the Memory; and being a plain form, it brings
no trouble to the Understanding. He that cannot walk upon the pavement of
heaven, amongst the mysteries of his Faith, may yet walk upon this earth, this
plain model of Devotion. He that knows but little of the Trinity, may yet cry,
Abba, Father. He that cannot dispute of God, may yet sanctify his Name. He who
is no Politician, may have his Kingdom within him: And he who cannot find out
his ways, may yet do his Will. Fastidiosior est scientia quam virtus: Paucorum
est ut literati sint; omnium, ut pii: Knowledge is more coy and hardly to be
wooed than Devotion; it makes its mansion but in a few: But Piety forsakes no
soul that will entertain her. Every man cannot be a Scholar; but every man may
be devout. Every man cannot preach; but every man may pray. Nemo ob imperitiam
literarum a perfectione cordis excluditur, says John Cassian. Antiquity
confined Perfection to a Contemplative life, to men of some eminence in the
Church: but a vain thing it is to imagine that none can reach perfection but
the Learned. Surgunt indocti, and rapiunt regnum coelorum, says Augustine;
Devout Ignorance many times takes heaven by violence, when our sluggish and
unprofitable knowledge cannot lift up our hands by Devotion so much as to knock
at the door. Take then the Disciples and the Multitude together, men of
knowledge, and men of no great reach, and the Sic orate, concerns them all, and
to them it is our Savior gives this Command, After this manner pray ye.

But now, in the last place, what shall we say to Sinners? May they use this
Form: or can they pray without offense, whose very prayer is an offense? I
should hardly have proposed so vain a question, but that I find it made a
question in the Schools, and amongst the Casuists a Case of Conscience. Indeed,
who can pray but Sinners? Our very Pater Noster is a strong argument that every
man is a sinner. But yet some sins do not exclude the grace and favor of God,
as those of daily incursion: Others of a higher nature may, and so make us
incapable of this holy Duty. This Doctrine like the Popes Interdict, shuts-up
the Church-doors, and shuts up our lips for ever, that we may not open them;
no, not to show forth the praises of the Lord. A doctrine as full of danger as
that from whence it sprung. For do we not read it in terminis, That the best
actions of the unregenerate are sins? We know who tells that opera bona optime
facta sunt venialia peccata, That the best works of Saints are so also in some
degree. Which opinions, though they have some truth, if rightly understood, yet
so crudely proposed as many times they are, are full of danger. Who would not
tremble to hear what I am sure has been preached, That the wicked are damned
for eating, and damned for drinking, damned for laboring in their calling, and
damned for going to Church, and damned for praying? whereas all things work for
the best to the godly, even Sin it self. But it is worth our observing, that
men of this opinion have a trick to shift themselves out of the tempest, and to
make themselves of the Elect. They deal as the Romans did; who, when two Cities
contending for a piece of ground had taken them for their judge, wisely gave
sentence on their own behalf, and took it from them both unto themselves. But
the truth is, to say that the Alms and Prayers of wicked men are sin is a harsh
saying; and we must, as Chrysostom speaks, (...), mollify it. Shall I call the
Temperance and Patience and Chastity of the Heathen sins? That is too foul a
reproach. I will rather say that they were as the Rainbow was before the
Flood, the same virtues with those which commend Christians, but of no use,
because they were not seasoned with Faith, which commends all virtues
whatsoever, and without which they cannot appear before the presence of the
Lord. But to give instance to our purpose; Cornelius was a Gentile, and knew
not Christ: yet we read that his prayers came up for a memorial before God.
Simon Magus was in the gall of bitterness and in the bond of iniquity; yea,
primogenitus Satanae, as Ignatius calls him, the firstborn of Satan: yet even
in this bitterness, even in this bond of sin, St. Peter's counsel is, to pray
God, if perhaps the thoughts of his heart may be forgiven him, Acts 8. 22.
which, after the thunder of his curse, clears the air, that he may see some
hope of escaping destruction. To make it a sin to pray in the state of sin, is
to deny physic to the sick and to destroy my Brother for whom Christ dyed. I
know the Schools determine the point thus, That both these are false, either
that a sinner is always heard of God, or that he is never heard; That God
loves his nature, but hates his fault; That out of his exceeding mercy he will
grant his request, if his prayer be pious. To those who walk (...), by that
light they have, God is ready to send an Angel or an Apostle, or to come
himself. When the Prodigal was yet a great way off, his Father saw him, and
ran, and fell on his Luke 15. 20.
neck, and kissed him. The Return of the sinner is expressed by the word Going;
but God's Coming to the sinner, by Running. God makes greater haste to the
sinner then the sinner does to God. God makes much of our first inclination,
and would not have it fall to the ground. We need say no more to clear this
point then what Gregory has taught, Fac boni quicquid potes; In what state
soever thou art, whether in Gods favor or under his frown, yet do all the good
thou can. In puncto reversionis, in the very point of thy turning to God, God
runs to meet thee; he watches each sigh, and hearkens to each groan: and thy
Prayer is so far from being a sin, that it shall wipe-out thy sin for ever: And
therefore Christ has put this Form in thy mouth: Which he has prescribed to
the learned and to the ignorant, to Disciples and to the Multitude, to perfect
men and to sinners, laying this command upon them all, After this manner
therefore pray ye, Our Father, etc.

This Form of Prayer is prescribed to all: yet all will not receive it; but
many look upon it with scorn, as if they thought themselves too wise to be
taught by our Savior. What Seneca spoke of Philosophy is as true of Religion
and Devotion, Fuit aliquando simplicior inter minora peccantes. When men were
truly devout, there was no contention but this one, Who should be most devour.
All the noise was in their Temples, little in their Schools. All men then did
join together with one heart and mind in prayer, and not, as now, fly asunder
and stand at distance; and then give laws to one another; or (which is worse)
in their hearts denounce a curse against those who will not follow their
example, that is, set the countenance, tune the voice, roll the eye, pray at
adventure, and in all things do as they do; or (which is equivalent to a curse)
esteem them at best but mere moral men (would they were so good) but
unsanctified men, and void of saving Grace; and so nourish that venom and
malice in their hearts against their Brethren which certainly cannot lodge in
the same room with true Devotion, and leave them only fit to act a prayer. And
then what a Roscius is a Pharisee! Beloved, Prayer was a Duty, but is become a
Problem; and men who cannot gain the reputation of Wise but by doing that for
which they deserve another name and title, have been bold to put it to the
question, When, and How, and In what manner we may pray; as if this Form came
short which our Savior has prescribed; have looked upon all other Forms, and
this of Christ's, (by which they were made) as upon a stone of offense, and out
of it have struck the fire of Contention. Nihil tam sanctum quod non inveniat
sacrilegum; There is nothing so sacred, so set apart, which a profane hand dare
not touch and violate; no Manna, which may not be loathed; nothing so
profitable to advance piety, which may not be trod under foot. If you cast a
pearl to a Swine, he will turn upon you and rent you, if he can. A set-Form!
That is a chain, and binds the holy Ghost to an Ink-horn. Meditation! (without
which we will not speak to our fellow mortal) That stints the blessed Spirit.
It is their own language. They bring Sermons and Prayers of Gods own making,
because they themselves takes no pains in framing them. Multa sunt sic digna
revinci, ne gravitate adorentur, says Tertullian; Many exceptions may be taken
which are not worth the excepting against; and many are so ridiculous, that to
be serious and earnest in confuting of them were to honor them too much. We
cannot but pity the men, because we are Christians; otherwise we could not but
make them the object of our laughter. We have probability enough to induce us
to believe that some of those who have so startled at a Form, would for the
very same reason have complained had there been none at all. For he that looks
for a fault, will be sure to find one; or, if he do not find, will make one.
They would have been as hot and angry had the Church been naked, as they are
now they see her glorious in all her embroydery. Ceremony, or no Ceremony;
Form, or no Form; all is one to him whose custom, whose nature, whose
advantage it is to be contentious. What? no reverence in the Church of Christ?
as liable to exceptions as, What? too much? What? turn the cock, and let it
run? one would think more obnoxious to censure then by meditation to draw
waters out of the fountain, the Word of God. What? speak we know not what? Such
an accusation in all reason should sooner raise a tempest then to pray after
that manner which our best Master has taught us. When it concerns us to be
angry, every shadow is a monster, every thing is out of order, every thing,
nothing is a fault. I have not been so particular as I should, because we live
among fanatic spirits, with men who, as David speaks, are soon set on fire;
who can themselves at pleasure libel the whole world, yet put on the malice of
a Fiend, and clothe themselves with vengeance, at the sound of the most gentle
reprehension. Imbecilla loedi se putant si tangantur; You must not lay a finger
upon that which is weak; If you but touch them, they are enraged, and will
pursue you as a murderer. Yet we may take leave to consider what degrees and
approaches the Arch-Enemy of the Church and Religion has made to overthrow all
Devotion and to digg up Christianity by the roots. First, men are offended with
Ceremony, though as ancient as the Church it self, and at last cry down Duty.
First, no Kneeling at the Sacrament, and then no Sacrament at all. First, no
Witnesses at the Font, and then no Baptism. First, no Ordination, and then no
Minister: and he is the best Preacher who has no calling, though he be fitter
to handle the Flayl then the Bible. First, no Adorning of Churches; and
presently they speak it plainly, A Barn, a Stable is as good as a Church. And
so it may be for such cattle as they. First, no set-Form of Prayer; and within
a while they will teach Christ himself how to pray. Thus Error multiplyes it
self, and striking over-hastily at that which is deemed Superstition, leaves
that untoucht, and wounds Religion it self, and swallows up the Truth in
victory in the unadvised and heedless pursuit of an error. This is an evil
humor, and works upon every matter it meets with: and when it has laid all
desolate before it, it will at last gnaw upon it self; as in the bag of Snakes
in Epiphanius the greatest Snake eat up the lesser, and at last half of
himself. For we commonly see that they that strike at whatsoever other men set
up, are at last as active to destroy the work of their own hands; and they who
quarrel with every thing, do at last fall out with themselves. Oh what pity is
it that Religion and Piety should be thus toyed withal! that men should play
the wanton with those heavenly advantages which should be as staves to uphold
them here on earth, and as wings to carry them up to heaven! that there should
be so much noise and business about that Duty which requires (...), the
quietness, the tranquillity, the stillness of the soul! that Praying should
become begging indeed, I mean, as Begging is now-a-dayes, an art and trade!
that all Devotion should be lost in shows! that men should hate Ceremony, and
yet be so much Papists as they are! that they should cry Down with Babylon even
to the ground, and yet build up a Babel in themselves! But, beloved, we have
not so learned Christ: Therefore, let us lay hold on better things, and such as
accompany Piety, that Piety which brings with it salvation: Let us not be
afraid of a good duty because it has fallen into evil hands; Let us not leave
off to pray in that Form which our Savior has taught us, or in any other Form
which is conformable to that, because some men love to play the wantons, and
will call us superstitious for doing what Christ commanded us; Let us not be
ashamed of the name of this Form of Christ, because by some it has been evil
spoken of; but let us pray, and after this manner, and pray that this their sin
may be forgiven them. Let us not affect long prayers, but pray so that we may
be heard. Let our Prayers be the effects and results, not of Vainglory, but of
Devotion. Let us know both what and to whom we speak; and then let us speak,
and God will answer. He will look down upon us, whilst we thus look up upon
him: And for his sake who taught us thus to pray, he will pour down blessings
upon our heads; he will give us our daily bread in this life, and in the life
to come feed us with the blessed vision of Himself, and with those pleasures
which are at his right hand for evermore.

The One and Thirtieth SERMON. PART III.
MATTHEW. VI. 9. Our Father which art in Heaven:
NOT to mis-spend our time by way of Preface, we may briefly divide this whole
Prayer into three parts; a Preface, or Exordium, OUR FATHER WHICH ART IN
HEAVEN; the Prayer it self, consisting of six Petitions, as some, or seven, as
others; the Conclusion, FOR THINE IS THE KINGDOM, THE POWER, AND THE GLORY,
FOR EVER. AMEN. In which are contained a kind of method of Prayer. For God, who
is a God of order, and has placed in all things (...), a kind of harmony and
elegant composition, and has his Name (...), as Clemens speaks, from the
ordering and disposing of all things, has also observed a kind of art and
method in that form of prayer which he has prescribed unto us. Statua non fit,
quanquam fusi omnibus membris, nisi collocetur; Though you have melted and
fashioned every point and member of a statue, yet the statue is not finished and
complete until you have orderly placed each part thereof: Nor do we pray (...),
after that manner which Christ has taught, unless our Devotion begin, and
press forward, and conclude ex praescripto, in that order which is prescribed.
Method commends all things, even Prayer it self, which without it were indeed
Battologie and nothing but noise. But being turned as it were and well set by
that rule which we have learned a magistro symphoniae, from the chief Master of
this heavenly melody, Christ himself, it is the best music we can make in the
ears of the Almighty, and does (...), even join us to the quire of Angels. We
cannot better begin, continue and end our prayers then with Christ.

These words, Our Father which art in heaven, are the Preface and Proem, (...),
and make way to bring-in the Petitions themselves; (...), a fair frontis-piece
set over the whole work, as Pindarus speaks. No art can reach it, no oratory
can equal it. It is not long, nor does it in caput excrescere, grow up into a
bulk: But three words, PATER NOSTER COELESTIS, Our heavenly Father. But, (...),
These three are all, and in this narrow compass comprise a world of matter. For
first, they are fitted and proportioned to the Petitions, and bear a
resemblance to every part; as Light does to the color of that glass through
which it shines. Whose Name should be more holy to us than our Fathers? Non est
cui magis velle me melius aequum siet, says he in the Poet. Nature and Equity
consecrate his Name. Who should be my King, and reign within me, but he whom I
know tam pro me esse quam supra me, to be as much for me as he is above me?
Whom should I obey more than my Father? Let his Wisdom, whose Will is my
salvation. Whom should I ask my bread of? of whom should I ask forgiveness? of
whom should I crave succor when evil assaults me, but of my Father? who being
our Father will, and being in heaven can, give us whatsoever we want. So these
words are not only a Preface, but also a groundwork and foundation on which
every Petition is built-up and stands firm like mount Sion which cannot be
moved.

Secondly, These words are a grateful acknowledgment of his Power and Goodness
and Providence to whom we commence our suit: and hereby we do captare
benevolentiam, we beg, nay, we obtain, Gods favor. For that Preface must
needs be powerful which Gratitude pens. Oratores hanc habent disciplinam ut
incipiant a laudibus, says St. Ambrose; It is the art of the best Orators to
begin with the praises of them to whom they speak, and then exprimere quod
petant, fully to expres, what they do desire. Tully begins his Oration for Milo
with the commendations of Pompey; St. Paul, his Defense with the praise of
Agrippa; Aristotle commends that custom Acts 26. Ethec. 5.
of building (...), a temple of Gratitude, in the midst of the City, that men
might learn to acknowledge benefits as well as beg them; or rather, first to
acknowledge, and then beg them. In feudis si feudatarius abscondit, neque
recogniscit a domino feudi totum feudum, jure illud amittit, says the Civil
Law; In Fee-farms if the Farmer conceal any part of the fee, and do not homage
for it, and make acknowledgment to the Lord, he forfeiteth all. It is so
between the Lord of heaven and earth, and us his poor vassals. We hold all we
have and all we are from him alone. And if his blessings make us wanton, if
Ingratitude seal up our lips that we do not show forth his praise, we lose all,
and are not sit to pray for more. If we will not call him Father, why should we
ask his blessing? Every moment is a monument of his Goodness; nor do we more
draw-in the air then his Goodness In him we live and move and have our being.
Therefore, Whatsoever good thou do, (...), could the very Heathen say,
confess it to be from God. And Plato gives the reason, (...), From one Good are
all Goods: and more divinely St. James, Every good gift and every perfect gift
is from above, and comes down from the Father of lights. Ingratitude, when she
cries loudest, is not heard: but Thankfulness and Singing of praises are the
true (...), the best flourish and preface to our Prayers!

Lastly, this Preface presents us in the true posture of Supplicants. It pulls
us on our knees: It lifts up our hands and eyes to him that dwells in the
heavens; which is (...), the true habit of a beades-man, as Eusebius speaks in
the Life of Constantine: It makes a glorious mixture of Fear and Love, of
Amazement and Boldness, of Confusion and Confidence. FATHER is a word full of
allurement, and makes us look up; (...), to lift up our eyes, and stretch forth
our hands, as if we were to meet the blessing and lay hold on it. But when we
remember the Majesty of Heaven, we are struck with reverence, we begin to fall
back, (...), as Justine Martyr speaks, casting our selves upon our faces on the
ground. The Philosopher will tell us in his Ethics, (...), that those men many
times are esteemed valiant whom the ignorance of danger makes audacious. It
fares so with Christians: They would not be so bold with God, did they rightly
conceive of his Majesty; did they consider that as he is a Father, ready to
open his hand in bounty to his children, so he is in heaven, as ready to lift
it up against those that are too familiar with him. Volo illum qui sit dicturus
solliciter surgere, and periculum intelligere, says Quintilian; In our
exordiums and beginnings we must put-on some solicitude, and understand the
danger we are in; not (...), tremble and look pale, as Tully himself once did,
that we cannot speak; but so to behave our selves as that Fear may not shut-up
our speech, but commend it. With the same care and reverence must we begin our
Prayers. We must, with Demosthenes, be (...), modest and fearful, but not
discouraged to tender our petitions. The Love of a Father may fill us with
confidence, but the Majesty of God must strike us with fear. I dare speak to
God, because he is my Father; but I speak in trembling, because he is in
heaven. If we do not thus begin, we lose our petitions before we utter them; as
the Mariner which unskilfully thrusts forth his ship from shore shipwracks in
the very haven.

Biel, upon the Canon of the Mass, divides this Exordium into four parts, which
are as so many ways by which we do captare benevolentiam Dei, insinuate our
selves into the favor of God. First we do it a dilectionis magnitudine, by the
greatness of his Love, by which he vouchsafes to be our Father; Secondly, a
liberali Bonitatis diffusione, from the free communication of his Goodness, in
that he is Our Father; Thirdly, ab immutabili perpetuitate, from the
immutability of his Essence, which he gathers out of these words, QUI ES, which
art; Lastly, a sublimitate Potentiae, from the sublimitie and eminency of his
Power, which is expressed in those words, IN COELIS, in heaven. We have here our
method drawn to our hand. But in our discourse we shall omit the third, and
rather take the words in sensu quo fiunt, in that sense in which they were made
to be understood, then in sensu quem faciunt, in that sense which they will
bear without any prejudice to the truth. God said unto Moses, I AM THAT I AM:
Exodus 3. 14.
and there cannot be a better expression of the Immutability of his Essence
than to say, HE IS: But to say, He is in heaven, does not more naturally
enforce than to say, He is Good, and he is Merciful, and he is Just. The lines
then by which we will bound our discourse are these, and by these we will pass:
We will enquire I. How God is our Father: II. Wherefore we call him ours: III.
How he is in heaven. Of these in their order.

And first, the word FATHER is not taken here, as it is in our Creed, (...),
personally.; for so God is the Father of Christ alone; but (...), essentially,
for the whole Trinity; and so he is the Father of all Christians. For the
Persons of the Trinity are inseparable: nor does every Person take a several
possession of us: But the Father as Goodness, the Son as Wisdom, the holy Ghost
as Power do all concur ad extra, in every particular which does issue outwardly
from that one glorious Deity, which they all are: And he that is not partaker
of all, can have fellowship with none. The whole Trinity is (...), as
Nazianzene speaks, a Sea, an Ocean of Essence, and a Sea, an Ocean of Goodness,
which has overflowed all Mankind. Whatsoever God did, whatsoever God
determined, he determined as a Father, out of his Goodness. The very name of
FATHER breaths Love and Power. Appellatio ista and pietatis and potestatis est,
says Tertullian. But Gods Power is not more wonderful than his Goodness is
eminent. Therefore Synesius in his Oration De Regno, tells us that when we call
God our FATHER, non tam potentiam glorificamus quam adoramus providentiam, we
do not so much magnify his Power as adore his Goodness and Providence. And
here what wings might I wish for to fly a pitch proportionable to the height of
Gods Goodness! or what line might I use to sound the depth of his Care! The
World, all that is in the wo^^d, all that we are, all that we desire, all that
we hope for, all that we believe are the arguments of his Goodness. Verba
amoris opera sunt; His Works are the language of his Love, and his Hand the
tongue of his Goodness. Whom does not the eloquence of the Universe amaze? What
Rhetoric is so furnished with figures as we see natures? What Goodness is that
which so overflows that we can neither receive nor understand it? FATHER is the
best expression we have, but it does not express that Love which makes him more
then a Father. First he expressed himself a Father in our creation. For what
other motive had he than his Goodness to create the World and Men and Angels in
so wonderful a manner. Who counseled him, who moved him to do it? He was of
himself all-sufficient; and needed nothing. (...), There can be no accession to
God, could the Philosopher say. Why then did he thus break out into action? We
can give no reason but his Goodness, which is a restless thing, always in
doing, and, like a Fountain, cannot stay it self within it self, but must find
vent to disperse it self. By his Goodness, I say, we were at first created his
children: and by his Goodness we were redeemed when we had forfeited our
filiation. When we had forgot to be Children, He did not forget to be a Father,
but provided that his own Son should die that his adopted sons might live for
ever. And so he has made us his by a double right, 1. of Creation, 2. of
Redemption. And lastly he does not suffer us to fall to the ground, but in all
miseries and afflictions, yea in death it self, he lifts and raises us up
with the hope of immortality and eternal life. O what room have we here to
expatiate! Further, we might show you how God is our Father by Adoption, taking
us in familiam, injusque familiae, into the family and church of the
firstborn, and giving us right and title to be of that family. We might lay
open his Goodness in our Regeneration. For of his own will he begat us with the
word of truth. I might set forth James 1. 18.
his Goodness in the Opening of his hand, and feeding us with all things
necessary both for this life and that which is to come, both to make us Men and
Saints. This word FATHER is proprium Evangelii, most proper to the Gospel. A
name which God did not reveal to Moses, says Tertullian. And had not he
commanded it, thus to pray, no man should have been so bold as to have called
him Father. Now as God has most plainly declared in his Gospel that he is our
Father; so he has most expressly promised that he will make us his children,
like unto him, immortal. His grace, says St. 2 Timothy 1. 10.
Paul, is now made manifest by the appearing of Jesus Christ, who has abolisht
death, and brought life and immortality to light through the Gospel. But what?
was not that brought to light before? No: the Heathen, who granted the
Immortality of the Soul, denied the Resurrection of the Body. De Caio Caium
reduces? He that will say that Caius shall rise again, the same Caius he was,
shall be thought by Philosophers (...), to play the fool, as it is in
Athenagoras. Nor was this truth so well known to the Jews. Chrysostom in diverse
places tells us that the common sort knew it not. And in his second Epistle to
Olympias, speaking of Jobs Patience; does thus exalt and amplify it, (...),
Job was a just man, and knew nothing of the resurrection. And Mercer, who was
well seen in the Jews language, interprets those words of Job, chapter 19. 25. I
know that my Redeemer lives, of his redemption from the dunghill and misery. I
will not be too peremptory to subscribe: But I will say with Epiphanius, that
God dealt like a true Father, and applied himself to the several ages of his
children, speaking to them in a diverse dialect, more obscurely under the Law,
more expressly under the Gospel. Omnis nostra natura in Christi hypostasi
revixit; Our nature as man united in Christ's Person, and in him revived, and
receives immortality. And we are told that as Christ is risen, even so we also
by the same power ^^all rise again; and that as God has been a Father to us in
making us after his own image, so he will be a Father to us in restoring us. He
is a Father of the world, a Father of our bodies, a Father of our souls; and he
will be a Father of our ashes: He will favor them, and love them, and recollect
them, and bring us his children to immortality and eternal life. I said this
word FATHER is most proper to the Gospel. Now I say more, Vox haec Evangelium
est, This word FATHER is the Gospel. For in it all the riches of the Gospel and
the treasures of Wisdom lie hid. Does Gods Countenance shine upon us? is he a
Father? Does he frown upon us? yet he is a Father. Does his hand uphold us? he
is a Father. Is it heavy upon us? he is a Father still. He is a Father, when he
reaches out his hand to help us; and a Father, when he stretches it forth to
strike us. For even in his anger there is love, and his very blows are helps:
his disgraces are honors; his corrections, Sermons: and when he casts us down,
then he lifts us up. Howsoever he handles us, whilst we are in his hands, we
are in the hands of a Father. Upon these points we might make large discourses.
And as Cato said, De morte usque ad mortem, that he could speak of Death even
until Death, so might we speak of this one word FATHER till that this our
Father bring us into heaven. But we will say with Ausonius, Non oblita haec,
sed praeterita, We do not omit these because we forgot them, but only pass them
by as unwilling to prolong our discourse, and speaks all. In Christ are hidden
all Col. 2. 3.
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. And he that says, We are redeemed,
has said all. That which makes God a Father is his Providence: and his
Providence is most eminent in the Redemption of mankind. But it is over all our
actions, over all our ways, sweetly ordering and composing all things, so that
necessary events fall out necessarily, and contingent contingently: and those
things which are carried about motu tumultuario, with a tumultuary and
uncertain motion, yet are regulated and governed certa lege, by a kind of law.
When we behold the Heavens, even the work of Gods fingers, we cannot but
acknowledge our Father which is in heaven. When we consider the World, we see
(...), says Chrysostom, a large book wherein both the wise and unlearned may
read the Providence of God. Every Creature is a leaf, every Action a Sermon,
every Thought a character. Wisdom cries out in the streets, in every place,
that God is a Father. Every thing is placed in its proper place; the least Herb
on the ground, the least Gnat in the air, as fairly seated as the Stars in
heaven: Non pulchrius Angelus in coelo quam Diabolus in inferno, the Devil in
hell as an Angel in heaven. That which most amazeth us is Gods judicial
Providence, which is that special branch that calls men to account for their
lives. This is operosa cognitio, hard to find out. For as He comes sometimes
like an epidemical disease, and singles out one here, and another there, on
whom he makes his anger fall, striking the sinner in his very sin; so sometimes
he comes like unto a deluge and flood; incestum addens integro, without any
respect or distinction carrying all before him, even good and bad. Sometimes we
see the wicked flourish, and the righteous miserable; sometimes we see them
both falling under the same calamity. And this makes some to think that God is
either not a Father at all, or a Father of both. To root-up this seed of
Atheism, we may say with the Father, Malus interpres Divinae providentiae,
humana infirmitas; Humane infirmity is but a bad interpreter of Gods
Providence. Nor can he find out Gods ways who is ignorant of his own. Art has
no enemy but Ignorance. An unskilful man may think a well-filed army to be but
a rout; method, disorder; and care neglect. Indeed were there no reason of Gods
proceeding, yet cannot this prejudice or call in question the Providence and
Goodness of our Father; Who makes Poverty a blessing, and Riches a curse; Qui
ex malis foecundat bona, Who can raise up a plentiful harvest of good upon no
better ground-plot then Evil it self; Who as he has made the Heavens (...), as
a vail of his Divine Majesty, so in all his operations and proceedings upon Man
is still Deus sub velo, a God under a vail; hidden, but yet seen; in a dark
character, but read; silent, and yet heard; not touched, but felt; then saving
his children when he is thought to destroy them. We are dull and slow of
Understanding. When we have spent our selves in study and searching of natural
things, yet with all this sweat, with all this oil, we purchase not so much
knowledge as to tell why the Grass which grows under our feet is rather green
than purple; and can we then hope to dive into supernaturals, and find out
those causes which God has lockt-up in his secret treasures? It ought to be
betwixt God and us as it was between St. Augustine and his Scholar; Who having
opened many points unto him, tells him that, if he had given him no reason at
all of such things as he had written, yet the authority and credit which he
ought to have with him should so far prevail with him as to make him take them
upon his word without any further question. It was a wise saying of Terentius
in Tacitus to the Emperor, and it saved him both his life and goods; Non est
nostrum aestimare quem supra caetera, aut quibus de causis locaveris: tibi
summum rerum judicium, nobis obsequii gloria relicta est; It is not for
subjects to examine whom thou have raised, or for what causes: the judgment of
things belongs unto Majesty, but duty and obedience commend a Liege-man. The
same consideration must poise and balance a Christian, that he totter not in
the doubtful and uncertain circumvolution of things. It is sufficient for us
that we know God has made Wisd. 11. 20.
all things in number, weight and measure; and whatsoever he says or does must
be taken for true and just, although we can assign no reason nor probability
why he does it. The whole Book of Job does drive at this very Doctrine. For
when Job was on the dunghill full of sores and botches, his friends, instead of
bringing comfort, put-up a question; and instead of helping him, ask the
question, Why he should be thus handled as to stand in need of their help. His
friends through ignorance of the Providence of God lay folly and iniquity to
his charge. Job stoutly defends his innocence, and is as far to seek as his
friends why Gods hand should be so heavy on him. At last (...), God himself
comes down from heaven, and puts an end to the question. He condemns both Job
and his friends of ignorance and imbecility, and tells him that it was not for
them to seek a cause, or call his judgments in question. For this were to
darken counsel by words without judgment. Can thou, says God, bind the sweet
influences of the Pleides, or loose the bands of Orion? Can thou send
lightnings, Job 38. 2.
that they may go, and say, Here we are? If the Emperor will be higher than
God, says Tertullian, coelum debellet, captivum ducat, vectigalia imponat, let
him conquer heaven, lead it captive, and put a tribute upon it. If any man will
trace out those ways which are past finding out, let him also command God
himself, and teach him to govern the world; if not, let him lay his hand on his
mouth, and proceed no further. It concerns not us to know how Gods Providence
works: It is enough that we know he is our Father, although he discover not
his love by any outward token of distinction. When he heals his children, he is
a Father; when he wounds them, he is a Father; and when he kills them, he is a
Father. Manet dissimilitudo passorum etiam in similitudine passionum, says St.
Augustine; Where the penalties are alike, the patients are not. God sees a
difference, though the world do not distinguish them. The Gold and the Dross
lie both in one fire, yet the Artist puts the one into his treasury, and flings
the other on the dunghill. The Wheat and the Chafs are both under one Flayl, yet
the one is for the granary, the other for the fire. It is the wisdom and
providence of our heavenly Father not to manifest his love by these outward
tokens of distinction, nor, as Jacob, to give that son which he loves best a
gayer coat then the rest. It is his property, (...), to find means when all
men's inventions do fail, and to bring great things to effect by those ways
which flesh and blood may think would hinder them; to bring light out of
darkness, and good out of evil; to take his children out of that mass of evil
where they seemed to be wrapped up eternally. A day will come quae male judicata
rejudicabit, wherein a^ crooked judgments shall have justice against them; when
secret things shall be (...), as naked and open as an Ox, which is cut down the
back, when we shall plainly see, what we are bound to believe, That in this
confusion God can distinguish, That in misery and affliction, and in death it
self, he is our Father. In most things the consideration of a fatal Necessity
brought the very Heathen to this moderation, that they either did lay-down the
opinion of evil, or else put-on a patience which was equal to it: but
Christians have a better help to remove Opinion, not Necessity, but the Will of
their Father. What cup can be bitter which he drinks to us? What can be Evil
which his Goodness consecrates? What matter is it what labyrinths and windings
we find in the course of our life, when God does lead us? Do we ask whether he
leads his children? He leads them unto himself. Do we ask by what ways? Why
should we ask the question? The traveller is not bound to one path, nor the
mariner to one point. Salebrosa est via, sed vector Deus; The way perhaps is
rough and uneven, but God is our guide, and wheresoever we are, we are still in
the hand of our Father. I have dwelt too long upon this one word: But I could
not but somewhat enlarge my discourse upon the Providence of God, because I see
a secret kind of Atheism lurks in the world; that many men call God their
Father, but prefer their low and sordid cares before his Providence; as if ^e
were a Father indeed, but such a one as does not provide for his children. The
rich man thinks none miserable but the poor; and the poor meets with his humor,
and thinks none happy but the rich. Riches is become the God of this world, and
has so blinded men's eyes that they cannot look up unto their Father which is
in heaven. I will give you a plain demonstration, That for which any thing is
esteemed must needs be of an higher estimation it self: Now experience will
teach us, Caelum venale, Deumque, that men daily venture their souls, and God
himself, for riches and plenty; that Virtue is not looked upon in rags, and
that Vice is even adored in purple; that the one is placed in a good place, at
the upper end of the table, when the other must stoop and sit down under the
footstool. I will not conclude with St. James, Are you not partial in your
selves? but rather, That he who thus loves riches may cry as loud as he will,
but cannot call God his Father.

Ye have heard of the Goodness and Love of God, a Love infinite, as Himself. It
is (...), a perpetual circle, beginning, proceeding from and ending in himself.
All which is wrapped up and comprehended in this one word Father. This is Gods
peculiar title: and all other fathers in comparison are not fathers. Hence
Christ says, Call no man your father upon the earth: for one is your Father,
which is in heaven. Yet some there have been found who have made God not a
Father, but a Tyrant, a mighty Nimrod, to destroy men for delight and pleasure;
perinde atque injuriam facere id demum esset imperio uti, as if to set-up his
children for a mark, and to kill them with the same liberty a hunter does a
Deer; were to be a Father. What is become of Gods Goodness now? Or shall we
call him Father whose hands do reek in the blood of his own children? Or is it
possible that his Goodness should make them to destroy them? We should call it
cruelty in Man, whose Goodness is nothing, and can we imagine it in God, whose
Goodness is infinite? Does a fountain send-forth at the same place sweet water
and bitter? says St. James. What can this James 3. 11.
argue but a dissolution of that internal harmony which should be in Nature?
All men are made after Gods own image: Now to hate some, and love others, of
his best creatures, would infer as great a distraction in the Indivisible
Divine Essence, as to have a Fig Tree bear olive berries, or a Vine figs, and
imputes a main contradiction to his infinite Goodness. All things were made out
of mere love: and to love the work of his hands is more essential to God, then
for Fire to burn. And Gods Love being infinite extends to all; for even All are
less then Infinite. God cannot hate any man till he hate him; nor indeed can
any man hate God till he hate himself. God is a Fountain of Love; he cannot
hate us: and he is a Sea of Goodness; we cannot hate him. Tam Pater nemo, tam
pius nemo; No such Father, none so loving, none so good. He that calls him
Father has answered all arguments that can call his Goodness into question.
But yet there is a devise found out, and we are taught to believe, that God is
a Father though he damn us; that the reprobate must think he has done them a
kind of favor in condemning them; that they are greatly indebted to him, and
bound very much to thank him; for appointing them to death, and for casting
them into hellfire for ever with the Devil and his Angels. Imo neque reprobi,
says one, habent cur de Deo conquerantur, sed potius cur ei gratias agant; The
Reprobate have no cause to complain, but rather heartily to give God thanks. A
bloody position; and which these men would not run away with such ease, but
that they have made a shift to persuade themselves that they are none of the
number of those on whom God has past such a sentence: For should God reveal it
to them that he had past such a decree upon them to damn them to hell, and
withal that he did it to manifest his power and glory, I much doubt whether
they would for their own particular in judgment and resolution be well-pleased,
or be so grateful as to thank him, or so submissive as to call him Father.
Melius est matulam esse quam simplex lutum; It is better to be a vessel of
dishonor than bare clay; It is better to be miserable eternally than not to be;
are thoughts which they only can entertain who are too secure of their
honorable estate here and of their eternal happiness hereafter. Our Savior,
who knew better than these men, spoke it of such a one (...), simply, and
without such qualification by distinction, that it had been good for that man
that he had never been born. I will not build a controversy upon such a word
of Love as FATHER, but rather admire and adore Gods Love, which he has pledged
and pawned bonis suis and malis suis, not only doing us good, but suffering
evil for us, buying us with his blood, his labor, his death; not that we were
of any worth, but that we might be so, even worthy of the Gospel of Christ,
worthy of immortality and eternal life.

We proceed now from the contemptation of Gods Goodness and Providence to that
which we proposed in the next place, the Liberal diffusion of it on all his
children, by which we are enjoined to call him ours. God is Christ's Father
peculiariter, says St. Ambrose, and there is no Pater noster for him; but Ours
communiter, by a full communion of himself unto all: and therefore we are
taught to pray, Our Father. For by the same Goodness by which he has united us
unto himself, by the same has he linkt us together amongst our selves (...),
says Nazianzene, with spiritual ligaments. From the same fountain issue our
Union with Christ and our Communion with one another. Therefore if we
diligently observe Christ's institution, as we are bound, then as often as we
pray so often must we exercise this act of Charity toward our brethren, and
that in gradu supremo, in the highest and greatest extent, as far as concerns
their good. And we must do it often, because every good man, every disciple of
Christ, must make it his delight, and practice to speak to the Father in the
language of his Son. (...); says Nazianzene; How long do we hear of Mine and
Thine in the Church? It is not, Paul is mine, and, Gospel is mine, and, Christ
is mine; but, Paul is ours, and, The Gospel is ours, and, Christ is ours, and
Christ Gods. Where there is Charity, there MEUM and TUUM are verba frigida, but
icy words, which melt at the very heat of that celestial fire. If the Church be
a Body, then must every Romans 12. 5.
member supply. The Foot must walk for the Eye and for the Ear, and the Eye
must see and the Ear hear for the Foot, says Chrysostom. If a House, then must
every part, every beam and rafter, help to uphold the building. If she be the
Spouse of Christ, then is she the mother of us all. The Philosopher, building
up his Commonwealth, tells us, Civis non est suus, sed civitatis. Sure I am,
Christianus non est suus, sed ecclesiae. As a Citizen is not a Citizen for
himself, but for the whole Commonwealth, so each action of a Christian in
respect of its diffusive operation should be as catholic as the Church.
Without this friendly communication the Christian world would be as Caligula
spoke of Seneca, commissiones merae, and arena sine calce, stones heapt
together without mortar, or as pieces of boards without any thing to tie and
knit them together. But Christ there teaches us to call God our Father; and by
Gods Providence and fatherly Goodness we are incorporated as it were and
kneaded together, that by softness of disposition, by friendly communication,
by mutual praying, we may transfuse our selves one into another, and receive
from others into our selves. And in this we place the Communion of Saints.
Secondly, in the participation of those Privileges and Charters which Christ
has granted and the Spirit sealed, calling us to the same faith, baptizing us
in the same laver, leading us by the same rule, filling us with the same grace,
sealing to us the same pardon, upholding us with the same hope. Lastly, in
those Offices and Duties which Christ has made common, which God requires of
his Church. Ubi communis metus, gaudium, labor; Where my Fear watches not only
for my self, but stands sentinel for others; my Sorrow drops not down for my
own sins alone, but for the sins of my brethren; my Joy is full with others
joy, and my Devotion is importunate and restless for the whole Church. I cry
aloud for my brother, and his prayers are the echo of my cry. We are all joined
together in this word NOSTER, when we call God Our Father. Nazianzene recording
the Martyrdom of Cyprian, not the Bishop but Deacon of Antioch, cries out as in
an ecstasie, (...), I am with him in the martyrdom; I triumph in his blood,
which was shed for Christ; I am carried to heaven in the same fiery chariot.
(...), Let others fight and overcome, (...), I am one of the same body, of the
same family, of the same Church; and the victory and crown is mine. This is it
which Tertullian may perhaps mean when he says, Non praeteritur ecclesia, In
our prayers we do not pass-by the Church of Christ. Nay, every man; when he
prays, when he says his Pater noster, is, as it is said of general Counsels, a
kind of representative Church: for he prays in persona ecclesiae, in the person
of the whole Church: Nor can one pray for himself but he must pray for others
also. Though the Church be scattered in its members throughout all the parts of
the world, yet as our eyes meet every day in looking upon the same Sun; and
every night upon the same Moon and Stars; so our hearts meet in the same God,
even in our Father, and our prayers are sent up for the Church, and the Church
for every man. If I shut my brother out of my prayers, I do as bad as
excommunicate him, nay worse: For this private excommunication is more terrible
then the Church has any. For though she shut-out the notorious sinner from the
Church, yet she leaves him a room in her devotions, and pours forth prayers
for the most despicable member she has, even for that member which she has
cut off. When the sinner contemns admonition, she strikes him virga pastorali,
with her Pastoral rod, rather to direct than destroy him: But to deny our
prayers to our brother, is to strike him virga ferrea, with a rod of iron, and
as much as in us lies to break him to pieces. How were it to be wished that we
rightly understood this one article of our Faith, The Communion of Saints, or
but the very first words of our Pater noster! But it fares with us in our
devotion as it did with Euphrainor the Painter in his art, who when he had
spent his best skill on Neptune, came short and failed in the drawing of
Jupiter. Our Love is so chained to our selves that she cannot reach forth a
hand to others. She is active and vocal at home, but has the cramp and cannot
breathe for the welfare of our brethren, impetu cogitationis in nobis ipsis
consumpto, having consumed and spent her self at home. To speak truth; our
Creed has devoured our Pater noster, and Faith has shut Charity out of doors.
As we believe for our selves, so we pray for our selves. It is my Christ, and
My virtue, and My kingdom, My riches, and My eloquent man, and My preacher, and
My Father too. Our Father is a word of compass and latitude, and cannot find
room in our narrow breasts. But we little remember that if it be not Ours, it
cannot be Mine. For by appropriating the graces of God we lose all right and
title to them. Woe be to him who is alone, says the Wiseman, for when he
falls, he Eccl. 4. 10.
cannot help himself, and has neither God nor Man to help him. We may say
perhaps, that we know well enough that God is our Father, and we would not meet
in public but to pray for the whole world. Indeed there is nothing sooner
said: we may do it in a Pater-noster-while. But tell me, Can thou pray for
him whom thy Malice has set up as a mark? Can thou include his name in thy
prayers, which thou make thy daily bread at thy table, and whose disgrace
thou feedest on more than thy meat? Can prayers and curses and reviling proceed
out of the same mouth; St. James asks the James 3. 10.
question; and does not answer it, only concludes, My brethren, these things
ought not to be. Ought not so to be? Nay, cannot so be. For he that prays
without Charity does but entreat God to deny him, yea, does force him to punish
him. Our union to the Father is shown by our communion with one another: And
when I see this backwardness in communion, I must needs doubt of the union,
which requires not only a (...), that we be of the same mind with Christ; but
(...) also, that we have the same will. They who are in charity imitate Christ,
and bare one another burdens as feelingly as their own. A great privilege it
is to be (...), a child of the Church, as Justine Martyr speaks; to have the
Church for our Mother, and God for our Father; a great prerogative, if we were
willing to conceive it, to be of the Communion of Saints. But I know not how on
one side it is scarce thought upon, and on the other made advantage of for
politic ends. Some shrink it up into too narrow a room: and others wire-draw
it, to make it pliable to fit well to their Ambition and Pride. So that as the
Orator spoke of the word Tyrannus, and the like, Malis moribus henesta nomina
perdidimus, so may we of the Church, and Catholic, and communion of Saints; We
have spoiled good words with our bad manners, and rob them of their proper
signification, to make them lackey it to our private humors. What the Church
is, and what the Communion of Saints, is open to every eye, even of the dullest
understanding. But instead of practicing what we know, we love aetatem in
tyllubis ferere, to spend our time in nothing but words, to cast a mist where
there is light, and to make that obscure which is plain and easy of it self.
That has befallen Divinity which the Stoic complained of in Philosophy, Fuit
aliquando simplicior inter minora peccantes; Divinity was not so perplexed and
sullen a thing till Ambition and Faction made her so. The very Heretics and
Schismatics says St. Augustine, Catholicam nihil aliud quam Catholicam
vocant; When they speak with Pagans, they call the Catholic Church that
Society of men which are divided from all the world besides by the profession
of Christ. This very word Our Father is enough to express it. But by
contentious spirits it has been made a matter of business, and the business of
the Will. And in these times, if we will follow private humors in those
Meanders and Labyrinths which they make, we may sooner go to heaven then find
the Church; Which, like the Cameleon, is drawn and shaped out by every fancy
like unto it self. Sometimes it is a Body, but nec caput, nec pedes, it must
have neither head nor feet. Sometimes it is a Spirit rather than a Body, so
invisible we cannot see it. Sometimes it is visible alone, and sometimes
invisible. And so we may ecclesiam in ecclesia quaerere, seek for the Church
even in the Church it self. Who knows not what the Church is? The subject is
plain and easy. But where men walk several ways, the discourse must need be
rugged and uneven. They who would bring in an Anarchy, and make all the members
equal, are droven to this shift also, to keep the Church out of sight: And they
who would raise a Monarchy, are forced to set it upon a hill. So that in
talking so much of that company of children which make the Church, we have
almost lost the Father, nay, the Pater Noster, and can but hardly consent that
God should be a Father to us both. For to say so is an error and mistake of
charity. No: how can God be our Father, when the Church is not our Mother? How
can Schismatics and Rebels against the Church have their fellowship and
communion with the Saints? How can he be a Christian who is not a Catholic?
(...), says the Poet; Mothers were wont to call up Hobgoblings and Cyclops to
still and silence their children. And what is all this but powder without shot.
What are these terms of Church and Catholic, and Communion, as the Church of
Rome urges them, but words and noise? We can say Our Father for all this, and
join with them in prayer too if they will pray as Christ taught. We communicate
with them whether they will or no as far as they communicate in the truth. But
if the Church of Rome tender us errors for truth, if she obtrude upon us a
multitude of things for fundamentals which are only the inventions of men and
no way concern our Faith, here non fugamur, sed fugimus; we did not stay till
she thrust us out, but we were bound to separate our selves from partaking of
those gross impieties, which proceeded from the Father of lies, and not from
our Father which is in heaven. That she sent thunder after us, and drove us out
by excommunication when we were gone, may argue want of charity in her, but
makes no impression of hurt upon us. For what prejudice can come unto us by her
excommunicating us, whose duty it was to make haste and leave her, unless you
will say that that soldier did a doughty deed who cut off the leg of a man
who was dead before. I am sure we are the children of God by the surer side:
for we lay claim by the Father, when they so much talk of their Mother the
Church that they have forgotten their Father, who alone begets us with the word
of truth. Quot palestrae opinionum? quot propagines quaestionum? Hence what a
wrestling in opinions has there been? what propagations and succession of
quaestions? Where our Church was when we separated? We need answer but this,
That it was there where it was: For they who have God to their Father may be
sure they have the Church to their Mother: Nor can any who find the truth and
embrace it, miss of the Church. This is one devise ready at hand to fright and
amaze those who have not maturity of understanding to take heed of their
deceit. The other is like unto it, and a most the same, the Communion of
Saints, which is here employed in these first words of our Pater Noster. In both
which vacua causarum implent ineptiis; When their cause is so hollow and empty
that it sounds and betrays it self at the very first touch, they fill it up
with chaff. They make it fuel for Purgatory; They draw it to the Invocation of
Saints; They make it as a Patent for their sale of Pardons; They give it
strength to carry up our Prayers to the Saints, and to conveigh their Merits to
us on earth; They temper it to that heat to draw up the blood of Martyrs and
the Works of Supererogating Christians into the treasury of the Church, and
then shower them down in Pardons and Indulgences. So that he that reads them,
and weighs their proofs, would wonder that men of great name for learning
should publish such trash, and make it saleable; and more, that any man should
be so simple as to buy at their market. It is, say they, the general property
of the Church that one member must be helped by another; Therefore one member
may suffer punishment for another. Again; One man may bear another burden;
Therefore he may bear his brothers sin. It were even as good an argument to
say, He is my Brother; Therefore he is my Mediator. Nobis non licet esse tam
disertis. We Schismatics dare not pretend to such subtilty and wit. We are
taught to distinguish between the duties of Charity and the office of
Mediation. The unction we have from the Head alone; but the Members may anoint
one another with that oil of Charity. Though I cannot suffer for my brother,
yet I may bear for him, even bear his burden. Though I cannot merit for him, I
may work for him. Though I cannot satisfy for him, I may pray for him. Though
there be no profit in my dust, yet there may be in my memory, in the memory of
my conversation, my counsel, my example. In this duty high and low, rich and
poor, learned and ignorant, all are equal. All have one Father, who hears the
low as well as the high, the poor as well as the rich, and the idiot as well as
the great clerk. Nihil iniquius fide, si tantum in eruditos caderet; Faith and
Religion were the unjustest things in the world, if no place were a fit
habitation for them but the breast of a Rabbi or a Potentate. No; God is our
Father; and every man claims an equal title to him. Licet parva rati portum
subire; In the smallest bark and weakest vessel we may sail to the haven where
we would be: And we have winds from every point, the prayers of the whole
Church, to drive us.

We have already showed you what may raise our hope and confidence when we
pray, even the name of Father* For what will not a father give to his children?
But we must now present God in his Majesty, to strike us with fear: that so our
Fear may temper our Hope, that it be not too saucy and familiar; and our Hope
may warm and comfort our Fear, that it be not too chill and cold, and end in
Despair. I dare speak to God, because he is our Father; but I speak in
trembling, because of his Majesty, because he is in heaven. And these two make
a glorious mixture. There be many things which in themselves may be hurtful;
yet being tempered and mixed together are very cordial and wholesome. Fear and
Hope, which in their excess are as deleterial as poison, being compounded and
mingled may be an antidote. Fear bridles my Hope, that I do not presume; and
Hope upholds my Fear, that I do not despair. Fear qualifies my Hope, and Hope
my Fear. Hope encourages us to speak, Fear composeth our language. Hope runs
to God as a Father; Fear moderateth her pace, because he is in heaven. We are
too ready to call him Father, to frame unto our selves a facile and easy God,
a God that will welcome us upon any terms: but we must remember also that he is
in heaven, a God of state and magnificence, qui solet difficilem habere januam,
whose gates open not straight at the sound of Pater noster, Deum non esse
perfunctorie salutandum, as Pythagoras speaks, that God will not be spoken to
in the by and passage, but requires that our addresses unto him be accurate
with fear and reverence. Hope and Fear, Love and Reverence, Boldness and
Amazement, Confusion and Confidence, these are the wings on which our Devotion
is carried and towers up a loft, till it rest in the bosom of our Father which
is in heaven.

And now let us lift-up our eyes to the hills from whence comes our salvation,
even to the throne of God and seat of his Majesty; but not to make too curious
a search how God is in heaven, but with reverence rather to stand at distance,
and put-on humility equal to our administration; not to come near and touch
this mount, for fear we be struck through with a dart. Nunquam verecundiores
esse debemus quam cum de Diis agitur, says Aristotle in Seneca; Modesty never
better becomes us then when we speak of God. We enter Temples with a composed
countenance; vultum submittimus, togam adducimus, we cast down our looks, we
gather our garments together, and every gesture is an argument of our
reverence. Where the object is so glorious, our eyes must needs dazzle. Gods
Essence and Perfection is higher then heaven; what can thou do deeper than
hell; what can thou know; The measure thereof is longer than the earth, and
broader than the Sea: Job 11. 8, 9.
What line will thou use? De Deo vel verum dicere, periculum; We dangerously
mistake our selves even when we speak the truth of God. That God is, that he is
infinite and imcomprehensible, (...), even our Fie will teach us, and the very
law of Nature manifest: But how he is in heaven, he is on the earth, how
everywhere, no mortal Eye can discern, no Reason demonstrate. If we could
perchance utter it, yet we could not understand it, says Nazianzene, Crat. 34.
if we had been ravished with St. Paul into the Third heaven, yet we could not
utter it. Indeed it is most true what Tertullian urges against Hermogenes,
Alium Deum facit, quem aliter cognoscit; He makes another God who conceives of
him otherwise then as he is: But no river can rise higher than its spring and
fountain; nor can we raise our knowledge above that light which is afforded us.
God is infinite; and the most certain kdowledge we have is, that he i^
infinite. The light which we have is but lightning, which is sudden and not
permanent; enough to draw us after him, because we conceive something of him;
and enough to strike us with admiration, because we conceive so little. It
fares with us in the pursuit of these profound mysteries as with those who
labor in rich mines: When we digg too deep, we meet with poisonous damps and
foggs instead of treasure; when we labor above, we find less metal, but more
safety. Dangerous it is for a weak brain to wade too far into the doings of the
Most high: We are most safely eloquent concerning his secrets when we are
silent. How great God is, What is his measure and essence, and How it is in any
place, or every place, (...), says Basile; as it is not safe to ask, so it is
impossible to answer: (...). My sheep hear my voice, says Christ: (...), THEY
HEAR, says he, not, DISPUTE. Yet how have men attempted to fly without wings,
and wade in those depths which are unfordable! to dispute of Gods Essense his
Immensity, his Ubiquity; of the Nature of Angels, of their Motion, of their
Locality; nay, de loquutione Angelorum, of their Language, and how that they
communicate their minds one to another. When we ask them how the Body of Christ
is seated in the Eucharist, they will tell us that it ^s there as the Spirits
and glorified Bodies are in the place which they possess. Tertius e caelo
cecidit Cato. Have these men lately descended, like a second Paul, out of the
third heaven, and from thence made this discovery? By what means could they
attain to this knowledge. What light have they in Scripture to direct them to
the knowledge of the manner of location and site which Spirits and glorified
Bodies have? St Paul has long since past his censure upon them; They thrust
themselves into things they have not seen, and upon a false show of knowledge
abuse easy hearers; and of things they know not adventure to speak they care
not what. The Philosopher will tell us that men who neglect their private
affairs, are commonly overbusie in the examining of public proceedings. They
will teach Kings how to rule, and Judges how to determine, and are well skilled
in every man's duty but their own. The same befalls us in our pursuit of divine
knowledge: Did every man walk according to that measure of knowledge he has,
we should not be so busily to find out more light to walk by. Did we add to
our faith virtue, and to our knowledge temperance, we should not multiply
questions so fast, which vanish into nothing, and when they make most noise do
nothing but sound, quae animum non faciunt, quia non habent, which can give us
no light and spirit, because they have it not. Did we enter that effectual door
which lies open unto us, our Curiosity would not venture so often at the
needless eye. A strange thing it is that men should be so bold to attempt that
which before they attempt they know impossible. We will struggle no longer with
these practices. The Stoic said well, Non debet excusationes vitio philosophia
suggerere; It is never worse with Philosophy then when she is made in suggest
excuses for Sin. And it has been always the bane of Divinity to make
Reverence and Respect a pretense for Blasphemy. Those Arians did less hurt,
says St. Ambrose, who denied the Divinity of the Son, because they would not
believe it, than those who in civility denied it, because they would not make
him subject to concupiscence, as Man. For these men colendo Deum violant,
violate the honor of God which they pretend they tender, and never wrong him
more than with reverence and a complement. Impossible it is that God should
withdraw his presence from any thing, because the very substance of God is
infinite. He fills heaven and earth, and yet he takes up no room in either.
His Substance is immaterial, pure, and so incomprehensible in this world, that
although no part of us be ever absent from him, who is present to every
particular thing, yet his presence we discern no further than only that he is
present: which partly by reason, but most perfectly by faith, we know to be
most certain. He is (...), open to our sight, that we may see him, and yet
(...), lies hid in darkness as in a Pavilion, that we may believe more than we
see. He does not fill the world as Water, or Air, or the very Light; that he
should fill the lesser part of the world with the lesser part of himself, and
the greater part with a greater proportion. Novit ubique totus esse, and nullo
contineri loco: He is every where, yet included in no place. He comes to us,
but not recedes from where he is; nor when he with-draws, does he forsake the
place to which he came, says St. Augustine. Deus est intra omnia, non tamen
inclusus; extra omnia, sed non exclusus; infra omnia, sed non depressus; supra
omnia, sed non elevatus: God is within all things, yet not shut-up; he is
without all things, yet not excluded; he is above all things, yet not exalted;
and he is below all things, yet not depressed. From the Infinity of his
Substance, follows necessarily the Immensity; I fill heaven and earth, says
God. St. Augustine in his Confessions considered the World as a Sponge which
the Jer. 23. 24
infinite sea of Gods Essence did compass and fill. Trismegistus conceived that
God was a Sphere or Circle cujus centrum est ubique circumferentia nusquam,
whose Center is every where, and Circumference no where: which does most fitly
express it. For there is not the least particle of this sphaerical world but it
is supported by the unity of Gods Essence, as by an internal Center; and yet
neither the circumference of this world, nor any circumference which we can
conceive, can circumscribe his essential Presence, so as we may say, Thus far
it reaches, and no further. And this is it which the Schools do mean when they
say, that as Gods Essence susteins and upholds all things, so it does also
contein and compass all things which either are or may be, not corporally, but
spiritually, as Eternity does all times. There is no part of the Heaven, there
is no part of the Earth, in which God is not according to his Essence, and out
of which he is not according to his essence; in qua non est totus, and extra
quam non est totus, as they speak. Cum dicitur totus esse in mundo denotatur
non aggregatio partium, sed privatio diminutionis, says Parisientis; When God
is said to be all in every place, we understand not any aggregation of parts,
but privation of diminution; so that his Essence without any diminution or
division is in every place: The Angels are not circumscribed, yet being finite
treasures, they are said to be in uno loco, quod non sint in alio, says
Aquinas; no otherwise in one place, but in that they are not in another, and
cannot be every where. Homo, cum alicubi est, tum alibi non erit, says Hilary,
lib. 8. De Trin. When a man is in this place, he cannot be in that. Infirma ad
id natura ejus ut ubique sit, qui insistens alicubi sit; For his nature is
incapable of being every where who is contained any where. Deus autem immensae
virtutis vivens potestas, quae nusquam non adsit, nec desit usquam; But God,
who is a living Power of immense virtue, is so present to every place that he
is absent from no place. Who insinuates himself by those things which he has
made, ut ubi sua insint, ipse esse intelligatur, that where the works of his
hands are he may be understood to be there also. Therefore as he has (...), an
Infinity exceeding all essence, so he has also (...), an Essence present every
where, and yet in no place. As he is eternal, so he is omni-present. As Seneca
says excellently, Nulla immortalitas cum exceptione est, nec quicquam noxium
aeterno, Immortality is not with exception, nor can any thing destroy that
which is eternal; so may we, Nulla infinitas cum exceptione, No Infinity admits
of exception. For that which is infinite must needs be immense; nor is it so in
one place that any other place is excepted: but it is so within all things that
it conteins them; and so without, that it concludes and compasses them;
(...), as Athanasius speaks, within all things, yet not included in any thing.
God then is in heaven; but not so that his Majesty is confined to that place.
For the heaven, even the 1 Kings 8. 27.
heaven of heavens, cannot contain him. The subject is of a high nature, and
the way rough and rugged; but we have paced it over with what smoothness and
plainness we could. You may perhaps bespeak me, as Alexander did his Master
Aristotle, Doce nos facilia, teach us those things which are easy. Multa
inutilia and inefficacia sola subtilitas facit, The subtilty of the matter and
the obscurity of the delivery make many things want their efficacy: It is so in
Divinity as well as Philosophy. I confess it: But yet our discourse cannot be
plainer than the subject will permit. And I am sure no auditory should be unfit
for such a lesson, because I know this lesson is not unfit for any auditory.
Aristotle was wont to divide his lectures into Acroamatical and Exoterical;
Some of them contained choice matter, which he privately read to a select
auditory; others of them but ordinary stuff, and were promiscuously exposed to
the hearing of all that would come. But it is not so in our Christian
Philosophy: We read no Acroamatical lectures, but open all truths as far as it
has pleased the King of heaven to reveal them: Nor must any man take them as
things out of his sphere, and above his reach. Besides, it is our duty to take
from you all gross and carnal conceits of God. And we have just cause to fear
that some are little better persuaded of God than the ancient
Anthropomorphites, who thought that God has hands and feet, and is in outward
shape proportioned unto us. If you yet doubt of the use of this, the Prophet
David shall most pathetically apply it for me; Whither shall I go from thy
Spirit? or whither Psalm. 139. 7.
shall I flee from thy presence? If I ascend up into heaven: if I make my bed
in hell, behold, thou art there. If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell
in the utmost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy
right hand shall hold me. Now nothing can be of greater force to restrain us
from sin then a strong persuasion and assurance that whatsoever we do or think
lies open to the view and survey of some Eye that is over us. Secrecy is much
desired amongst men: and there is no such fomenter of evil actions as it is:
For what no man knows is accounted as not done. But magna necessitas indicta
probitatis, says Boethius; There is a kind of necessity of doing well laid upon
us when we know that God is a witness and observer of our actions. What rocks
can thou call to cover thee? what hills to hide thee from his eyes? What
night can veil thee? Prope est a te Deus, tecum est, intus est, says Seneca;
God is near thee, is with thee, is within thee: Cui obscura lucent, muta
respondent, silentium confitetur, says Leo; To him Darkness is as light as the
Day, the Dumb speak, and Silence shriveth it self. Think not because God is in
heaven, he cannot see thee at such a distance: For he fills both the heaven and
the earth: (...), He beholds all things, and hears all things, (...), as
Basil calls him. From heaven he beholds the children of men, and considers
all Psalm. 33. 13, 14, 15.
their ways. To him thy Complement is a lie, thy Dissimulation open, thy
Hypocrisy unmaskt, thy Thoughts as vocal as thy Words, thy Whisper as loud as
Thunder, and thy Secrecy as open as the Day. All things are written (...), in
Gods Book. Nay, he keeps a Book in the very closet of thy soul, the only Book
of all thy Library, says Bernard, which goes along with thee into the world to
come. He sees the Title of the Book, SINS; and the Dedication of it, To the
Prince of Sin; The several Chapters, so many several Sins; and every Letter, a
character of Sin. Quid prodest inclusam habere conscientiam? patemus Deo, says
Lactantius; Why do we shut-up this Book? God can read it when it is shut-up.
Why do we bribe our Conscience to be quiet? God understands her language when
she faulters. Why do we lay these pillows to rest on? We are awake to God when
we are fast asleep. The very strumpets of Rome, who were wont to dance naked
upon the stage to make the people sport, yet would not do it whilst Cato was
present. Behold, not Cato, but God himself is in presence, qui omnia novit,
omnia notat, who knows all things, and marks and observes all things; Which are
the two acts of his Providence. We have still over us (...), as Basil speaks, a
super-intending Eye, which tries the sons of men, and pondereth all their
thoughts. Therefore the Father said well, Ubi est Dei memoria, ibt peccatorum
oblivium and malorum interitus; the very memory of God is an antidote against
sin: For the most secret Sin we commit is as open to him as that which is
committed before the Sun and the People. We read in Velleius Paterculus of
Livius Drusus a great Gentleman of Rome, who being about to build him an house,
his workman told him that he could so cunningly contrive the windows, the
lights, the doors of it, that no man should be able to look in and see what he
was a doing. But Drusus answered him, If you desire to give me content, then so
contrive the lights of my house that all may look in and see what I do. St.
Hilary does make the application for me; In omnibus vitae nostrae operibus
circumspecti and ad Deum patentes esse debemus: This is the right fabric of a
Christian man's soul, which, being innocent, still opens and unfolds it self
unto God, and is so much the better contrived by how much the more liberally it
admits of light, ut liberis and per innocentiam patulis cordibus Deus dignetur
lumen suum infundere, that innocence having broken down all the strong holds
and fenses of Sin, and laid open the gates of the Heart, the King of glory may
enter in, and fill it with the light of his countenance. Oh what a preservative
against Sin is it to think that all that we do we do in Divinitatis sinu, as
the Father speaks, in the bosom of the Divinity! When I fast, and when I
surfeit; when I bless, and when I curse; when I praise God, and when I blaspheme
him, I am still even in his very bosom. When we behave our selves as in the
bosom of our Father, God handles us then as a Father, as if we were in his
bosom; He gives us an EUGE, Well done, good children: But when our behavior
is as if we were in a Wilderness, or Grot, or Cave, or Theater, rather rhen in
the bosom of God, majori contumelia ejus intra quem haec agimus peccamus, we
are most contumelious to him in whose bosom we are.

We have seen now some light in this cloud, and have gained this observation,
That Gods all-seeing Eye will find us out when our curtains are drawn; That
what we dare not let others behold, he looks upon; That what we dare not behold
our selves, he sees ad nudum, as the Schools speak, naked as it is. You will
ask now, Is not God in every place? and if he be in the earth, in hell, beyond
the seas, why then are we bound to say, Our Father which art in heaven? Not
because heaven does contein him, but because his Majesty and Glory is there
most apparent. God calls heaven his seat, his holy habitation, and he is every
where in Scripture styled (...); Psalm. 66. 1. Deuteronomy. 26. 15.
heavenly. We will not here spin-out any curious discourse concerning Heaven,
as those did in St. Augustine, who did so intently dispute of the caelestial
Globe, ut in coelo habitare se crederent de quo disputabant, that to themselves
they seemed to dwell there, and to have made Heaven their Kingdom as well as
their argument. It is plain we must not understand here Moses 's Heaven, the
Air for the Firmament, but St. Paul's third Heaven. This is the City of the
great King, the City of the living God, the Psalm. 48. 2. Hebr. 12. 22. Hebr 1
10. 1 Timothy 6 16. Psalm. 103. 19.
heavenly Jerusalem, a City which has foundations, whose builder and maker is
God. Here our Father dwells in light inaccessible, unconceivable: Here he
keeps his glorious residence, and here he has prepared his throne; Here he
keeps his glorious residence, and here he has prepared his throne; Here
thousand thousands, minister unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand
stand Dan. 7. 9.
before him: Here he still shows the brightness of his countenance, and to
all eternity communicates himself to all his blessed Angels and Saints.
Beloved; the consideration of this stately Palace of the King of Kings should
fill our hearts with humility and devotion, and make us put-up our petitions at
the throne of Grace with all reverence and adoration. Is our Father Psalm. 104.
1. Genesis 18. 27.
in heaven, clothed with honor and majesty? Then let us who are but dust and
ashes, vile earth, and miserable sinners, when we make our approaches to this
great and dreadful God, not be rude, and rash, and inconsiderate, vainly
multiplying Dan. 9 4.
words before him without knowledge, and using empty and heartless repetitions;
but let us first recollect our thoughts, compose our affections, bring our
minds into a heavenly frame, take to our selves words fit to Hos. 14. 2.
express the desires of our souls, and then let us worship, and bow down, and
Psalm. 95. 6.
kneel before the Lord our Maker, and let us pour forth our prayers into the
bosom of our heavenly Father, our Tongue all the while speaking nothing but
what the Heart enditeth. This counsel the Preacher gives us; Be not rash with
thy mouth, and let not thine heart be hasty to utter any thing before Eccl. 5.
2.
God: For God is in heaven, and thou upon earth: therefore let thy words be
few. Again, is our Father in heaven? Then our heart may be glad, and our Psalm.
16. 9, 10.
glory rejoice, and our flesh also rest in hope. God will not leave us in the
grave, nor suffer us to live for ever under corruption; but in due time we
shall be brought out of that bonaage into a glorious liberty, and be admitted
into those Romans 8. 21:
happy mansions in our Fathers house. He will have his children like unto John
14. 2, 3.
himself: Therefore we may be assured that as now he guides us with his
counsel, Psalm. 73. 25.
so he will afterward receive us into glory. Our elder Brother, who is gone
before, and has by his ascension opened the gate of Heaven, and prepared a
place for us, will come again at the end of the world, and awake us John 14. 3.
Psalm. 17. 15. Mat. 25. 21, 23. 1 John 3. 2. 1 Cor. 15. 49.
out of our beds of d^st, and receive us unto himself, that we may enter into
the joy of our Lord, for ever behold his face, see him as he is, be satisfied
with his likeness, and, as we have born the image of the earthy, so bear the
image of the heavenly And now, Beloved, having this hope in us, let us purify
our 1 John 3. 3.
selves, even as our Father which is in heaven is pure. While we remain here
below, and pass through this valley of Tears, let us ever and anon lift up our
Psalm. 84. 6. Psalm. 121. 1. Isa. 57. 15.
eyes unto the hills, even to that high and holy place wherein dwells that
high and lofty One who inhabiteth eternity; yet not boldly to gaze and busily
to pry within the veil: For Heaven is too high and bright an object for our Eye
to discern and discover, for our Tongue to discourse and dispute of. But SURSUM
CORDA; Let us look up to heaven that we may learn not to mind earthly things,
but to set our affections on those things which are above, to Col. 3. 2.
have our conversation in heaven, and our heart there where our everlasting
Phil. 3. 20. Matthew. 6. 21.
treasure is. Let us still wish and long and breathe and pant to mount that
holy hill, and often with the Spirit and the Bride say, Come; Come Lord Rev.
22. 17, 20
Jesus, come quickly, and sigh devoutly with the Psalmist, When shall we come
Psalm. 42. 2.
and appear before God? And in the mean time let us sweeten and lighten those
many tribulations we must pass through with the sober and holy contemplation
Acts 14. 22.
of that far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory, of the fullness of joy
2 Cor. 4. 17.
that is in Gods presence, and of those pleasures for evermore that are at the
Psalm. 16. 11.
right hand of OUR FATHER WHICH IS IN HEAVEN. To whom with the Son and the Holy
Ghost be all honor and glory now and ever.

Amen.
The Two and Thirtieth SERMON. PART IV.
MATTHEW. VI. 9. Hallowed be thy Name:
WE have past the Preface or Frontis-piece, and must now take a view of the
Building, the Petitions themselves. We find a needless difference raised
concerning the number of them. Some have made seven Petitions; and have
compared them to the seven Stars in heaven; to the seven golden Candlesticks;
to the seven Planets; to the river Nilus, which, as Seneca tells us, per
septena ostia in mare effunditur, ex his quodcunque elegeris mare est, is
divided into seven streams, and every stream is an Ocean. Others have fitted
them to the seven Gifts of the Spirit. Those we will not call, with A. Gellius,
nugalia, or with Seneca, ineptias, toys and trifles: but we may truly say,
Aliquid habent ingenii, nihil cordis; Some show of wit we may perhaps descry in
them, but not any great savor or relish of sense and judgment. What perfection
there can be in one number more than in another; or what mystery in the number
of seven, I leave it to their inquiry who have time and leisure perscrutari and
interrogare latebras numerorum, as the Father speaks, to search and dive into
the secrets of Numbers; who by their art and skill can digg the air, and find
precious metal there, where we of duller apprehension can find no such
treasure. I confess men of great wits have thus delighted themselves numeros ad
unquem excutere, to sift and winnow Numbers: but all the memorial of their
labor was but chaff. The number of Forty (for Christ after his Resurrection
staid so long upon earth) they have divided into four Denaries, and those four
they have paralleld with the four parts of the World, into which the sound of
the Gospel should go. The number of Ten they have consecrated in the Law, and
the number of Seven in the holy Ghost: Perfecta lex in Denario numero;
commendatur Septenarius numerus propter Spiritum Sanctum, says St. Augustine.
I could present you with some which, I fear, would move you to laughter; as it
seems it did some of St. Augustines auditory who heard them. For the Father
suddenly breaks forth into those words in one of his Sermons upon St. John;
Gratulor vobis hanc spiritualem hilaritatem, I am very glad to see you so
spiritually pleasant. Nobis. non licet esse tam disertis. It is not for us to
be so witty; nor can we commend wit there, ubi nihil est praeter ingenium,
where there is nothing but wit. We will give them leave oblectare ingenia, thus
to please their fancy: but we must not think as Tully spoke in another case,
siquid Socrates aut Aristippus contra morem civilem loquuti sint, idem nobis
licere; that if Socrates or Aristippus, if Augustine, or other of the Worthies
of the Church, have taken this liberty, that it is lawful for us thus to give
our Fancy line, and let her loose at shadows, and to commend our selves by
their example. For this were truly Theologiam oblectamentum facere, non
remedium, to make Divinity a sport, which is a remedy. We will therefore, with
Calvine and some others, make but six Petitions. And in these six all other
prayer is contained. Magnae ac beatae interpretationis substantia fulta est
haec oration; and quantum substringitur verbis, tantum diffunditur sensibus, as
Tertullian speaks; The words are but few, but the sense is large. For when we
have reckoned up all particulars which our phansies can suggest; when all our
wants present themselves naked to us to be offered up to that hand of Majesty
which can supply them; these six will comprehend them all. All that Reason
leads us to is something that may profit us: All it withdraws us from, is
something that may hurt us. The four first Petitions contein all the first; and
in the two last we pray that neither Sin nor the Devil nor Tentations nor any
Evil may hurt us. We cannot ask more than all. If Gods name be sanctified, we
are holy: If his Kingdom come, we reign as Kings: If his Will be done, we are
saved; for his Will is our salvation. If he give us our daily bread, our souls
do live to praise him: If he forgive us our sins, no evil past; if he lead us
not into temptation, but deliver us from evil, no evil to come can hurt us. So
that those six Petitions are like those (...), or Common places, in Logic,
which are, says the Philosopher, (...), common to every Art and Science, which
the Geometrician and Arithmetician and Philosopher may use in their several
Arts, as heads and principles to draw conclusions from. There is no prayer
which may not be reduced to these. Do we desire (...) good things, which bring
honor to ourselves or God? We may run and read them in the three first
Petitions. For Gods Honor is ours; his Sanctification, our holiness; his
Kingdom, our happiness; the fulfilling of his Will, the rectitude of our own.
Do we affect (...), good things which commend themselves by profit, or some
greater good, which they bring? What more commendable, what more profitable,
then to hallow Gods Name, to advance his Kingdom, to do his Will? Do we seek
after those which are (...), which in themselves are neither good nor evil, but
are made so by their use, as Riches, and Food, and Raiment? He that gives us
Bread, gives us all these. Do we run from the face of evil, when it is either
(...), terrible, or (...), troublesome? What more terrible than Sin, which we
are here taught to ask Forgiveness of? What more troublesome than Tentations
and the Devil? We pray, not to be lead into the one, and to be delivered from
the other. Quae cupimus, quae fugimus, whatsoever we do desire, whatsoever we
fly from, is here comprised. Universa quae a Domino licite desiderari possunt,
his petitionibus continentur, says Biel. Run through all the Prayers of the
Prophets, of the Apostles, of the Martyrs, of Christ himself; upon these they
are built. All those silver streams, which make glad the city of God; are from
this fountain. Husbandmen observe that in the growth of corn there is great
difference; Some in the springing up is very full and luxuriant, other is more
spare, and in show poorer; yet many times the fruit of that which seems thinner
is as much or more than that which was so full and abundant in the grass. So it
is in our Prayers: They who are long and copious and abundant in devotion, do
but foeliciter luxuriari, present us a kind of spiritual luxury, fair and
goodly to the eye, but the fruit and effect of it is no more than of that which
is not so full and so luxuriant in word and phrase. If our whole life were
Prayer; as in some sense it should be: if we did prolong our prayer, not till
midnight, as St. Paul did his Sermon, but till our Acts 20. 7.
last night, death it self: Yet he that shall say his Pater Noster, makes his
request as large as ours. Did we multiply millions of prayers, these six
Petitions are as many as they. All our Petitions are but the echo of these, or
rather these in other words: So that Tertullian well calls them a Foundation of
all requests whatsoever. And all petitions which will not lie upon these, nor
head-well nor bed-well, as they say, upon this foundation, are but
extravagancies and rubbage. We will say no more of the number of these
Petitions; although perhaps we might find as great a mystery in the number of
Six as others have in that of Seven. But this would be exercere ingenium inter
inita, and nihil profuturis otium terere, to catch at atoms, and spend our
time to no purpose. I am sure the Petitions borrow no virtue from the number;
nor do I see how the Number should borrow any mystery from the Petitions. Be
they six or seven, it is not much material: but, when we pray, we must pray
after this manner.

But before we come to the handling of these Petitions in particular, we must
speak something of the Order and Method which Christ observes in this form. For
that God who does in all his ways and proceedings (...), as the Stoics speak,
observe a certain and regular course, has also taught us a method of Prayer.
There is a (...), something which we must pray for in the first place: and
there be other which are but as corollaries. Our Savior here teaches us to
pray for our daily bread; yet v. 3. he bids us take no thought for it; but he
interprets himself v. 33. by showing us a method; But seek ye first the Kingdom
of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you. We
may divide this Prayer as Moses divided the Law, into two Tables: In the first
were written officia pietatis, duty of Piety toward God; In the second,
officia charitatis, duties which Love requires we perform to our selves and
others. We see the three first Petitions breathe forth the glory of God; the
last three draw their breath as it were inwards, and reflect upon our selves.
In the three first we strive to enlarge the glory and honor and majesty of God:
In the first we sanctify his Name, in the second we call him, in the third we
make him a King. But in the last three we beg our Bread, our Salvation, our
Security: We desire him to give us a Staff to uphold us, to remove a Thorn that
pricks us, and to spread his Providence like a rich canopy over our tabernacle
to protect us: But yet so as that God is (...), all in all; not only Holy in
his Name, and mighty in his Kingdom, and Powerful in his Will; but also
glorious in giving us Bread, glorious in forgiving our sins, and glorious in
our victory over Satan. And as God has a share in the three last, so are we
not excluded the three first. For when we pray that his Name may be hallowed,
we do not put up a bare wish and desire that it may be so, sed ut sanctum
habeatur a nobis, says Augustine, that we may sanctify it. For whether we
pray or no, Gods Name is holy, his Kingdom is everlasting, and he does
whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth. Nor do we pray that he will do all
this without us, but that he will supply us with those means and helps by which
we may do it our selves. So that when we pray that his Name may be hallowed,
our desire is, that we may hallow it.

I will therefore draw and confine my Discourse within the bounds of these
three propositions: I. That in all our petitions we must propose the Glory of
God as our chiefest end. II. That we must prefer Spiritual things before
Temporal. III. That it is not enough to pray for blessings, and against evils,
unless we be careful and industrious to procure the one, and to avoid the
other. For if we pray that Gods Name may be hallowed, and do not seriously
strive to sanctify it our selves, we put up rather a faint wish than a devout
prayer, and rather mock God than worship him. Of these plainly and briefly.

What the Philospher requires of his Moral man is most necessary in the works
of Piety and Religion, (...). We must propose a right End. Non agitur officium
nisi intendatur finis. I stir not in my Duty, if this move me no^* and I faint
and sink under my Duty, if this confirm not the motion. Gemina virtus in
Christiano, intentio and actio, says St. Ambrose: There is a double virtue in
a very Christian, to intend a right end, and to do what he intends. The Eye
cannot say to the Hand I have no need of thee; nor the Hand to the Eye, I have
no need of thee: but the Eye directs the Hand, and the Hand follows the Eye.
Intention regulates the whole work of my Devotion. Most certain it is, Every
man when he prays, proposes some end; for his end is that he may obtain. We
desire that Gods Name may be sanctified, that we may be holy: We desire
Holiness, that we may see God: We desire to see God, that we may be happy.
Sanctity it self is an end, and the Reward is an end. Nor do we exclude these
ends as unfit to be looked upon. It is lawful for us to make the Reward as a
Napkin to wipe off the sweat of our brows, and to comfort our Devotion with
Hope. But the finis architectonicus, the principal end must be the glory of
God. All other ends are wrapped within this, as a wheel within a wheel, and a
sphere within a sphere, but the Glory of God is the first compassing wheel,
prima sphera, still on the top, and sets all on moving. And here our
Devotion is in its regular motion, when it moves about, not by the sight of
some good on our selves, or the expectation of reward, but propter Deum ex
charitate, and propter se amatum, as the Schools speak, by the contemplation of
God, whom we love for himself; and when it proceeds from a Love like to the
Love of God; Whose actions are right in themselves, although he propose no
other end but the Actions; Whose very Glory is the good of his creature. We
read in our books of a woman who went about the City Prolamais with a vessel of
water in one hand, and fire in the other, sometimes looking up to heaven, and
anon casting her eyes upon the ground. And being asked by a Dominican what she
did with those two so contrary elements in her hands, she replied straight,
Cuperem hoc foco Paradisum incendere, and hac unda restinguere flammas
gehennae; I would, says she, if I could, with this fire burn down the
celestial Paradise, and with this water quench the fire of Hell, that neither
might be. I cannot but rank this action of hers, if it be true, amongst those
which frenzy produces. But the reason which she gave is a measured and
positive truth in Divinity, That we must cheerfully endeavor to hallow Gods
Name, and advance his Kingdom, and fulfill his Will, if there were neither
heaven nor hell, neither reward to allure us to holiness, nor punishment to
fright us from impiety. All we do should be the issue of our Love to God, who
loved us so that for no hope of reward or addition of glory he was even turned
into love, and gave us himself. He that loves God perfectly, cannot but neglect
himself, and perish and be Lost to himself; but he rises again, and is found,
first in God, whilst he thinks nothing but of him; and then, whilst he thinks
that he is loved of him, and lives in him whilst he is thus lost. Could we
raise our Devotion to this pitch, it were indeed in its proper Zenith. But our
Prayers for the most part are blemished with some partialities and by-respects,
and our selves are more respected in them than God. If they be petitory, we
request some good for our selves; if eucharistical, we give thanks for some
good we have received; if deprecatory, we request to be preserved from some
evil. Still our selves have the chiefest part; and our Prayers are like the
Parthean horsemen, which ride one way, but look another; They seem to go
toward God, but indeed reflect upon our selves. And how many of us would fall
down before God if we did not stand in need of him? And this may be the reason
why many times our Prayers are sent forth like the Raven out of Noah's Ark, and
never return. But when we make the Glory of God the chief end of our Devotion,
they go forth like the Dove, and return to us again with an Olive Branch. It is
a nice observation of Quadrigarius in Gellius, that darts and arrows which are
shot upward do fly more level, and more surely hit the mark, then those which
are shot downwards. But it is most true in our Prayers, which are called
Ejaculations, because they are darted from us as shafts out of a bow; Those
that fly upward to God, and aim at his glory, do more fix upon and take him
than those other which fly downward upon our selves. For God and Man are in
respect of one another as the species of Quantity, Continua, and Discreta; as a
Body, and Number. Number admits of infinite additions; Nullus est post quem non
sit alter; You can give no number to which you may not add another. And a
Corporeal substance may be diminished in unitate. You cannot so divide a piece
of wood but you may divide it again: The more you diminish and cut from the
wood, the more you increase the number of parts. So is it between God and our
selves. The more we take from our selves, the more we add to God; the more vile
we think our selves, the more glorious he appears. The knowledge of Gods
infinite Majesty may receive infinite additions; and so may the knowledge of
our own unworthiness. When we are busy in the contemplation of our own
vileness, then do we most clearly see the Glory of God, for which we were made.
The tree that sends his root downwards, sends his boughs upwards; and the
deeper his root, the higher his boughs: so the more we are deprest and
cast-down in our selves, the nearer are we raised to the throne of God. The
Glory of God was that for which we were created: Now the Philosophers will tell
us, Unumquodque est propter suam operationem; Every thing is and has its being
for the work it has to do. I do not warm my self with a Plainer, nor smooth a
table with Fire. This were not only vain, but would destroy any work. All
things, even Arts and Sciences, beyond or besides their end are unuseful.
Seneca tells his friend that the Arts were then liberal cum homines liberos
facerent, when they made men free and ingenuous. And censuring the vices of the
time, he says that Arithmetic and Geometry were of no use if they taught only
metiri latifundia, and digitos accommodare avaritiae, to measure Lordships, and
tell money. And certainly Man is the most unprofitable creature in the world,
if he dedicate not himself and his devotions to the glory of that God who made
him for that end. For the Love of God is an undefiled love, and if it be
perfect, will admit of no mixture. For to love God for any other respect than
God himself, whether it be for Health or Wealth or Honors, be it for fear of
hell, or be it for hope of heaven it self, is at the least an imperfection in
us. Now the reason of this is plain; That for which any thing is loved is of it
self more beloved. When David dealt kindly with Mephibosheth for Jonathan his
fathers sake, it is a certain argument that he loved Jonathan better than
Mephibosheth. He that loves a man for money or meat, loves money and meat more
than the man, because these are the causes and ends why he loves the man. It
will follow then, that he that loves God for himself, or for any other end than
God, loves that more then God. But God is principally and solely to be loved;
all other things, even our own salvation, are to be loved for him, but he for
himself. Should we now take the dimensions of our Devotion by this rule, I fear
it will not reach home. Would we down on our knees, but for a blessing? Would
we be so earnest to hallow Gods Name, but that in his name we shall cast out
devils, some evil that may hurt us? Would we advance his Kingdom, but to crown
ourselves? Would we be desirous his Will should be done, if his will were to
damn us? Is there an Anselme now alive, that, if Hell and Sin were proposed to
his choice, would be damned to torments for ever rather than once by sin
dishonor God? No: Our PATER NOSTER for the most part begins at PANEM NOSTRUM,
Give us this day our daily bread. And our Prayers are much like Jacobs Vow, If
God will give us bread to eat, and raiment to put on, then the Lord shall be
our God. Indeed it should Genesis 28. 20.
not be thus. If our Love were perfect, our Devotion would be so also, and
kindle at no other fire than the Love of Gods Glory. For perfect Love does not
only cast-out all fear, but all other respects whatsoever. And God would be
loved by us as David loved Jonathan; but the Creature, as Mephibosheth, but in
a second place, for Jonathans sake, but we are Men, not Angels: and God, who is
(...), as Clemens speaks, who studies ways to save us, and is even witty in
inventing of means to bring us unto him, does so far condescend as to be
content we have an eye to our own Good, so we prefer his Glory; to propose
other ends, so we make that the first; and to pray for our selves, so we begin
with him: Although we cannot begin with him but we pray for our selves. Toll
luctatori praemium, and lentus jacebit in stadio; Take away the garland, and
the Soldier will not strike a stroke. Our Devotion would be frostbound, nor
would we fill heaven with our prayers, but that we hope they will bring down
some blessing from thence. Therefore God deals with us as a skillful Artist
does that works upon an evil matter; If he cannot make what he would, yet makes
that which the matter gives him leave: And like the Husbandman in the Gospel,
he does not pluck up the Tares, these imperfections of ours, for fear that the
Wheat, even the whole harvest of our Devotion, should come up with them. Hence
it is that he proposes (...), reward and punishment, and (...), his manifold
benefits, to incite us to call upon him. And he that is, (...), the worker both
of our Fight and Reward, has made it as a Law, and promulged it to all his
followers, HE THAT ASKS, SHALL RECEIVE. And this is the reason why in the
primitive times they anointed Christians at their initiation and reception into
the Church, to remember them that they were brought into the banners, and to
encourage them with hope of reward if they overcame. If we pray that Gods Name
be hallowed, we may pray also that he write our names in the book of life: If
we advance his Kingdom, he will crown us: Only his Glory in all things must
have the praeeminence.

But you will say that it is a hard thing to keep this intention alive when we
pray, and that these two, the Glory of God and our Good, non sunt unius animi,
cannot harbor in the same heart at once. Nor does God require of them an actual
and perpetual intention of his Glory, but, as the Schools speak, an habitual.
Thou may pray to his glory when thy thoughts are busy and reflect upon thy
own want. We see an arrow flies to the mark by the force of that hand out of
which it was sent: and he that travels on the way may go forward in his journey
though he divert his thoughts sometimes upon some occurences in the way, and do
not always fix them on the place to which he is going: So when thy Will and
Affections are quickened and enlivened with the love of Gods Glory, every action
and prayer will carry with it a savor, and relish of that fountain from whence
they spring. An Artificer does not always think of the end why he builds a
house, but his intention on his work sometimes comes in between, and makes him
forget his end. And though he make a thousand pieces, yet he still retains his
Art, says Basil. So though thou can not make this main Intention of Gods
Glory keep time with thy Devotion, nor send up every thought thus incenst and
perfumed, yet the smell of thy sacrifice shall come before God, because it is
breathed forth of that heart which is Gloriae ara, an Altar dedicated wholly to
the glory of God. Thy ear must be to keep it, as thy Heart, with all diligence;
to nourish and strengthen it, that, if it seem to sleep, yet it may not die in
thee; to barricado thy heart against all contrary and heterogeneous
imaginations, all wandering cogitations, which, as Jacob, may take his
firstborn by the heel, and afterward supplant and robb it of its birthright.
For these thoughts will borrow no life from thy first intention of Gods Glory,
but the intention of Gods Glory will be lost and dye in these thoughts.

We pass forward to that which we proposed in the second place. That spiritual
blessings must have the first place in our prayers. Holiness and Obedience must
go before our daily bread; the spiritual Manna, which nourishes us up unto
eternal life, before (...), the things of this present life, or that bread
which upholds us but for a span of time. A doctrine as most plain, so most
necessary for these times, in which men's hearts are so set on gain and temporal
respects that heaven finds but little room in their thoughts, and so care for
the Body as if they knew not whether they had any Soul or no: Of his mind in
Plautus, who professed, if he were to sacrifice to Jupiter, yet, si quid lucri
esset, if gain and filthy lucre presented it self before him; he would rem
divinam deserere, instantly run from the Altar and leave his sacrifice.
Epictetus the Stoic observed that there were daily sacrifices brought to the
Temples of the Gods for wealth, for honors, for victory, but none ever offered
up for a good mind. And Seneca tells us, Turpissima vota diis insusurrant, that
men were wont to whisper dishonest desires into the ears of the Gods; si quis
autem admoverit aurem, conticescunt, but if any stood near them to hearken,
they were presently silent. Were the hearts of many men anatomized and opened,
we should find Riches and Content deeply rooted in the very center, but
Holiness and Obedience and Honesty of conversation written in faint and fading
characters in superficie, in the very surface and outside of the heart. Villam
malumus quam coelum, We had rather have a Farm, a Cottage, than Paradise, and
three lives in that than eternity in heaven. We had rather be rich than good,
mighty than just. And talk what you will of sanctifying Gods Name, we had
rather make our selves one; of advancing his Kingdom, we had rather reign as
Kings; of fulfilling Gods Will, we will do our own; of the Bread of life, Give
us this day our daily Bread. But thus to pray is not to pray (...), after that
manner which Christ here taught, but a strange (...), want of method, in our
Devotion. Our Love is seen in our language. For those things which most affect
us, we love to talk of, we use to dream of, and our thoughts are restless in
the pursuit of them. It was observed in Alexander as a kind of prophecy and
presage of his many conquests, quod nihil humile aut puerile sciscitaretur,
that he speaking with the Persian Ambassadors asked no childish or vain
question, sed aut viarum longitudinem, aut itinerum modos, but of the length of
the ways, and the distance of places, of the Persian King, and of his Court. A
man, says the Wiseman, is known by his speech, and a Christian by his prayers.

I could be copious in this argument, but purposely forbear, because it is so
common a place. Only to set your Devotion on fire, and raise it to things
above, may you please to consider Temporal goods 1. not satisfactory; 2. as an
hindrance to the improvement of Spiritual. Do but consult your own Reason, and
that will tell you, that the Mind of man is unsatiable in this life. Who ever
yet brought all his ends and purposes about, and rested there? Possideas
quantum rapuit Hero; Let a man possess what Craft and unlawful Policy can
entitle him to; Let him be Lord of all that lies in the bosom of the earth,
and in the bosom of the Sea; Let him, as Solomon did, even study how to give
himself all delight imaginable; yet with all this cost, with all this pains and
travel, he is as far from what he looked for as when he first set out. Now as
God having made the Understanding an eye, has made the whole Universe for its
object, so having placed a (...), an infinite desire in the soul, has
proportioned something to allay it. Which since these temporal things cannot
do, it is evident that heaven and spiritual blessings are those things which
alone can satisfy this infinite appetite. Put them both in the Scales, and
there is no comparison. You may as well measure Time by Aeternity, and weigh a
little sand on the shore with the whole Ocean.

Again, as they do not satisfy, so are they an hinderance to our improvement
in spiritual wealth. Alter de lucro cogitat, alter de honor, and putat quod
eum Deus possit audire? One thinks of Gain when he prays for Godliness. another
of Honor when he talks of Heaven. We may call this Prayer, if we will; but most
certain it is that God never hears it, nor any prayer which is not made (...),
as Isidore speaks, with diligence. Which leads us to that which we proposed in
the third place, That when we pray, Hallowed be thy Name, we do not simply pray
that God will do it without us, but that he will supply us with those means and
helps by which we may do it our selves; That it is not enough to pray for
blessings, or against evils, unless we be careful and industrious to procure
the one, and avoid the other.

HALLOWED BE THY NAME, is soon said. But every man that says it, does not
hallow Gods Name. Else what a sanctified world should we have! We should hear
no blasphemy, see no uncleanness, meet with no profaneness: but every man would
be holy as our heavenly Father is holy; and the earth, which is overrun with
weeds, would become a Paradise of perfection. The reason of this may be, that,
when we pray for these graces, we imagine that so soon as we kneel God will
come down from heaven and sow this seed of holiness in our hearts whilst we are
asleep; that though we every day corrupt our selves, he will purge and refine
them; though we breathe out blasphemies against him, he will take us at a time
when he will strike us to the ground, as he did St. Paul, and make us holy on
the sudden. And this is an epidemical error, which has long possessed the hearts
of men, mentis gratissimus error, an error with which we are much taken and
delighted. Our beloved bosom error, which whosoever strives to remove shall have
no better reward than St. Paul had of the Athenians when he preached of the
Resurrection of the dead; He shall be accounted a setterforth of strange
Doctrines. But the weak conceit of our hearers must not make us leave off to
call upon them, and put them in mind of the danger they are in, and remember
them in the words of the Father, Deum orare ut nobis prestet quod nos facere
recusamus, ridiculum est, imo ludibriosum in Deum; To pray to God that he will
do that for us which we refuse to do our selves, is a great folly in respect of
our selves, and contumelious to God. We mistake our selves, if we think
Holiness and Obedience are such tares as will grow up in our hearts whilst we
sleep. They are indeed the gifts of God; but they are (...), as Clemens speaks,
not so easily achieved as we suppose. For howsoever the things of this world
are then best purchased when they cost least, yet these gifts of God are taken
up upon the best terms when we do pay most for them. Laetius est magno quoties
sibi constat honestum: They are cheapest when they are dearest. For in this our
labor we never fail, God always working with us, and blessing the work of our
hands. Indeed to think our Prayers are but matter of complement or to deny the
assistance of God in every good work, were not only to be Pelagians, but worse
then the Heathen. Nulla bona men's sine Deo, says Seneca: No man is good but
with the help of God. Ille dat consilia magnifica and recta; All good counsels
and heroic thoughts are from him. When Pliny had the day against Regulus, he
professes openly, Sentio mihi Deos affuisse; I perceive the Gods were present
to help me. And it was a common Proverb amongst them, VIRTUTE DEORUM ET NOSTRA;
What they did they did by the help of the Gods. The Greek Fathers, who did so
highly extol the Martyrs and other Saints, and it may be elevated the power of
Nature beyond the sphere of its activity, yet referred all these (...), these
powers, unto God as the first fountain, and did acknowledge every where (...),
that the grace of God did all; and whatsoever the best of men did (...), to be
the gift of God, that no man might boast. All this is true: and it is
impossible we should attribute too much to God. Our fault is, that we shrink
and contract his Grace, and shorten his hand where he has stretched it forth.
We pray for Grace, and can we think that God, who is (...), Goodness it self,
who is emissivus, as the Schools speak, liberal and free of himself, and does
naturally send forth (...), the beams of his goodness every where; will deny us
that which he commands us to ask, nay, which he gives us that we may ask? We
are dead; and Grace is the breath by which we live: We are blind; and Grace is
the eye by which we see: We are lame, and Grace is the staff by which we walk.
God knows that without his grace our hearts are but styes of sin and pollution;
It is likely then he will take his Grace from Man, and so make himself, if not
the author, yet the occasioner, of sin? Is it justice with God to put out our
eyes, and then punish us for stumbling. Or is God delighted to try conclusions,
to see what Men will do if Grace be not with them? God does not take our souls,
as Surgeons do dead bodies, to practice on. No: when we pray, he hears us:
nay, he hears us before we pray. And if we do not hallow his Name, it is not
for want of grace, but of Will. You will say perhaps that God is an omnipotent
Agent, can unty our tongues to speak his praise, and lead us on in the ways of
holiness, though our feet be shackled, though we have no feet to go. But the
Proverb will answer you. (...), If God will, you may sail over the Sea in a
sive. But we must remember that God, as he is a powerful Agent, so is a free
Agent, and works and dispenses all things according to the pleasure of his
will. He will not lead thee, if thou will not go. He will not whisper Holiness
into thee whilst thou sleep, nor enlighten thee when thou shuttest thine
eyes. Proposuit pulcherrimo cuique operi difficultatem: He that placed some
rubs and difficulties in that way between us and Holiness, that we should digg
out our way with the sweat of our brows to find this rich treasure. Frequent
and hearty Prayers, daily Exercise of virtuous actions, a kind of Violence
offered to our selves; these are a sign that Grace works kindly, and has its
natural operation in us. Holiness is a treasure: but we do not find it as we
may find some kind of treasure. It may be we read the examples of some who have
not paid so dear for it, but without any great labor have attained to those
virtues which they afterward constantly improved to their own end. Pontius the
Deacon tells us of St. Cyprian, Praepropera velocitate pietatis pene ante
caepit perfectus esse quam disceret; At his first setting-out for piety and
Christianity he used such incredible speed that he was almost perfect before he
began. Tam matura coepit fide quam pauci perfecerunt, Few men ended in that
perfection in which he began. Be it so: But this is no good argument for me to
put my hands into my bosom, and sit still, and expect the good hour.
Christian virtues are gifts but are not usually obtained sine pulvere and sole,
without labor and difficulty. There is nothing in the world that has any
esteem amongst men, but will cost some pains to attain, to atchieve, (...),
says the Father. All things, both good and bad, in this are alike, that they
are procured with difficulty. Errors, and the things of the Devil, are
difficult, that we may be frighted from desiring them: Holiness, and the things
of God, are more difficult, to try our Obedience. If it were no more than, as
the Psalmist speaks, to speak well of his Name, it were not so easy. For they
that talk most of Grace, we see, have not learned this lesson yet, To speak
well of their brother. But it is, to purge the Heart, which is a customhouse
for all wares; to tie up the tongue, an unruly member; to check every
inclination of our minds and motion of our bodies: Which though it be the work
of Grace, yet is not done in a moment, nor without care and watchfulness.
Difficulty by the Providence of God is annexed to all things of worth, not to
deter or extinguish but to kindle men's industry, and to put a difference
between one and another. When men sale in a calm Sea, there is no difference
between a skillful Pilot and an ignorant: sed cum stridunt funes, and gemunt
gubernacula, when the tempest rages, and the Sea works, then there is a
difference discovered. Dulcius munera gratiae proveniunt quoties non sine
magnis sudoribus acquiruntur, says Leo; the gifts of Grace then bring forth
most sweet fruits when they are watered with the sweat of our brows. When we
lie on the dunghill, when the waves of affliction beat upon us, when he kills
us, then to sanctify his Name, this is the task of a Christian. Yet all this
we will do if Gods Grace be sufficiently vouchsafed us. Why so; is it not
vouchsafed to his whole Church? Officiosissima res gratia, and veluti in
hominum jurata salutem, Grace is the most officious thing in the world. Nor
have I attained to that proficiency in knowledge as to understand how it can
stand with the Justice of God unprovoked to withdraw his grace from any Man.
But thus we must needs charge him, and lay all our numerous, or rather
innumerable defects upon him, if we think the only cause why we commit them is
because God does not give us grace. Multos inveni aequos adversus homines,
adversus Deos neminem, says Seneca; I have observed many just in their censure
of other men, but none that have held that equity toward the Gods. And it is
the common fault of Christians to lay all upon God. Why else do we talk so often
of our natural Infirmities, of a Necessity of sinning, as if we would have it
so? De carnis infirmitate causantur, de Spiritus autem firmitate dissimulant,
says Tertullian; The flesh is weak; we are ready at that: but, the Spirit is
quick and ready, we never observe it. Infirmity is made, not a witness to plead
against us, but a friend to comfort us. A dangerous error it is, and sinks
many a soul to Hell. The defect cannot be in the conduct and conveyance, but in
the vessel that should receive: Nor do we sin so much for want as for neglect
of Grace. When we pray, Hallowed be thy Name, do we think God withdraws his
Grace, that we may not hallow it? Is he willing to be blasphemed? Or can we
imagine that he exposes his Name to our profaneness, that he may glorify it
upon us in our destruction? We may say of this as Tertullian spoke of Idolatry,
Principale crimen humani generis, summus saeculi reatus, tota causa judicii;
This is not only the supreme and greatest, but the sole crime of all mankind,
to do more than ever the Pope could do, to grant an indulgence unto our selves.
We make it either impossible to go to heaven, or else very easy. To say,
SANCTIFICETUR NOMEN TUUM, Hallowed be thy Name, is to purchase Holiness. So
that it should seem there is, as Basil speaks, (...), a spell in the words, and
a sanctifying power in the very syllables. If this will not prevail, and break
open heaven gates, it is in vain to knock any longer. Certainly, Beloved, it is
a gross error for us thus to think, that God will be held upon such easy and
cheap terms, or else be lost without possibility of recovery. For if it be so
easy to hold-in with God, then were the greatest Saints of God of all men most
miserable, who made no end of cleansing their hearts, and washing their hands
in innocence. St. Paul, the greatest and worthiest servant of Christ that ever
was on earth, found it a thing not so easy. It is true, he says, By the grace
of God I am that I 1 Cor. 15. 10.
am: but that it might not be in vain, he labored more abundantly than they
all. Why did he give himself to watching, to fasting, to prayers, to that exact
discipline of taming his body, if he knew Obedience and Sanctity might stand
him at a cheaper rate? We conclude then; It is not enough to breathe these
words into the air, Hallowed be thy Name, but we must re and actis velle quod
affectu and voto volumus, really and in act will that sanctity which we desire
in our prayers. We must put in practice what we pray for, and with all our
might and strength, with our best endeavors strive to do that which we
earnestly beg we may be able to perform. Otherwise, to pray, and sit still; to
pray, and sleep; to pray for holiness, and run on in the ways of profaneness;
to pray that Gods Name may be hallowed, and not strive to sanctify it, is
rather a faint wish than a devout prayer, and makes us guilty of a kind of
blasphemy, even when we pray, HALLOWED BE THY NAME.

Though all persons, without exception of quality, age, time, or sex, say this
Petition, though every man with Angels and Archangels cry aloud, Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord God of Sabbath, yet few there be who truly sanctify Gods Name. We
may be bold to fear that they speak it best who can scarcely speak it; that
their Devotion is greatest whose understanding is least; that to our heavenly
Father it is a more pleasing thing to hear parvulorum adhuc linguas
balbutientes Christo Hallelujah resonare, as St. Hierome speaks, little
children in their imperfect language to sing their Saviors praise, than all
the busy noise and babble of a Hypocrite; that their broken prattle is more
pleasant in the ears of the Almighty, who speak and do it as they can, than
their full language who can both speak and do it, yet express it only with
their tongue. There is more in this Petition than a weak eye at first can
pierce into. That we may take a full view of it, and behold it in its proper
shape, we must first distinguish and sever it from the two next Petitions,
which bear that nearness and affinity to it that for ought I can perceive, most
men in their discourses have made them the very same. The Sanctifying of Gods
Name is annexed to his Kingdom; and the fairest part of his Kingdom is the
fulfilling of his Will. He that halloweth Gods Name does advance his Kingdom;
and he that advances his Kingdom, does his Will: And this last includes and
comprehends both the former: so that Bradwartine will tell us that a Christian
man needs no other prayer but this, FIAT VOLUNTAS TUA, Thy will be done, which
in force and virtue conteins all other prayers whatsoever. And this is true in
sensu quem faciunt, in that sense which every one of them will bear; but in
sensu quo fiunt, in that sense in which our Savior spoke and taught them, it
is most probable they have their proper bounds and limits. And for our more
plain and orderly proceeding we will confine this first Petition to our Words
and outward Gesture, by which we do expressly honor God, and hallow him as it
were before the Sun and the People: the second to our Hearts, which are, (...),
the house of God, in which he delights to dwell; his very throne, wherein he
sits: It is our Saviors speech, The Kingdom of God is within you, the last to
our Actions Luke 17. 21.
and Works of Piety, which are the proper language of the Heart. Haec tria sunt
omnia; These three are all, the whole body of our Devotion, To hallow God with
our tongue and outward deportment, To yield him the subjection and true
allegiance of our hearts, and To be ready and active to execute his will. These
take up all that we have, all that we are, the inward and the outward, and the
outward man. We are taught to sanctify the Lord God: which at the first 1 Pet.
3. 15.
we may easily be persuaded to be the very same with this Petition: But the
addition, in your hearts, points out some difference. It is not there in
terms, that we should sanctify and honor God with our deeds and words and
writing, and the like, but with that which is proper to the Heart: Which indeed
does necessarily show it self in outward action. For presently the Apostle
adds, as an effect of this sanctifying of God, being ready always to give an
answer to every man that asks you a reason of the hope which is in you. So
that this place of Peter may seem rather to belong to the next Petition, Thy
Kingdom come. But to close in a little nearer with these words; we will first
ask, What is meant here by the Name of God; and then, What it is to sanctify
it. For the first, We are informed by those who have skill in that language,
that by the propriety of the Hebrew the Name of God is God himself. So to call
upon his Name is to call upon him, to speak good of his Name is to speak good
of him, to magnify his Name is to magnify him. And it is most usual to take
the Name for the person: (...), says Chrysostom in his Preface to the Romans.
The Apostles had the whole world committed to their charge; I am not sufficient
for twenty names, that is, for twenty men. Indeed God is (...), hidden, says
Justine Martyr; we cannot see him: (...), says Damascene, incomprehensible; we
cannot lay hold on him. Nec nomen Dei quaeras. DEUS nomen est illi, says
Minutius; Do not ask what is Gods Name. His Name is GOD. There is need of words
and names where diversity of things are to be distinguished by several
appellations: Deo, qui solus est, DEUS vocabulum totum est. God is most One,
nay, Unity it self; (...), most alone, nay Aloneness it self: All that you can
say of him is, That he is GOD. The heathen Gods, says Theodoret, had many
names: (...). Indeed they were nothing else but names. But the true God, who is
of infinite essence, can have no name at all. Dei nomen semper fuit apud
semetipsum, and in semetipso, says Tertullian against Hermogenes; Gods Name
was always with himself, and in himself. DEUS, nomen Divinitatis; DOMINUS,
Potestatis; GOD signifies his Divinity; and LORD, his Power. But yet as the
Creature does but faintly represent God, so there are names which do but weakly
and imperfectly express him. For as Names import composition of substance and
quality, so they cannot suit with the Simplicity of Gods Essence, but as they
signify notitiam, something by which he is notified. So we say, God is just,
wise, true, eternal, and the like. Now to acknowledge these is to hallow his
Name. We hallow him as Wise, when we count Honesty the best policy; as Just,
when the put the Sword into his hand, and leave all Vengeance to him; as
Omniscient, when we are as much afraid of the twilight as of the noonday; as
True, when in all our miseries we distrust him not; as Aeternal, when we seek
for an abiding City, whose builder is God. But we will confine our selves, and
take the Name of God for God himself, and in the next place enquire What it is
to sanctify him. Now SANCTUM, quod separatum; that is Holy which is separated
from common use. (...) --

The Three and Thirtieth SERMON.
MATTHEW. VI. 10. Thy Kingdom come:
IN this Petition we have three words, and all very observable; a Noun,
Kingdom; a Pronoun, Thy; and a Verb, Come. The Kingdom which here we are
commanded to pray for is not that which the Chiliasts or Millenaries fondly
dream of, the enjoyment of pomp and pleasure and all temporal happiness upon
earth for a thousand years together after the resurrection. This fancy they
fetch from Revel. 20. and other places. And this error, as gross as it is,
spread so far in the very infancy and best times of the Church as to find
entertainment with many, with Papias St. John's Scholar, as Hierome tells us in
his Book De viris illustribus; with Iraeneus, Apollinarius; Tertullian, as some
think; Victorius Pectaviensis; Lactantius, as appears in his seventh Book of
Institutions. Nay, it was of so great account, that St. Augustine himself did
once embrace it, as himself confesses in his twentieth Book De Civit. Dei. and
St. Hierome dared not to condemn it, as he records it himself in his
Commentaries upon Jeremie. A wonder this is; when St. John there plainly
mentions the first Resurrection, which is of the Soul alone. But men easily
persuade themselves they see the image of their own conceits in those parts of
Scripture where they walk, as Antipheron in Aristotle thought he saw his own
shape and picture wheresoever he went. Men take the Kingdom of Christ to be
like unto the Kingdom of the World. Avaritia nostra nobis non sufficit, nisi
avarum quoque Christum facimus, says Petrarch in another case: It is not
enough for us to set our hearts upon riches, unless we make Christ himself
Covetous also. It is not enough for us to pursue honors and dignities, unless
we make Christ ambitious, and so set up a temporal Monarchy in the Church. We
crown Christ, but it is not with the crown wherewith his Father crowned him in
the day of his espousals, when he made him the Head of the Church. In the world
we are born, in the world we are bread; and hence it comes to pass, that when
we divert our industry unto Christian study, to the knowledge of Christ and his
Kingdom, we still fancy something like unto the World, Riches, and Honor,
and a universal Monarchy. But suppose that Christ had the politic government
of the world given him as man, yet he never exercised his Regal power in this
kind: He built no castles, raised no armies, trod not upon the necks of
Emperors. Suppose he had exercised his Regal power, yet all this would hardly
fasten the triple Crown on the high Priests head. But we see himself renounce
all such claim. He complains he has not what the Foxes have, a hole to hide
his head. Being desired to divide the inheritance between two brothers, he
answers sharply, Man, who made Luke 9. 56.
me a judge or a divider over you? When Pilate asks him, Art thou the King
Luke 12. 14.
of the Jews? Christ answers; Say thou this of thy self? or did others
tell it thee of me? Do thou object this crime? or is it seigned to thy hands
by others? And at last he makes this plain confession before Pontius Pilate, My
kingdom is not of this world. Which words, like the Parthian horseman, John 18.
ride one way, but look another; are spoken to an Infidel, to Pilate, but are a
lesson directed to the subjects of his spiritual Kingdom; a Lesson teaching us
not to dream of any honor in his kingdom but salvation, nor any crown but the
crown of life. And therefore as Aristotle tells us of his moral Happiness, that
it is the chiefest good; but not that which the Voluptuary phansieth, the
Epicures Good; nor that which the Ambitious adoreth, the Politicians Good; nor
that which the Contemplative man abstracteth, a Universal notion and Idea of
Good: so may we say of this Kingdom, that in respect of it all the Kingdoms of
the earth are not worth a thought; but it is not such a Kingdom as the Jews
expect, or the Chiliasts fancy, or the Church of Rome dreams of. And though
commonly Negatives make nothing known, yet we shall find that the nature of
Christ's Kingdom could not have been more lively and effectually expressed than
by this plain negation, My Kingdom is not of this world. To come yet a little
nearer to the light by which we may discover this Kingdom; The Schoolmen have
raised up diverse Kingdoms, and built them all upon the same foundation, the
Word of God; First, his absolute Dominion over the creature; in respect of
which Christ is called King of Kings, and Lord of Lords. To this they have
added Regnum Scripturae, and Regnum Ecclesiae; They call the Scripture and the
Church Kingdoms. Then they make Regnum Gratiae, a Kingdom of Grace; and Regnum
Gloriae, a Kingdom of Glory. And by a figure they make the King, Christ
himself, a Kingdom. All these may be true, and these appellations may have
some warrant from Scripture it self, and may have an ADVENIAT set to them. When
we rest upon that law of Providence by which, in a wonderful manner God
governs the world, we say, ADVENIAT, Let his absolute Kingdom come; Let him
dispose and order the actions of men and the events of things as he pleases.
When we make our selves Saints, and strive to bring others into that fellowship
and communion, there is an ADVENIAT; for we pray for the increase of the
Church, and the enlarging of her territories. When we hunger and thirst after
the water of life, when we desire that wholesome doctrine may drop as the rain,
and saving truth distill as the dew, there is an ADVENIAT, a prayer which will
open the windows of heaven. Some are of opinion that by Kingdom come here
Christ did mean the Gospel. And this carries some probability in it. For the
Disciples and Apostles of Christ, whose business it was to propagate the
Gospel, had this petition, Thy Kingdom come, so often in their mouths, that
they were accused affectati regni, as Enemies to the State, who did secretly
undermine one Empire to set up another. We cannot deny but that not only the
manifestation of Gods will, but the confirmation of it, either by preaching, or
by miracle, or by those gifts and effects which can proceed from no other cause
but the power and efficacy of the Spirit, are truly called the kingdom of
Christ, because they are instrumenta regni, instruments and helps to advance
his throne or Kingdom in our very hearts; that as true Subjects we may obey
his commands, as true Soldiers fight under his banner, that so we may suffer
with him here and reign with him hereafter. And in this sense we may call the
Scripture a Kingdom; and the Preaching of the Word, the Administration of the
Sacraments, and the outward Government of the Church, whether Political by the
Magistrate, or Ecclesiastical by the Bishops and Priests, a Kingdom; because
both Powers, both Ecclesiastical and Civil, are (...), great helps and
furtherances, to advance Gods Kingdom. But Aquinas shall give you a full
resolution, 1 a. 2 ae. Qu. 104. Regnum Dei in interioribus consistit
principaliter: sed ex consequenti ad regnum Dei pertinent omnia illa sine
quibus interiores actus esse non possunt; The Kingdom of God is within us, and
principally consists in the subduing of the inward man, in taking the citadel
of the Heart: but by a plain and easy consequence all those things without
which these inward acts are not ordinarily performed, may be taken in within
its verge and compass: And when we pray for the supply and continuance of these
helps, we truly say, Thy Kingdom come. For Christ is not truly and properly
said to reign, till we have surrendered up unto him our very souls and hearts,
and laid them at his feet. For, as Cassian says of Fasting and Watching and
Nakedness, that they are not perfection it self, but the instruments to work
it; So may we say of these outward helps, the Preaching of the Word, the
Administration of the Sacraments, and the Watchfulness of Kings and Prelates,
and the like, They are not the Kingdom of God, but helps and instruments to
set us up. And his reason will hold here also, In ipsis enim non consistit
disciplinae finis, sed per illa pervenitur ad finem; For these are not the end,
but by these we are brought to the end, to the Kingdom of Grace, which will
bring us to the Kingdom of Glory. In fine non est modus, says the Philosopher
in his Politics; When we look on the end, our desires are vehement, our
thoughts restless; no ADVENIAT is loud enough till we have attained it. And for
this alone we are as eager for the means, because they conduce and help forward
to the end. What wrong then is done to the Framer and Fashioner of the Heart,
when we make that, which should be the palace of the great King, a den of
thieves and rebels and traitors! How do we despite the spirit of grace, and, as
much as in us lies, unking him, and thrust him out of his Dominions! When his
word goes out very swiftly, and flies from one end of the world to the other;
when he sends Ambassadors of peace to all the world; when he destroys his
enemies, and works wonders; when he has drawn out a form of government,
promulged his laws, and backed them with promises and threatenings; when he has
mightily showed himself to be our King by great signs and miracles; he does not
yet account himself to reign: But when thou openest thy heart, and give him
possession of every corner of thy soul, then he sits as King in his holy place.
For as the Philosopher tells us that the confirmation of Laws consists not
only (...), in the wise and discreet framing of them; but (...), in the right
and due observance of them: So though Christ be King from all eternity, and
cannot be divested of his Kingly office, yet then only he calls his Kingdom
complete when we are subject and obedient to him; when he has gotten
possession of the Heart, where he may walk, not as he did in Paradise, terrible
to Adam, who had forfeited his allegiance, but as in a garden of pleasures, to
delight himself with the sons of men. For here, in the Heart of man, sits
Reason as chief: here is the counsel-table, here is polity, here are decrees,
here are good purposes and resolutions; hither resort those nuntii, those
messengers, which convey those auxiliary forces which either our Senses, or the
blessed Angels, or the Spirit of God provide and send unto it. So many Virtues
and Vices as there are, so many castles and towers are set up, where so many
battles are fought, so many conquests made. Here Holiness is besieged, Religion
shaken, here it is either betrayed or defended. Here if the Fear of this great
King stand not as sentinel, the strong tower of our constancies falls to the
ground, the Scepter and Crown is broken, and Reason is thrust out of the
throne, whilst the enemy regeth. Our Affections, as in a popular sedition, rush
in with violence, and Christ stands as secluded, and only as looker on. Reign
he may (...), as Lord of all the world, omnipotent, as Nazianzene says, and
will rule over all, whether they will or no; but not (...), as one who has
brought us under his command to obey his laws and ordinances. Both Christ's
Kingdoms we pray for here, for that of Grace, for that of Glory, the one being
the end of our prayers and of our hopes, the other a most necessary means to
attain it. No reigning as Kings in the one unless we serve as Subjects in the
other; no crown there without allegiance here; no glory without grace. But
because it is impossible for the most piercing eye to discover the rules and
laws and order of the Kingdom of Glory, we will stay our meditations upon the
way which leads to it, and show wherein the Kingdom of Grace consists. We
told you the seat and place of this Kingdom is the Heart of men. For who can
meddle with ordering men's hearts but Christ alone? Princes Laws may sound in
the Ears, may bind the Tongues, may manacle the Hands, may command our Goods;
farther they cannot go. Illa se jactet in aula Aeolus. But to set up an
imperial throne and reign in the Heart, this none but Christ can do. Now by the
Heart we do not mean that fleshy part which, as the Father speaks, is as the
center in the body; which, says St. Basil, was first created, first received
life, and then conveys and derives it to every part. Nor do we mean, with some,
the Will; nor, with others, the Affections. But by the Heart we understand all
the powers and faculties of the soul, the Understanding, Will, and Affections,
which when they move in an obedient course, by the rules and laws of any
Kingdom, yield us the surest sign and token (...), of a divine conversation,
conformable to Christ himself. The Kingdom of Christ, says Nazianzene,
consists in the obteining of that which is most perfect. (...), But the most
perfect thing in the world is the knowledge of God. By which he does not mean a
bare knowledge of the King and of his Laws, but a submission of our Will, and a
captivating of our Affections, that we may walk in obedience and newness of
life, according to these laws. Aristotle tells us, (...), He that will erect a
Commonwealth must also frame laws, and fit them to that form of commonwealth
which he intends. We cannot make the same laws sit a Popular estate and a
Monarchy. The different complexions of States and Republics you may see in
their Laws, as the faces of Princes in their coyns. Now as Christ is the
wonderful Counselor, so He came out of the loins of Judah, and is a Lawgiver
too, and has drawn out Laws like unto his Kingdom. As his Isa. 9. 6. Genesis 49.
10. Psalm. 60. 7. and 108. 8.
Scepter is a Scepter of righteousness, so are his Laws just: No man, no devil
can question them. Socrates and Plato and the wisest of the Philosophers,
though strangers to him and aliants from his Kingdom, yet would no doubt have
subscribed to his Laws. As his Kingdom is heavenly, so are his Laws from
heaven, heavenly, written by the finger of Wisdom it self. As he is an
everlasting Prince, so are his Laws eternal. But I will not now stand to show
the difference between these Laws and the Laws by which the Kingdom of the
world be governed. For what will fall-in more fitly with the TUUM, the Pronoun
possessive, which points out a Kingdom by it self, and with which other
Kingdoms cannot be compared. The Kingdom of God Luke 17. 21.
is then within us, when the Understanding makes haste to the object thereof,
the Truth of God, to apprehend it; and the Will is ready to meet the object
thereof, our sovereign Good, to embrace it; and the Affections wait and give
attention upon the will, to further our possession of it; when we have such
wisdom, such holiness, such courage and desires as are fit for a subject of
Christ to bring him unto and keep him in true fidelity and obedience for ever.
For Christ's Laws do not pass only to restrain the Will, but to bound the
Understanding also, to regulate our Affections, to set limits to our very
Thoughts, which flow from the heart; to keep us from Error as well as from Sin.
For as the Will must turn it self from all evil, ut non consentiat; that it no
way incline to consent unto it, so is there a tie upon the Understanding to
avoid error, ut non assentiat, that it yield not assent to it. As the Will is
bound to perform its act, so is the Understanding also. The Will is bound to
will that which is good; the Understanding, to know and believe those things
which are the objects of our Faith and Knowledge: so that it is as well a sin
to believe a lie in matters of Faith as to break a commandment. If there were
no law to the Understanding, then were it lawful for every man to believe and
think as he please: and that opinion would pass for current, That every man may
be saved in that Religion and Sect which he believes to be good and true: And
then how has the Church of Christ been mistaken in passing such heavy censures
upon Heretics and Infidels? We have a saying indeed in St. Bernard, Nihil
ardet in inferno praeter propriam voluntatem, That nothing of us makes fuel for
the fire of hell but our Will, and that men are punished only for the
stubbornness and disobedience of their Will: and if we examine it, we shall
find it true enough, though at the first appearance it bears some show of
opposition to the truth. For the Will receives the first wound and maim. And it
is most certain, we could never err dangerously, if we were not willing to be
deceived. The complaint is put-up in Scripture, They will not understand. Not
that the acts of the Understanding depend on the Will, which are rather natural
than arbitrary (for it is not in our power not to apprehend things in those
shapes in which they present themselves) but because we wilfully refuse the
means to clear doubts, we will not see that which is most naked and visible, we
seek no guide, we follow no direction, nay, perhaps against our own consciences
we dissent from that which inwardly, will we, nill we, we do acknowledge. And
as the errors of the Understanding, so all the extravagancies of the Affections
are originally from the Will. It was the Stoics error to disgrace the
Affections as evil. Christianity has made the weapons of righteousness to
fight the battles of this great King. My Anger may be a sword, my Love a
banner, my Hope a staff, my Fear a buckler. All the weaknesses of our Soul, the
errors of our Understanding, and the rebellions of our Affections, are from the
Will. From hence are wars and fightings. Is the Understanding dark? The cloud
is from the Will. That my Anger rages, my Love burns, my Fear despaireth, my
Grief is impatient, my Joy mad, is from the Will. From this treasury blows the
wind which makes the wicked like the Isa. 57. 20.
troubled sea which cannot rest, whose waters cast up mire and dirt. And now
you see that the Kingdom of Christ consists principally in subduing of the
will. When that yields, the Understanding is straight as wax to receive the
impressions of Truth, and the Affections as so many gentle gales to carry us to
the haven where we would be. This is (...), as Chrysostom calls it, principale
animae, as St. Ambrose, the commanding, leading, and principal part of the
Heart. If Christ has taken possession of this, he has taken the whole heart,
and is Lord of all. Fight, says the 1 King. 22. 31
King of Syria, neither with small nor great, save only with the King of
Israel. If he fa^l in battle, the whole army is overthrown. Will you have it
plainly thus? There be these three parts as it were in the Heart or Soul of
man, Reason, Will, and Appetite. Reason necessarily inclines to things,
reasonable; and the Sensitive appetite follows the conduct of Sense. For it is
an axiom in the Schools, Unaquaeque virtus expeditior est ad proprium actum,
Every power of the soul tends naturally to its proper act and operation. Our
Reason is quick to discourse, and our Sense carries us to sensual objects: And
these two are at a kind of war and variance in man, and strive which shall have
the supremacy: They are as two extremes, and the Will in the midst, as it were,
to decide the controversy. When Sense has over whelmed Reason, then Sin
begins to reign, and the Devil to triumph: But when through Christ, that
strenghtheneth us, our Will takes Reason's part, and treads the Appetite under
her feet; then the adverse faction is swallowed up in victory, Christ is all in
all, and VENIT REGNUM DEI, the Kingdom of God is within us.

I now proceed further, to unfold the nature of the Kingdom of God. It is
REGNUM TUUM, thy Kingdom. Which puts a difference betwixt this and other
Kingdoms. Christ rules and reigns as a King in his Church: But as his
Kingdom is not of this world, so is it of a diverse form and complexion from
the Kingdoms of the world. We pray, Let thy Kingdom come: Which points out a
peculiar Kingdom, a Kingdom by it self. And if we put it in the Scales with
the Kingdoms of the earth, and weigh them together, they will be all found too
light; whether we respect the Laws by which this Kingdom is governed, or the
Virtue and Power it has, or its large Compass, or the Riches it abounds with,
or its Duration; the Laws unquestionable, indispensable: the Power universal;
the Circuit as large as the world; the Riches everlasting; and its Continuance
for ever. To speak something of these in their order.

First, in the Kingdom of Christ and his Laws neither People, nor Senate, nor
Wisemen, nor Judges, has any hand. They were made in Senatu and Soliloquio, as
Rupertus speaks, in that Senate and Solitariness where there are diverse, yet
but one; Three Persons, and but one God. Secondly, there is a difference in the
Laws themselves. These are pure and undefiled, exact and perfect, and such as
tend to perfection; and so were none that ever the heathen Legislatours
enacted. What speak we of the Laws of heathen men and strangers from the
Commonwealth of Israel? The Law of Moses, though it had nothing unlawful or
dishonest, yet contained many precepts concerning things which in themselves
were neither good nor evil; as Sacrificing of beasts, Circumcision, exact Rest
on their Sabboath, forbidding of diverse meats. But the Laws of the Gospel and
of the Kingdom of Christ command those duties which, had they not been tendered
in that high commanding form, yet in their own nature were most just and fit to
be done; Not to circumcise the flesh, but the heart; Not to cease from labor,
but from that which is unlawful; Not to sacrifice the blood and fat of beasts,
but our selves; Not to abstein from certain meats, but to beat down our body,
and wage war with our appetite. We may say of the Law of Moses as St. Paul
speaks of the yearly sacrifices, It did not make the comers thereunto Hebr.
10. 8.
perfect, but left behind it still (...), a conscience of sins; not only ex
part reatus, a conscience which did testify that they had sinned, and
affright them with the guilt, but ex part vindictae, a conscience which not
only questioned their sins, but there atonement also. Therefore Chrysostom on
that place will tell us, In that the Jews did offer sacrifice, it seems they
had a conscience that accused them of sin; but that they did it continually,
argued they had a conscience which accused their sacrifice of Imperfection. The
Law of Faith, which is the fundamental Law of the Gospel; is expunctor legis
and totius retro vetustatis. blots out these Laws, and whatever Antiquity did
write down as a Law in her tables. Quicquid retro fuit, aut demutatum est, ut
circumcisio; aut suppletum, ut lex reliqua; aut impletum, ut prophetia; aut
perfectum, ut fides ipsa; Whatsoever was in times past was either changed, as
Circumcision; or supplied, as the rest of the Law; or fulfilled, as Prophesies;
or made perfect, as Faith it self. I should detein you too long in this
argument, should I draw a comparison between each particular constitution. By
the very nature and quality of the Laws you may easily descry a main difference
between these Kingdoms. The Laws of Christ are unchangeable and eternal, but
all humane constitutions are temporary and mutable. Those which are written in
the Body of the Law by the Civilians are called LEGES PERPETUAE, Laws
unchangeable: but after Ages have seen the countenance of some altered, and
others quite rased out. Legum medelae pro temporum moribus and pro rerumpubl.
generibus and pro utilitatum presentium rationibus mutari solent and flecti,
nec uno statu consistere, sed, ut coeli facies and maris, ita rerum and
fortunae tempestatibus variari; But the Laws of the heavenly Kingdom are
eternal, written in our souls by the King of Souls from the beginning.

The second head wherein the difference of this Kingdom from others is seen,
is the Power of it, which is extended not to the body alone but to the soul
also. Other Kings may lay the whip on the back, but this rips-up the very
bowels: other Kings may kill the body, but this can cast both body and soul
into hell. Many times it is wisdom in Kings not to punish, because of the
multitude or power of offenders. Nescio, says an heathen man in the Historian,
an suasurus fuerim omittere potius praevalida and adulta vitia, quam hoc
assequi ut palam fiat quibus vitiis impares simus. Sins many times do reign
amongst men, and spread themselves so far and wide, that no strength of the
Magistrate is able to supress them: and therefore many times it is our best
wisdom to let such sins alone, lest by going about to amend them, we betray our
weakness, and show that the Law it self may have a bridle put into her mouth,
that offenders may ride her as they please. It is not so in this Kingdom. God
can never be out-braved by any sin, be it never so universal. Be the offenders
never such Giants, never so many, he is able to chain and fetter them even with
a word. He that sits on the throne and he that grinds at the mill to him are
all one. And as a thousand years with him are but as one day, so a thousand, a
million, a whole world of men with him are but as one man. And when he shall
sit to do judgment upon sinners, all the world shall have before him but one
neck, and he can strike it off at a blow. When I mentioned the power and virtue
of this Kingdom, you might expect perhaps that I should have said something of
the power and efficacy of Grace, because this Kingdom is called the Kingdom
of Grace. And indeed herein is a difference between this Kingdom and others.
Magistrates promulge laws, threaten, bind the tongue and hand; but have no
influence nor operation on the hearts and wills of men: But in this our
spiritual Kingdom the King does not only command, but gives us his helping
hand that we may perform his command. Et quomodo fulgur nubes disrumpit, as
Cyprian speaks, as lightning suddenly breaks through the cloud, and at once
enlightens and amazes the world; so the coruscation and splendour of Gods Grace
does at once illuminate and dull the eye of our understanding. Nescio quomodo
tangimur, and tangi nos sentimus; we are touched with this sudden flash we know
not how, and we feel that we are touched; but it is not easy to discern how.
Non deprehendes quemadmodum aut quando tibi prosit, profuisse deprehendes. That
the power of Gods Grace has wrought you shall find; but the secret and retired
passages by which it wrought are impossible to be reduced to demonstration. We
must confess that by nature we are blind, and Grace is the eye by which we see;
we are lame, and Grace is the staff by which we walk; we are dead, and Grace is
the breath by which we live. As man upon earth is composed of Body and Soul, so
in respect of this Kingdom he admits of a new composition, of Man and the
Spirit of Grace: But we must remember it is a Kingdom we speak of; and Christ
is a King, not a Tyrant. Now the Philosopher will tell us, Rex imperat
volentibus; tyrannus, nolentibus; That in this a King and a Tyrant differ, that
the one rules his subjects with that wisdom and temper that they are willing
to obey, the other makes them obey whether they will or no. Beloved, Christ is
a King in this respect: He will not rule us against our will. Nemo se ab invito
coli vult. No man will take a gift from an unwilling hand. And do thou look
that the King of heaven and earth should force thee to allegiance? Some have
made it an observation, That before Christ's resurrection he was obeyed by those
that served him against their will, and so was served but to halves; but under
the Gospel he gathers unto him populum spontaneum, a willing people, that still
be ready to do his will. All this is from Grace, thou will say. It is true; But
not of Grace so working as to force the Will. For as God is powerful, and can
do all things; so is he wise too, and sweetly disposes all things,
accomplishing his will by those means he in his eternal wisdom knows to be
best; using his power as a King, but not violence as a Tyrant. Will thou then
sit still, and not set thy hand to work, upon a fancy that God does not send
thee grace? Will thou not hearken to the voice of thy King speaking within God,
unless he knock, as Fortune is said to have done at Galba's gates, till he be
weary? Will thou not move unless with the hand of violence he drive thee before
him? Will thou still be evil, and pretend he will not make thee good? What a
dishonor is this to thy King, to entitle him to thy disobedience, and make him
guilty of that treason which is committed against himself? Beloved, this is to
be ignorant of the nature of this Kingdom, and injurious to the King himself,
and the highest pitch of rebellion, to make him, if not the author, yet the
occasioner of it. No; he helps us, he does not force us. He leads, not drives
us. He works in us, but not without us. For these two, Grace and Free Will are
not coordinate, but subordinate. Non partim gratia, partim liberum arbitrium,
says St. Bernard; Grace and Free Will do not share our obedience between them:
sed totum singula peragunt, but each of them does perform the whole work: Grace
does it wholly, and Free Will does it wholly: sed ut totum in illo, sic totum
ex illa; as it is wholly wrought by the Free Will of man, so is the Free Will
of man wholly enabled thereunto by the Grace of God, which helps to determine
the Will. Attribute what you will to Gods Grace, every good work, and word, and
thought: You cannot attribute too much, you cannot attribute enough: But when
you have set God at this height, in that proper Zenith where his natural
Goodness has placed him, oh then draw him not down again to the mire where you
ly wallowing, to be partaker with your filth. Do not weaken him by giving him
an attribute of Power. Say not when he does not reign in your hearts, that it
is because he will not. The voice of his Psalm. 77. 18.
thunder is in the heaven; The Vulgar renders it, VOX TONITRUI IN ROTA, The
voice of his thunder is in the wheel. It is heard of men who are willing to
walk in the wheel and circle of Discipline and Virtue, which have their
thoughts collected and raised from the sensual vanities of this word. And then
by the power of this voice, by the Power of Gods Grace, like a wheel, they are
rolled about, and are lifted up, and do touch the earth but in puncto, as it
were but in a point, having not the least relish of the world. And this is the
power and virtue of the Kingdom of Grace.

We pass now to the third head of difference, which consists in the Compass and
Circuit of this Kingdom, which is as large as all the world. In this respect
all Kingdoms come short of it, every one having its bounds which it cannot
pass without violence. A foolish title it is which some give the Emperor of
Rome, as if he had power over the most remote and unknown people of the world.
Bartolus counts him no less than an he etick who denies it. But his arguments
are no better than the Emperors Title, which is but nominal. They tell us that
he calls himself MUNDI DOMINUM, The Lord of all the world, and that Rome has
the appellation (...), of the whole world, given it by Writers of latter times.
So the Poet, Orbem jam totum victor Romanus habebat. But these are but
hyperboles, spoken by way of excess and excellency. So Jewry is also called in
Scripture: For Jerusalem is said to be placed in the midst of the earth, that
is, in the midst of Judaea: as the City Delphi is called orbis umbilicus, the
Navel of the world, because it is situate in the midst of Greece. But without
hyperbole Christ is the Catholic and universal Monarch of the whole world. He
sees and rules all places. All places are to him alike. We need not vow a
pilgrimage to Rome or to Jerusalem: we need not take our scrip and staff to go
thither. De Britannia and de Hierosolymis aequaliter patet aura coelestis; The
way to this Kingdom is as near out of Britanny as out of Jerusalem, says St.
Hierome to Paulinus. Totius mundi vox una, CHRISTUS; Christ is become the
language of the whole world. The Prophets are plain, the Psalms full of
testimonies. In thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed, says God
to Abraham. Ask of me, and I will give thee the heathen for thine inheritance,
Psalm. 2. 8.
and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession, says God to Christ.
The Gospel must be preached to all nations, says our Savior. But as the Sun
has its race through all the world, but yet does not shine in every part at
once, but begins in the East, and passes to the South, and so to the West;
and as it passes forward, it brings light to one place, and withdraws it
from another: so is it with the Sun of righteousness; he spreads his beams on
those who were in darkness and the shadow of death, and makes it night to them
who had the clearest noon. Not that his race is confined, as is the Suns, but
because of the interposition of men's sins, who exclude themselves from his
beams.

And now to proceed to our fourth head of difference; As this is the largest of
all Kingdoms, so it is the most lasting. Other Kingdoms last not; Quibus
evertendis una dies, hora, momentum sufficit. Though they have been many years
a raising to their height, yet a day, an hour, a moment is enough to blow them
down, and lay them level with the ground. And while they last, they continue
not uniform, but have their climacterical years and fatal periods. Though they
grow up like the tree, and be Dan. 4.
strong, and their height reach unto heaven; yet there may come an Angel, some
messenger, from heaven, and hew down the tree, and cut off his branches, and
scatter his fruit, and not leave so much as the stump of its root in the earth.
Justine has calculated the three first Monarchies, and Sleidan all four: and
we have seen their beginning, and their end. But the God of heaven has set up
a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed: and it shall break to pieces, and
consume all those Kingdoms, but it self shall stand fast Dan. 2. 44.
for ever.

We will conclude with the Riches of this Kingdom. If Money were virtue, and
earthly Honor salvation; if the Jasper were holiness, and the Sapphire
obedience; if those Pearls in the Revelation were virtues, then that of our
Savior would be true in this sense also, The Kingdom of heaven would be taken
by violence: The Covetous, the Ambitious, the Publicanes and Sinners, would all
be candidati angelorum, joynt-suiters and competitors for an angels place.
Behold then in this Kingdom are Riches which never fail, not Money, but
Virtue; not Honor, but Salvation; not the Jasper and the Sapphire, but that
Pearl which is better than all our estate. For God and the Saints when they
speak of Profit and Gain, take it not in that sense which men use to take it:
As the Poet tells us when he speaks of Rivers and Mountains, that men called
them thus or thus, but the Gods had other names for them. The Gold of this
Kingdom is the Religiousness and Obedience of the Saints; the precious Stones
are Truth and Sanctity. In mundo tanto quisque melior, quanto pecuniosior; In
the world every man is esteemed so good as he is rich; Like a fruitless tree,
tanti est in pretio, quantum lignum ejus in trunco; he is valued only by his
bulk and trunk. But in this Kingdom the only Riches is Obedience. Men may have
the riches of the world, and yet be poor: But this Kingdom makes Poverty it
self riches; Disgrace, honor; Death, life. Here we are kept by the power of God
through faith unto salvation; here we are begotten to an inheritance
incorruptible and undefiled, that fades not away, but is reserved in the
heavens for us, till that time that we shall receive the end of our faith, the
salvation of our souls.

Having now made the comparison, the choice is easy. And a great folly it were
to prefer the World to the Church. In the world the Laws are mutable, here
everlasting; In the world they have tongues many times to speak, but not hands
to strike; here they both thunder and lighten: there Power beats the ear, here
it pierces the very heart. The Kingdoms of the world are bounded by place and
time; this is unconfinable: More scope in the Church than in the world. The
Riches of the one are fading and transitory, of the other everlasting. And of
this just and mighty and large and rich and everlasting Kingdom we cannot but
say ADVENIAT, Let it come.

I need make no further discovery of this Kingdom. For who knows not what that
Kingdom is where the King is (...), both God and Man? Where the Subjects are
of the earth, earthy, and yet born to an Angelical estate, and having their
conversation in heaven, perigrini deorsum, cives sursum, strangers where they
live, and fellow-citizens with the Saints? Phil. 3. 10.
Where the King speaks to the eye by his wonders, and to the ear by his word,
and yet leads and guides his people like sheep by a powerful but invisible
hand? A Kingdom which is not of this world, but yet in this world; raised up
and built upon flesh and blood, upon frail and mortal men; begun John 18. 36.
here, but to be made perfect and consummate in the world to come? In a word,
where the King shall deliver up his kingdom, and yet remain 1 Cor. 15. 34.
still a King? Take the Mapp of the whole world, and if you find no such
Kingdom, no such parts, no such subjects, no such government, then look up and
lift up your heads: let not your contemplations grovel on the earth; for the
Kingdom of heaven is at hand. This is the sum of that we formerly delivered
concerning the Object of this Petition. We pass now to the Petition it self, to
the Verb ADVENIAT, Let it come. Which breaths it self forth in an earnest
desire to draw this Kingdom nearer. Whether you take it for the Gospel, which
is the manifestation of Gods will; or for the receiving of the Gospel, which is
the performing of his will: Whether you take it for the Kingdom of Grace here,
or for the Kingdom of Glory hereafter; ADVENIAT, Let it come. That is the
language of every true Christian. Where it is not yet come, let it come; it
cannot come soon enough. And when it is come, let it come nearer. When it is
within us, let it be established there; and when it is established, let it be
eternized there. Remove all obstacles, supply all helps, ut adveniat, that it
may come; that thy Kingdom of Grace may entitle us to thy Kingdom of Glory. A
Petition fitted indeed to the times wherein it was first prescribed, but most
necessary for all Christians to the worlds end when time shall be no more.
Though the Angels had sounded forth their GLORIA IN EXCELSIS, Glory to God in
the highest, good will toward men, though Christ were come in the flesh, yet
this Kingdom of the Gospel was not yet come, but was rather in voto than in
ministerio, rather desired than known by its several offices and ministeries.
The Law and the Prophets, says our Savior, were until John; since that time
the Kingdom of Luke 16. 16.
God is preached, and every man presses unto it. By this preaching cannot be
meant the kingdom present: first, because when Christ sends his Disciples
Matthew. 10.
forth, he commands them to preach, The kingdom of heaven is at hand.
Secondly, he tells us that, From the time of John the Baptist the kingdom
Matthew. 11.
of heaven suffers violence; not that the Kingdom of heaven was then invaded
and taken, but because from that time men did burn with ardent affection and
desires to have it come, not able to bear the burden of expectation; beholding
it at hand, yet thinking it not near enough. As in those good things we desire,
omnia solemus facilius perpeti quam moram, we can endure any thing better than
delay. And that this is the true meaning of those words may appear by our
Saviors elogie of John the Baptist, That among them that are born of women
there has not risen a greater than John Matthew. 11. 11.
the Baptist, notwithstanding he that is least in the kingdom of heaven is
greater than he: MINOR, the least, not Angel in heaven, as St. Augustine; nor
LEAST, that is, of fewer years, to wit, Christ himself, as Rupertus; nor LEAST,
that is, he that is most humble, as others will have it; but the least in the
Church of Christ, the least and meanest subject in the Kingdom of the Gospel,
is greater than John. Where Christ puts a manifest Antithesis and opposition
between the Law and the Gospel, and between those persons which are under the
Law and those which obey the Gospel; which had it been then in force, our
Savior had made John Baptist greater than himself. Most plain it is, the Law
was yet in force, the Ceremonies not disannulled; Christ himself observed them.
The old Tabernacle was yet standing, because our high Priest was not yet
entered into the true Sanctuary. And therefore in crepusculo Evangelii, in this
dawning of the Gospel, when the Sun of righteousness had not yet climbed up to
the proper Horizon of the Church, in this interstitium, this interposition of
Jesus preaching, who was (...), as Nazianzene calls him, placed in the middle
between the Law and the Gospel, this Petition was most fit and opportune,
fitting the time, and opportune for the persons who would be disciples of this
Kingdom, ADVENIAT REGNUM TUUM, Thy Kingdom is at hand, and let it come. And
as it fits the time, so is it necessary in respect of the Gospel it self; which
though it be commentum Divinitatis, as Tertullian calls it, the very work and
invention of the Deity; though it breathe nothing but peace and joy, though it
have not only authority but reason to plead for it, yet the sound of it was no
sooner heard, but the world was in a tumult: The heathen did rage, and the
people imagine a vain thing: The Kings of the earth did set themselves against
the Lord and against his Anointed. Do the Angels proclaim it? Men oppose it.
Does Psalm 2.
Christ preach it and confirm it by wonders? Let him be crucified, say the
Jews: Ecquis Christus cum sua fabula? say the Gentiles after; Away with Christ
and his Legend. Whilst it was yet in its swathing-bands, it was brought to the
bar; the professors of it are punished and tortured, non ut dicant quae
faciunt, sed ut negent quod sunt, not to reveal what they do, but to deny what
they are. For this the most chaste wife is devorced from her husband, the most
obedient son disinherited by his father, the most trusty and faithful servant
shut out of doors by his master; even for the Religion of the Gospel, which
made the Wife chaste, the Son obedient, and Servant faithful. Ex aemulatione
Judaei, ex natura domestici nostri; The Jew is spurred on by his envy; nay, she
finds enemies in her own house, the Church of God; and even Christians oppose
her because of the truth it self, whose nature it is to offend. It is a just
complaint, that our Savior came into the world, and the world received him
not, would not receive him as a King, but groaned under him as a cruel Tyrant.
His edicts, his commands, his proclamations, his precepts were hard and harsh
sayings, none could bear them. So it stands with Christian Religion: Cum odio
sui caepit, It was hated as soon as it was. Nor indeed can it be otherwise. For
it offends the whole world. It stands between the Wanton and his lust, the
Ambitious and his pomp, the Covetous and his mammon. Christ is truth, and his
Kingdom is a Kingdom of righteousness and truth; no^ is there any thing in
the world more scandalous and offensive than the Truth. Old Simeon tells Mary
of Christ, This child is set for the falling and rising again Luke 2. 34.
of many in Israel. Not that Christ, says St. (...) is contrary ^^ himself, a
Savior and a Destroyer, a Friend and an Enemy. (...), but for the diverse
opinions and affections of men, which abusing his love make him an enemy, and
the Savior of the world a Destroyer: I might name here many hindrances of the
growth of ^he Gospel; as Heresy, which is a most poisonous viper biting not
the heel but the very heart of it; Infidelity, which robs Christ of his
subjects, contracts his Kingdom into a narrow room and into a small number;
Disorder, which rents it, which works confusion there. All these are
impedimenta, lets and hindrances, to the propagation of the Gospel; not like
those impedimenta militiae, the luggage and carriage of an army, without which
it cannot subsist, but obicem ponentia, fences and bulwarks and barricadoes
against the King of Heaven, if it were possible, to stay him in his victorious
march, and to damm up that light which must shine from one end of the earth
unto the other. But this perhaps might fill up our discourse, and make it swell
beyond its bounds. The greatest hinderance which we must pray against is an
evil thought which flies about the world, That there is no Hinderance but
these; no opposition to the truth but Heresy, no sin but Infidelity, no
breaking of order but in a Schism. This, it is to be feared, not only hinders
the propagation of the Gospel in credendis, in respect of outward profession,
but blasts and shrinks it up in agendis, in respect of outward practice and of
that obedience without which we are mere aliens and strangers from this
Kingdom. This does veritatem defendendo concutere, this shakes that truth
which should make us fruitful to every good work by being so loud in the
defense of it. It is a truth, I think, confessed by all, That the errors of our
Understanding for the most part are not of so great alloy as those of the Will,
That it is not so dangerous to be ignorant of some truth as it is to be guilty
of any evil: yet all the heat of contention is spent here; all our quarrels and
digladiations are about these; nay, all our Religion is this, (...), earnestly
to contend, not who shall be the truest subjects in Christ's Kingdom, but who
shall be most loud to cry down Heresy and Schism. And this fancy I take to
be as great a viper as Heresy, as poisonous as Infidelity, and the first
ground and original of all Schisms in the world. Whose zeal is so hot against
an Oath as against an Error! Who says Anathema to the Wanton? What curse upon
the Oppressor but of the Orphan and the Widow? And from whence come wars, from
whence come fightings amongst us, but from this corrupt imagination, That we do
better service in the Church of Christ, which is the Kingdom of God, by the
loud defense than by the serious practice of the truth. And all this while we
mistake this Kingdom and the Religion which we profess, which is absoluta and
simplex, a Religion of great perfection and simplicity, non quaerens strophas
verborum, and needs not the help of wit and sophistry. God leads us not unto
his Kingdom by knotty and intricate Disputes. In absoluto nobis and facili
aeternitas, says Hilary; Our journey to it is most easy. It will come unto us
sine pompa and apparatu, without pomp or observation. It was Erasmus his
complaint in the days of our Forefathers, Ecclesiam sustineri syllogismis,
That this Kingdom was upheld, not by piety and obedience, but by syllogistical
disputes, as the surest props. I could be infinite in this argument; but I am
unwilling to loose my way whilst I pursue a thief. The sum of all is, That this
ADVENIAT is not only an invitation to draw this Kingdom nearer, but an
antidote against Heresy, Infidelity and Schism, and also against this corrupt
conceit, That Religion does in labris natare, is most powerful when it floats
upon the tongue. And we must raise it up as an engine, to bruise the head of
these vipers, to cast down imaginations and every thing that exalts it self
against the Kingdom of Christ.

Again, as this ADVENIAT fits all ages of the Church, and was the language
which Christ taught his Disciples when the Church was yet an Embrio, in semine
and principiis, not yet brought forth in perfect shape; so is it a most proper
and significant word, verbum rei accommodatum, a word fitted to the matter in
hand, the Kingdom here mentioned, which must come to us before we can come to
it. Nothing more free and voluntary, more spontaneous, than the dispensation of
the Gospel. It came to us when we were shackled with sin that we could not stir
a foot; when we were a sleep, and did not so much as dream of it; nay, when we
were dead in sin to quicken us that we might come. For though our life be a
warfare, and we make our way to this Kingdom with our sword, and with danger
of our lives; though our life be a walk, and we pace it along with weary steps;
though it be a peregrination and travel, and we are absent from our home till
we meet it; yet this Kingdom does come unto us, not by works, says St. Paul,
which are as so many motions or approaches, but according to Gods infinite
mercy, which brings it home, and lays it at our doors. And in this respect that
is most true, Gratia nullo modo est gratia si non omnimodo sit gratuita, Grace,
if it be not every way free and coming, as we say, is not Grace at all. Other
benefits God puts out to sale; and, if we will have them, we must give as and
libram, we must pay down ready money for them. He holds them in his hand; nor
will they move toward us. Oportet figere scopum, We must set them up as our
end, and then move toward them. Arts and Sciences lie lapped up and hidden in
things themselves. The Egyptians found out Astronomy; the Caldaeans,
Southsaying; the Phaenicians, Letters; Lycurgus and Solon, Laws; but not as
things framed to their hands and laid in their way, but by much swet and labor,
with much thoughtfulness and care. But the Gospel, which brings eternal life,
is the gift of God, sent down Romans 6. 23.
to us by the ministry of Angels, preached unto us out of heaven by way of
letter and epistle, says St. Augustine, conveyed unto us by those (...), as
Epiphanius calls them, by the Apostles, which did (...), brought it out upon
the open stage, and presented it to all the world. And therefore ADVENIAT, Let
it come, to lift us up, who are pressed down with the weight of sin; to make us
active, who are cripples; to heal us, who are wounded; and to make our feet
like Hinds feet, that we may run the way of Gods commandments. But are not we
commanded to come? Does not the Bride say, Come? and the Spirit say, Come? And
may not whosoever will come unto this Kingdom? Yes: but this Kingdom must
first come, and then we may. The Gospel must first be published, the Grace of
God appear, and then we must draw near with a true heart in full assurance of
Faith. And then the coming of this Kingdom to us and of us to it are but as
one motion, so that we can hardly distinguish them. When we are on the way,
that is coming; and when that is coming, we are ready to meet it: and it is
hard to say whether it comes when we meet it, or we meet it when it comes. The
blessedness which it brings along with it could not be finis naturalis, an end
or mark which the eye of nature could descry, but finis supernaturalis, a
supernatural end, which the hand of Mercy has set up and presented to all
mankind. And our coming to it is nothing else, says St. Bernard, but cogitare
de hoc regno, and de rebus omnibus habito respectu ad hoc regnum, to think of
it now it is offered, and of all other things in the world in no other relation
then unto it; to think of Poverty, as of that which may purchase a Kingdom; of
Wealth, by distributing of which I may be rich in works; of Sickness, which by
patience may be better than health; of Health, which may make me active in the
religious duties of my calling; of Life, as it is a walk; and of Death, as it
is a passage to bliss: that so as the Kingdom is prepared for me, I may be
prepared for it, and it may come to me in my high estate and in my low
condition, in my sickness and in my health, and Christ may be to me both in
life and in death advantage.

Further, this ADVENIAT reaches to the second advent of Christ, even to the
end of all things. For of his Kingdom of Glory we say, Let it come. And it is
a word of Desire, not of Impatience. For though we cry out, How long, Lord! how
long! yet we are willing to stay his leisure. For it is also a word expressing
our hope. And Hope as it does stir and quicken our desire, so does it also
temper it, that it be not irregular. Spes supra desiderium addit conatum
quendam and elevationem animi, says Aquinas; Hope adds no more to Desire but a
kind of activity and elevation of the mind. For where our Desire would flagg
and fall to the ground, there Hope feathers it, and sets it on the wing, that
it may fly to the mark. But it puts no malignity in it. For if we hope, says
St. Paul, for that which is not seen, then do we with patience Romans 8. 25.
wait for it. And this Hope is (...), laid up for us in heaven, where Col. 1. 5.
hope is taken for the thing hoped for. SEPOSITA, laid up, not put into our
hands, that our desires might be eager; and SEPOSITA NOBIS, laid up for us,
that we might not faint, but press on to the mark; and SEPOSITA IN COELO, laid
up in heaven, the surest treasury in the world. Spes res spissas facit, says
he in Plautus: Indeed Hope commonly makes every thing which we desire appear
slow in its approach. But when that which we hope for is sure in heaven, though
we would fain run and meet the Object, yet we are content to stay the time: Nec
ullae longae morae ejus quod certo eveniet; Nor can the deferring of that be
long which will surely come.

Secondly, ADVENIAT is a word expressing our Faith. Though Hope takes a long
day, yet Faith lays hold on the promises as if they were present, being the
substance, the evidence, the presence, of Hebr. 11.
things to come. Faith is the life of Hope, without which it cannot have
existence. Hope does suppose Faith; but Faith may be where there is no hope at
all. How many be there who believe that there is a Kingdom of Glory, that
verily there is a reward for the righteous, and yet have their chariot-wheels
struck off that they drive but heavily toward it, have their Hope fastened to
earth by their many sins, that it cannot look up? The second Coming of Christ
is an article of our Creed; and we may do well to make it the object of our
Hope also. That he will come with troops of Angels and Archangels is most
certain; but the time is not known but to the Father alone, that by the
doubtful expectation of the very hour God might make a trial of the
watchfulness of their faith quos in magnis aeternae beatitudinis constituet
exemplis, whom he means to place amongst the few but great examples of eternal
happiness. Semper diem observant, cum semper ignorant: quotidie timeant quod
quotidie sperant, says Tertullian in that excellent Book of his De Anima. For
whilst men are always ignorant they are also always observant, and fear that
may come this minute which they hope and are assured will come at last.

Lastly, this ADVENIAT, as it is the language of our Hope and Faith, so is it
the dialect olso of our Charity and Love both to God and our Brethren. Thy
Kingdom come. Why certainly it will come. Certus esto, veniet. Nec solum
veniet, sed, etsi nolis, veniet, says St. Augustine. You may be sure it will
come: nay, it will come, whether we will or no Our prayers perchance may hasten
it, but no power in heaven or in earth or in hell can keep it back: But this
ADVENIAT, this prayer of ours that it may come, is a kind of subscription to
the eternal decree of God that it should come. By this we testify our consent,
show our agreement, and make it appear that we are truly his subjects; since we
would have that which our King would have, and are of the same mind with him.
We usually say that they who are true friends have idem Velle and idem Nolle,
will and nill the self-same things. It is said of Abraham that he was the
friend of God. And not only Abraham, 2 Chronicles. 20. 7. Isa. 41. 8. James 2. 23.
but every true son of Abraham, that fears the Lord, does also inherit
Abraham's title, and is the friend of God. If therefore we will be counted
Abraham's Children and the Friends of God, we must will and nill the same things
with God, or else we shall not continue long friends. Non pareo Deo, sed
assentior; and ex animo illum, non quia necesse est, sequor, says the heathen
Seneca: We do not so much obey God, because he has authority to command, as
because we acknowledge that what he will have is just and good; and we assent
to him not of necessity, but of a willing mind. We entreat him to do his will,
and beg it at his hand as a great favor. We cry unto him, ADVENIAT, Thy
Kingdom come, though we know that he is already resolved that it shall come.
And so in this one word ADVENIAT we may see the motion of our Faith, the
activity of our Hope, and the humble plyability of our Love. And thus we may
tota fidei substantia incidere, as Tertullian speaks, we may with these three
go forth to meet the King as with the wh^le armor and substance of our faith.
Now our Desire must needs be carried on ^n a swift and eager course where these
three do fill the sails, where Faith awakes it, Hope spurs it on, and Love
upholds and countenances it. It must needs be more than an ordinary heat of
affection which is kindled by all these. These three will set ADVENIAT to the
highest pinn, to the highest elevation of our thoughts. Let thy Kingdom come;
yet not till the appointed time, yet let it come: Though many thousands of
years are to pass over before it come, yet let it come; not now, but when thou will; and when thou will, yet now. It cannot come soon enough, if thou will;
and if thou will not now, it cannot come too late. It was a famous saying of
Martyn Luther, Homo perfect credens se esse haeredem and filium Dei non diu
superstes maneret; Did a man perfectly believe that he were a child of God and
heir of this Kingdom of Glory, he would be transported beyond himself, and dye
of immoderate joy. We read EXSPECTATIO MEA APUD Psalm. 39. 7.
TE, My hope is even in thee; but the Vulgar renders it, SUBSTANTIA MEA APUD
TE, My substance, my being, is in thee; as if David were composed and made up
and elemented of his Hope; as if all that he had, all that he was, were only in
expectation. And indeed they who affect a future life, and look forward toward
eternity, are truly said ne tunc quidem tum vivunt vivere, not to be where they
are, not to live when they are alive.

To conclude; No wonder to hear an ADVENIAT for a Christians mouth, who lives
so as if he thought of nothing else but the Coming of this Kingdom. For this
ADVENIAT is as a spark from that fire, as a beam of that Glory which shall be
hereafter. Nor can he ever with a perfect desire sound an ADVENIAT who has not
some imperfect knowledge of the melody of the Angels and the music of the
Cherubims. He cannot say, Thy Kingdom come, who has not a glimpse of that
glory which is to come. The Philosophers tell us that there is nothing which
can be nourishing to our bodies, but we have a kind of fore-taste and assay of
it in our very tempers and constitutions. The Child, when he is hungry, desires
milk, because he has a kind of praegustation of milk in his very nature. Nihil
penitus incongruum appetitur; Nothing is desired by us which disagrees with our
(...) and disposition.

The wickedst Christian living may say his PATER NOSTER; but he cannot
pronounce the ADVENIAT with that accent and emphasis and heartiness that he
should. Thy Kingdom come! Nay, rather let mountains fall on me, and hills
cover me. And all this, because the Glory of Gods Kingdom is against his very
nature. What taste can he have of the Water of life who is in the gall of
bitterness? What relish can he have of the Bread of life who surfets on the
world? Or can he have any praegustation of Heaven whose very soul by
covetousness is become as earthy as his body? Can he desire eternal Glory whose
glory is in his shame? No: Vita Christiani sanctum desiderium; The life of a
true Christian is nothing else but a holy desire, and an expectation of the
coming of this Kingdom of Christ: Which he has a taste and relish of even in
his very temper and constitution; which he received at his regeneration. For so
St. Paul calls our regeneration and amendment of life a taste of the heavenly
gift of the good word of God, and of the Hebr. 6. 4, 5.
powers of the world to come. For as God commanded Moses, before he dyed, to
ascend up into the mountain, that he might see afar off and discover that good
land which he had promised: So it is his pleasure that through holy
conversation and newness of life we should raise our selves above the rest of
the world, and even in this life time, (...), as Nazianzene speaks, as from an
exceeding high mountain, discover and have some sight of that good Land, of
that Crown of glory, which is laid up for all those who watch and wait for the
Coming of this Kingdom.

The Four and Thirtieth SERMON. PART I.
MATTHEW. VI. 10. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
THIS is the last Petition of those three which look up directly unto heaven,
upon the very face of God, without any reflection upon the earth or the
temporary blessings of this present life: Which as they are terminated in the
glory of God and our spiritual good, so they carry with them that nearness and
affinity to each other that it is not easy to distinguish them: And most men
in their discourses, although they tell us that they are three, as they are
indeed, yet in their illustrations and amplifications, before they wind up
their discourse, in effect do make them but one and the very same. (...), says
Aristotle; Some things there are of that nature, and which bear such
resemblance one to the other, that it is not easy to distinguish them,
especially Moral and Theological Duties, as they are levelled to one end, so are
they linkt as it were in one and the same chain, that you cannot touch upon
one, but you must also glance upon the rest, and move them all. The
Sanctification of Gods Name is annexed to his Kingdom: and the fairest part of
his Kingdom (as it is said to come to us) is the fulfilling of his Will. He
that hallows Gods Name does advance his Kingdom: and he that advances his
Kingdom does fulfill his Will: and this last seems to conclude and comprehend
both the other. And this we heretofore told you was true in sensu quem faciunt,
in that sense which every one of these Petitions will bear; but in sensu quem
fiunt, in that sense in which our Savior spoke and taught them, they must
necessarily have their proper bounds and limits. And thus you may remember we
did confine the first Petition, Hallowed be thy Name, to our words and writings
and outward gestures and deportment, by which we do most expressly and visibly
honor God, and hallow his Name, as it were before the Sun and the People; The
second, Thy Kingdom come, to the preaching and promulgation of the Gospel, of
which when himself speaks he tells us, The kingdom of heaven is at hand; as
also to the Heart of man, which is to receive it when it is promulged, which is
(...), the House of God, in which he delights to dwell, and his Throne, in
which he sits. And take this interpretation from Christ's own blessed lips, The
Kingdom of God Luke 17. 21.
is within you: The last, of which we are now to speak, not only to our outward
Obedience, to our actions and works of Piety, by which we do facere voluntatem
Dei, do what God would have us, but also to a general Submission and conformity
of our wills to his in all things, by doing what he commands, and by suffering
with all humility what he does. Whither his countenance shine, or he clothe
himself with judgment; whether he speaks peace, or thunder from heaven; whether
he lift us up, or cast us down, the language of every Christian must be, Thy
will be done in earth as it is in heaven. This Petition points out to us, Rem
and Modum; first, the Thing it self we must pray for; and that is, That Gods
will may be fulfilled by us in all things: and secondly, the Manner how this
must be accomplished, in earth as it is in heaven: We begin with the Petition:
In the unfolding of which we shall pass by these lines: First, we will consider
the Petition in a generality, and therein the weight and energy of the words:
Secondly, we will lay open the sense of the words, by showing what is meant by
the Will of God: Lastly, we will draw forth some few conclusions which
naturally issue from the consideration of the Will of God as from a rich
fountain, and may lead us at once to the full understanding of the Petition,
and be useful for our instruction. Of these in their order.

And first of all this Petition follows the other in a right order and method.
For he that desires that the Kingdom of heaven should come must make it his
petition also that he may lay hold on the means which must draw it near unto
him. Qui vult finem, vult media ad finem, says the Philosopher. Naturally our
desires are thus carried: First we behold the mark, the Kingdom of heaven; and
then we press forward and reach forth unto it by doing the Will of God. (...),
says Aristotle; The end in this respect is the beginning, and as the first
wheel, which sets all the rest a going. As we can never set our hands to work
and do Gods will, unless we have some sight of a Kingdom that is coming; so
this Kingdom will never come unless we do his Will. I will not stand to
determine on which our affections should be carried with most eager violence,
whether on the Means or on the End, whether on the Kingdom or fulfilling of
Gods will. For I take it to be a question not so necessary, because we know not
how to divide the Desire where it must be (...), wound up to the highest pinn.
And God, out of the love he has unto our good, is willing to apply himself to
our infirmity, and, so that we do his will, accepts of our conformity, though
it be wrought out of us by a greater love we have unto the End, which is full
of beauty and glory to allure, then to the Means, which carry with them pain
and difficulty, to dull and slugg the affection. Only we must be careful to
avoid that strange (...), that want of method and order, which is common in the
world, to be ravished with the beauty of Gods Kingdom, and never busy our
thoughts, with the performance of his will; that we do not dimidiare Christum,
receive Christ by halves, receive him with a reward, but not with precepts; cry
out, Thy Kingdom come, with a loud voice and a fervent affection, clare, and
ut audiat hospes, that all the world may hear us, but, Thy will be done, (...),
between the teeth, burying it in such a lazy silence that none can take notice
of us that we look with any great affection toward it. We may desire Glory,
but not without Grace; and Gods Kingdom, but not without a FIAT, not unless we
do his will. Simplicius in his Comments upon Aristotle moves a question,
Whether youth in reading of Aristotle's Book^ should begin with his Logic where
he teaches to dispute and reason, or with his Morals, where he teaches to
live honestly. If they begin with Logic without Morals, they will prove but
wrangling Sophisters; and if they begin with Morals without Logic, they will
prove but confused. The question may be soon resolved in that particular. But
in the study of Christianity there can no such doubt be raised. Our method is
plain and easy, drawn out before our eyes by the hand of Christ himself. Thy
Kingdom come, is the very language and dialect of a Christian: But if his FIAT
be not as loud and vocal as his ADVENIAT; if we are as high as Gods closet when
we should be busy at his footstool; if we have Predestination at heart, but
will not learn that conformity to Gods Will which should write our names in the
book of life, we are not perfect methodists in Christ's School, and leave the
best part of our Pater Noster unlearnt. And though we cry aloud, he will not
hear us in the one, who are unwilling to be heard in the other. An ADVENIAT
with a FIAT is the greatest soloecisme in Christianity.

And herein consists the excellency of this Form: It points out unto us the
best and the hardest part of Christianity. We may well call it Summam summarum,
the very Sum and Abridgment of all Divinity. Magnae and beatae interpretationis
est, says Tertullian, and quantum substringitur verbis, tantum diffunditur
sensibus; When we have made our prayers as long as that of Solomon at the
dedication of the Temple, when we have reckoned up all particulars which our
phansies can suggest; the sum of all is or must be this, Lord, grant us these
things, if it be thy will; if not, thy will be done. Again, when we have spent
our age in controversy; when we have tired our selves in spinetis
scholasticorum, in the intricate discourses of the Schools, when we have
searched the Counsels, turned over the Fathers; after much study and weariness
of the flesh, the conclusion of the whole matter, says Solomon, is this, To
fear God, and keep his commandments: which in brief is but this, To do his will.

I call it the hardest part of Christianity, but do not make the Difficulty an
argument of its Excellency as Bellarmine does of the necessity of Confession:
but rather in respect of that other part, the Knowledge of his Will. It passes
as a common proverb, (...), That those things which are excellent in their use
are hard in the achievement: but it holds in Evil things also. Covetousness is
not therefore a virtue because it sorts not with the humor of the Prodigal; nor
is Prodigality to be commended because the Miser hates it. (...), says Basil.
All things, both good and bad, in this do pariate, that they are not bought but
with difficulty and danger. And therefore though Confession be of singular use
in the Church of Christ, yet this argument does not make it good that it is so.
Nor will I here make it mine. (...), as St. Basil spoke in the point of
Repentance: I speak with some fear, when I call this the hardest part of
Christianity, although it is most manifest that it is so. For this name of
Difficulty in the duties of our life is a very monster, a Medusa, that turns us
into stones, leaves us without life or action. But though I do not make the
Difficulty of the duty an argument of the Excellency of the prayer, yet I do
account it a strong incitement to us, not to spend all our days in that part
which is so easy, the Knowledge of Gods will, and reserve no other time for
the doing of his will (which is far more difficult) but that in which we can do
nothing. Non per difficiles nos Deus ad beatam vitam quaestiones vocat; God
does not lead us to this Kingdom by knotty disputations, or by questions which
are hard to be resolved, but by the doing of his will. He has showed thee, O
man, what is good: and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do justly,
and to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God? He has showed it; and who
is there Mic. 6. 8.
that cannot run and read it? How easy is it to believe? The world we see,
talks of nothing else but Faith. Who knows not the commandments? The very
heathen Orator will tell us, Brevis est institutio vitae honestae beataeque,
That we may quickly learn those precepts which will lead us to that integrity
which will make us happy. And this consideration struck him with amazement,
Mirum est malos esse tam multos, that there were so many evil men in the world.
Nam at aqua piscibus, circumfusus nobis spiritus volucribus convenit, says he;
For Goodness is as natural to Man, as the Water to Fishes, and the Air to
Birds. And more easily it is certainly for Man secundam naturam quam contra eam
vivere, to live according to the dictates of Nature than against them. You will
think perhaps you hear Pelagius speak: but it is Quintilian, an Heathen; and so
the speech concerns not us, who are Christians. (...), says Justin Martyr; To
live according to the direction of Nature belongs to them who do not yet
believe in Christ. Our task is greater, though for the m^st part we fall short
of this. And the reason is given by the Stoic, Scholae, non vitae discimus:
Our ambition is to know rather than to do. We have turned the FIAT into
COGNOSCATUR, as if our duty were rather to conform our selves to Gods
Omniscience than to his Will. Now one question is on foot, anon another is
startled, and we fight it out with great heat of contention. Par pari refertur,
and invicem nobis videmur insanire; We are froward with the froward, and answer
reproach with reproach. And ask both their opinions of one another, and both
are mad. I do not speak this as if it were an offense to defend the truth. No;
I rather count it a part of our conformity to Gods Will. But I am jealous of
the FIAT. And we may justly fear that when men spend so many hours in the
discussion of that which is not absolutely necessary, they steal some few from
the practice of that truth which is essential. Whilst they stay so long upon
the COGNOSCATUR, they faint and weary in the FIAT; As the Painter who having
spent his best skill on Neptune, failed in setting forth the majesty of
Jupiter. I am willing to attribute what I can to Knowledge, but methinks I see
an Emphasis in the FIAT. We may pray that we may know, but above all that we
may do Gods Will.

And now, in the second place, we may conceive the weight of this Petition, in
that it suits best with the Majesty and Greatness of God. We have indeed many
words and forms of speech by which we express his Majesty, as when we say he is
above all, and through all, and in us all; that of him, and Ephesians. 4. 6. Romans
11. 36. Jer. 23. 24.
through him, and to him are all things; that he fills heaven and earth, and
the like; But there is none that does more effectually open it then when we
attribute most unto his Will. For as it is in the soul of man, though there be
many admirable parts, Understanding, Sense, Life, and the like, yet the
commanding power of our soul, which gives laws as it were to all the other
faculties, and which makes us Lords of our actions, is the Will; So it is also
with God. We see some parts of his glory by the light of Nature, but we have a
fairer radiation by the light of Scripture. Ut res in literis, sic literas in
rebus: We read him in the Book of his Word, and in the Book of his Works: But
we never so fully express him as when we give him a Will which makes him Lord
paramount and commander of all things. Dei posse est velle, says Tertullian
against Draxeas; His Will is his Power, and his Power is his Will. For
whatsoever he can do, yet he does no more than he wills. Quis potest eloqui
potentias Domini? Who can speak of the Power and Omnipotency of God? Yet his
Omnipotency seems to vail to his Will, and in a manner to be commanded by it.
For he is therefore said to be omnipotent because he can do all things that he
will. He is (...), an infinite sea of Essence, and (...), an infinite ocean of
Power: And did not his Will bound his Omnipotency, all things would have been
as infinite as he himself is. Wherefore did he create us? wherefore did he
redeem-us? He himself gives the answer, QUI A VOLUIT, Because he would. Whence
comes it to pass that the world is contained within these limits? whence is it
that it is no greater, nor less than it is? Whence have living things their
limits of growth, their measure of power, their date of time and durance? The
best reason we can give is Gods Will, which bounds that infinite Ocean of his
Power, which otherwise must needs have had a larger flow. In the former
Petition we give God a Kingdom, but we give him more when we give him an
absolute and uncontrollable Will. For what is a Kingdom but a mere name if it
have any other Law than the Will of the King? Some Kings there are which are so
nomine, not re, rather by title than indeed, as we find in Livy and Plutarch
the Kings of the Lacedaemonians were. Others are more absolute: Of which we read
in the Historian, Liberi sunt, suique ac legum potentes, ut et quod volunt
faciant, et quod nolunt non faciant; They are free and powerful in themselves
and their laws, to do what they would, and not to do what they would not; una
regentes cuncta arbitrio, governing all by their will. And this giving them an
illimited Will is an (...), as Nazianzene speaks, to make them Gods indeed.
Howsoever then in that Petition, Thy Kingdom come, we style him; in this, Thy
Will be done, we make God a King. Behold these who call themselves Gods and
Lords here on earth: They then think themselves tantum nomen implere, best to
answer the name they bear, when they can plead exemption from all Law but their
own Will. Antonine, one of the Roman Emperors, speaks it plainly, Legibus
soluti, legibus vivimus; Kings, howsoever they are pleased to condescend and
submit themselves to Law, yet in their own nature are free from the Law, and
have no other Law to bound them besides their Will. Yet this is but a weak
resemblance. For take the highest pitch of Regality that our imagination can
reach, yet it falls short of His to whom all earthly Majesty must vail, and at
whose feet Princes lay down their crowns and scepters. Therefore Dionysius
Longinus, in his Book (...), Of the sublimity of speech, makes that expression
of Moses (...), God spoke, Let there be light, and immediately there was light.
Let there be earth; and there was earth, the highest and most sublime that
could be given, and does much commend his art that he so spoke of God as well
befitted the person of whom he spoke: (...), Thus the Power of God is best
expressed; No sooner to speak, but it is done. To conclude this; If Moses 's art,
speaking of Gods Power, did seem so wonderful to this heathen Orator, what art
then may a Christian observe in these words of our Savior, Thy Will be done!
which to speak to any thus but unto God were utterly unlawful.

We will give you one taste more of the excellency of this Prayer. As it best
suits with Gods Majesty, so it is the fairest expression of our humility. For
greater Humility than this has no man than absolutely to resign all
disposition of our selves, and wholly to cast our selves upon Gods Will
whatsoever it be. We are told by some that Pride was the first sin; that it
threw Lucifer down from heaven, and drove Adam out of Paradise. And Basil on
Isa. 13. tells us, (...), that the whole nature and species of all sin, is
derived from this, from an unwillingness to submit our selves to the will of
God. Deum inter damna sua avarus accusat, says Hilary; The covetous person,
when he has lost his money, accuses God himself. He that is tried by
persecutions thinks God unjust. Rachel weepeth for her children, and will not
be comforted, because they are not. All our repinings and murmurings and
discontents are from this, that we cannot say, Thy will be done. But he that
resigns his will into the hands of God, I do not see how it is possible for him
to offend him; but he stands like Scaeva in the Poet, strong before an army:
Parque novum fortuna videt concurrere, bellum
Atque virum. --
There are but these two in this glorious contention, thou, O Man, and all the
evils and calamities in the world, and all the devils in hell. Does the world
frown? Does persecution rage? Does Sickness seize upon? Let God touch, let him
kill, all that you hear from Humility is, Let his will be done. In this form
you may behold the full and perfect shape of Humility drawn to the life. Other
forms may seem to set us above our sphere. When we call God Father it is too
high and honorable a term for such miscreants as we are. For though it do imply
Subjection, yet it does imply the subjection of a Child rather than of a
Servant. And therefore we must join this FIAT to PATER, submit our selves as
children, but submit our selves as servants too. And there is great reason for
it. For many so rely upon the name of Father that they forget the FIAT quite.
Therefore in this Petition we may learn to preserve our selves from extremes;
neither so to presume upon Gods Love as to forget his Power, nor so to think
upon his Power, as to despair of his Love. A Father he is; but if he give us
blows, we must remember the FIAT, and fall down before him, saying, Thy will be
done. God will have us to wait upon him at distance. When he teaches us to
call him FATHER, he seems to call us too near to him, that we go not too far:
but when he commands us to say, Thy will be done, he teaches us, like
Servants, to know our place, that we come not too near, nor be too familiar
with him.

I will yet add one reason more, and that from Christ himself, who was now come
into the world, not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him. This
will be now declares to all the world. Which was but darkly seen before, wrapped
up in types, hid in visions, veiled in the ceremonies of the Law; but now it is
made manifest to all the world. So that we may find a kind of triumph, in this
Form, the acclamations of Love and Joy, FIAT, Thy will be done. For, as Job
said, Shall we receive good things at the hands of God, and not evil? so, on
the contrary, shall we set a FIAT, set our seal, to the evils which God sends,
and not to the good news? to the voice of his thunder, when he scatters his
enemies, and not to the voice of his Angel which proclaims peace? The
Redemption of mankind by the coming of Christ was praecipua pars providentiae,
the fairest piece in which the Providence of God showed it self, decreed (...),
before the foundations of the world were laid. This FIAT then, Thy will be
done, is: he voice of Faith and Obedience and Gratitude. The Grammarians tell
us there be some words which will not fit a Tragedy; and Donatus had a conceit,
Si ferrum nominetur in comaedia, transit in tragoediam, That but to name a
Sword in a Comedy were enough to fright it into a Tragedy. But these words will
serve and fit both, fit us on our good days, and fit us on our bad; fit us in
our sorrow, and in our joy; in the house of mourning, and at a triumph; as fit
for us the first coming of Christ as for the second.

But this is not all: For this flows but from a decree of God; what he would do
on the earth and what he would do for us. And this might awake the most sullen
Ingratitude. We are all willing to set a FIAT to those decrees which are made
for our good. Will God send his Son? His will be done. Here a FIAT has not
enough of the wing; and therefore the gloss which our Heart gives is, Oh Lord,
make no long tarrying. But besides this, as Christ came to do his Fathers will,
so he came to teach us his will also. Certainly to think otherwise is a most
dangerous error. For what is it but to make the Gospel of Christ to be the
Gospel of sinful man, nay the Gospel of the Devil? What is it but to poison the
many wholesome precepts we find there? This shuts up the FIAT within the compass
of the absolute Decree; and our Petition is no more then this, That God would
be as good as his word, and fulfill those promises on us which he made before
the foundations of the world were laid. Gods Promises are, like his Threats,
conditional: If thou believe, I will give unto thee eternal life; If thou
overcome, thou shall be crowned. Is it not good news to the heavy-laden that by
coming to Christ he may be eased? to the rich, that he may make such friends
of Mammon as may at last receive him into everlasting habitations; to the
captive, that he may shake his shackles off? and to every Christian, that, if
he will but fight he shall purchase a Kingdom? The Gospel is not the less
Gospel because it conteins precepts and laws. Evangelical Laws, is no
contradiction at all. Will you hear our Savior speak like a Lawgiver? This is
my commandment. And, You shall be my Disciples if you do what I command you.
Will you see him in his robes as a Judge? Behold him in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8.
that know not God. And who are they? Even those that obey not the Gospel of
Christ? And how shall they be judged? According to my Gospel, Romans 2. 16.
says St. Paul. We need not stand longer on this point. But if they will not
grant us this, we will yet increase further upon them, and show this Petition
to be most proper to the Gospel: For it is not only, This is my commandment,
but, A new commandment give I unto you. For though at sundry John 13. 34.
times and in diverse manners God had revealed his Will to our Fathers by the
Prophets, yet in these last days he has spoken by his Son, more plainly and
more fully expressing his will then ever heretofore; and after which he will
never speak again. For the Grace of God is made manifest by the 2 Timothy 1. 10.
appearing of our Savior Jesus Christ, who has abolisht death, and brought
life and immortality to light through the Gospel. And as it is his last Will,
so it removes those indulgences and dispensations which were granted under the
Law, and which stood as a thick cloud before the eyes of the Jews, that they
could not fully and clearly discern the full purport of his Will. Hac ratione
munit nos Christus adversus Diaboli latitudines, says Tertullian; The opening
of Gods Will by Christ is as a fense to keep us from those latitudes and
exspatiations and extravagancies, and shows us yet a more excellent way,
discovering unto us the danger of those sins which heretofore, under the Law,
went under that name. The Jews were Gods peculiar people, and to them he gave
his statutes and his testimonies; but yet he did not expect that perfection
from a Jew which he does from a Christian. Our Savior does not only clear the
Law from those corrupt glosses with which the Jewish Doctors had infected it,
but also ampliavit and expanxit legem and totam retro vetustatem, as Tertullian
speaks. Who has believed our report? and to whom is the arm of the Lord Isa.
53. 1.
revealed? says the Prophet. Some report the Prophets made, but not all; nor
were they fully heard. It is the Will of God that we deny our selves, that we
take up our cross, that we use this world as if we used it not; living in the
world, but out of the world; non exercentes quod nati sumus, not being what
indeed we are. Where find we these lessons, this his Will, but in the Gospel? A
vain attempt it is to draw them into the Decalogue by force, by I know not what
Analogy, by long and far-fetcht deductions. For by the same art I may contract
all the ten Commandments into one. No man commits a sin but ipso facto, in some
proportioned sense, he has set up another God, which is only forbid in the
first Commandment. We use not to commit those secrets to every messenger which
we do to our son; Nor did the Prophets, the Messengers of Christ, know all his
will. This was an office for the Son, for Christ himself ^^lly to declare and
publish his last Will, and to teach us to subscribe to it with our blood, with
a FIAT VOLUNTAS TUA. If I must deny my self, if I must be torn on the rack, if
I must through many afflictions enter into thy Kingdom, FIAT, Thy will be done.

The Five and Thirtieth SERMON. PART II.
MATTHEW. VI. 10. Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven.
IT may be perhaps expected that I should frame some Apology this day for my
absence the last. But indeed I was never overmuch in love with Apologies in
this kind; and therefore, first, I may say with Seneca, Si noluero, quis
coacturus est? If I will not, who can compel me? Secondly, I have already
rendered my reason, and it was accepted there where it was especially due. From
others, who love ire in opus alienum, to be over-busie in other men's matters,
and who are least pleased with the greatest diligence, I expect but thus much,
that they will give me leave not to be troubled much with what they think or
say, who give them full liberty to think and say what they please. Abundat sibi
locuples testis conscientia, says St. Ambrose; It is not much material what
foul weather is abroad, when all is quiet at home: and when the Conscience has
received no wound, all the censures of the world are but noise, which can shake
none but those who are vilissima popularis aurae mancipia, who walk along in
the strength of that applause which Ignorance breaths forth, and, when that
wind cease, are on the ground! I will mis-spend therefore no more time in an
unnecessary Apology for that fault of omission which borrowed nothing from my
will; but I proceed to show what conformity we owe to Gods Will in its several
kinds, either as Absolute, or as Natural and Antecedent, or as Consequent and
Occasioned, or as barely Permissive, or lastly to that Will of his which we
call voluntatem praecepti, his Law and Command; And so having said something of
them in several, we will draw up all at last in this one conclusion, That every
Christian who will truly say this petition, Thy will be done, must bring with
him an heart that will yield ready obedience to do whatsoever God commands, and
a cheerful patience to suffer what his hand shall lay upon him.

And first, for Gods Absolute Will, by which he created the world, and does
what he pleases both in heaven and earth, common Reason will teach us that
this Will of his will be fulfilled whether we pray or no. For who has resisted
his will? And if he shut up, or cut off, or gather together, who Job 11. 10.
can hinder him? says Zophar. Prayer and entreaty are then used when without
prayer and entreaty we cannot prevail. But this Will of God shall take effect
whether we set-to our FIAT, or no. He gives snow like wool, and scatters
the hoar-frost like ashes: He casts forth his ice like morsels. He causes
his wind to blow, and the waters flow. And what he Psalm. 46.
will do, he does: Nor can all the prayers of the world draw him from action,
or help him in his work. Yet notwithstanding we may say FIAT, Thy will be done,
to testify our consent and conformity to his Will. We must idem velle, et idem
nolle, will and nill the self-same things with God, that so we may be his
friends, Non pareo Deo, sed assentior, and ex animo illum, non quia necesse
est, sequor, says Seneca. Obedience may be constrained: and therefore we must
not only obey God because Necessity forces us; but we must with joy and
readiness entreat him to do his will, and even beg it at his hand as a favor.
Now this our conformity to Gods Absolute will, quot ramos porrigit, quot venas
diffundit! it has many branches and veins by which it spreads and conveighs
and manifests it self. It is seen in our Admiration of his infinite power, and
of those his works which no hand but that of Omnipotency could produce. For
though Augustine somewhere calls Admiration a vice, yet he retracts it, lib. 1.
Retract. c. 3. And certainly it is a good argument of our assent unto Gods
Will, when the contemplation of his works transports us beyond our selves,
strikes us into a kind of silence, and leaves that deep impression in our
souls, that no finite power could compass them; and forces us to subscribe
after the ancient form, Donum factum, That whatsoever God does is well done;
and withal to confess that he is ita magnus in magnis ut minor non sit in
minimis, that as his hand is great in the greatest works, so is it no less
great and mighty in the least; and that his Power, which has made so many
things unlike one to the other, yet in all these is still like it self, and
perfect and absolute in every one. To question, with Hermogenes and the
Materiarii, Whether the world were made of praeexistent matter; with others,
Whether it were coaeternal with God; with the Gnostics, Whether it were made
by God, or by his Angels; to quarrel with the Creation, with Alfonsus King of
Arragon, who was persuaded he could have made and ordered the world better than
it is; to ask whether God might not have made more worlds, are bad symptoms
and prognostics of a profane heart, evaporations of sick and loathsome brains,
doubts of men unwilling to subscribe, and who have not wrought their will to
that conformity which they owe to the Absolute Will of God. Secondly, this our
assent is seen in our songs of Thanksgiving. Great is the Lord, and most worthy
to be praised; and again, Who can speak the greatness of the Lord, or show
forth all his praises? are fair commentaries upon this Petition. He that
magnifieth Gods name for that which he has done, he which rejoices and
triumphs in every work of God, who can find matter for a Jubilee not only in
the Sun and Moon and Stars, but in the Lilies of the field, and in every herb
that grows there; has set-to his seal and approbation, and says his PATER
NOSTER not only (...), from the lips outward, but (...), from his very soul.
God 's works are made whether we will or no, whether we pray or no: And for us
they were thus made. And our Magnificats, our Jubilees and our Gratitude are
our FIAT, and plainly speak our conformity to Gods Will. A sullen silence and a
lazy ingratitude: scatter our prayers before the wind, and make it too plain
and evident that we are not willing that God should do what he will. Again, our
conformity to this his Absolute Will dwells as it were and takes up its
residence in a heart which frequently meditates in the works of God. For
Meditation is that handmaid which follows God at a distance in all his works,
which beholds Omnipotency in the creation of the world; which sees a world of
miracles in Man, (...), a great world in a little one; which hears God in his
thunder, considers who is Father of the Rain, and who begets the drops of the
Dew, out Job 38.
of whose womb the Ice came. Meditation is that spiritual rumination, that
chewing of the cudd, which brings and calls back all the works of God ab
intestino memoriae ad os cogitationis, from the bowels and stomach of the
Memory, as St. Augustine speaks, to the mouth of the Thoughts, that there we
may feed upon them with fresh delight, and make them comfortable and wholesome
to our souls; which prepares us contra omnia fidei excidia, as Hilary
speaks, against all those temptations which are dangerous and deleterial to
our Faith. We cannot doubt but that he who delights in what God has done has
also surrendered his will to God, and said from his very heart, Let the will of
God be done. Nazianzene in Orat. 39. yet adds another, and that is, (...), an
holy emulation to work great works, to be Gods unto our selves; Not to create a
new world, but the help of Gods grace to create new hearts in our selves; to
bind and fetter the common enemy of mankind; to open the windows of goals, and
wash our sins with the tears of our repentance, to strike those rocks, our
stony hearts, that the waters of contrition may gush forth: in a holy
consideration of Gods Immensity and Power to gain to our selves, with St. Paul,
a kind of Omnisciency, to have all knowledge, and a kind of Omnipotency 1 Cor.
13. 2.
through Christ, who strengthens us, to be able to do all things. And by Phil.
4. 13.
these, by falling down in a reverent Admiration of what God has wrought, by
our continual Praises and Gratulations and Hallelujahs, by walking every day
about the gallery of our souls, and viewing with delight those many pictures
and various representations of his wonderful works, by a holy Aemulation to
work something in our own souls which may resemble what he has wrought in the
world, by recounting with our selves that that great God did not make us thus
wonderfully, to be his miracles, and to do trifles, by these, as by so many
faithful interpreters, we best acknowledge and express our conformity to Gods
Absolute Will.

We pass now to show what conformity we owe to the Natural Will of God; which
we call voluntatem desiderii and inclinationis, his Will of Desire and
Inclination, his Prime and Antecedent Will, by which he desires the happiness
of all mankind, and administers all the means to bring them to it. And here I
can conceive no difficulty at all, but if Gods Natural Will be to have all men
saved, then certainly the same mind should be in us 1 Timothy 2. 4.
which is in God, and we should pray that all men may be saved. Shall God will
it, and we not pray for it? Shall the cataracts of Gods Mercy and Goodness
stand wide open, and we quite shut up the passage of our Devotion? Is it
impossible that God naturally should will the damnation of any man, and is it
possible that we should think there be some men for whom we ought not to pray?
I have read the Catalogues of old Heresies written by St. Augustine and
Philastrius; and I find some of them to be such ridiculous phansies, such
intellectual meteors, that I have much wondered those Worthies would once stain
their papers with them, or take such pains to deliver them to posterity:
Methinks they should have destroyed those monsters in their birth, and not have
graced them so much as to have told after-ages that they ever were, or had so
much as being in the Church. But I do not remember that there is any one of
them of so monstrous a shape as this, That it is not lawful to pray for the
salvation of all men: This sure was reserved for these after-ages, to attend
upon its misshapen damm, that ill-begotten fancy of the absolute Decree of
Reprobation. I could not once conceive that any should delight in so killing a
fancy, which quite cutteth off all hope of salvation from some men, and
leaves them in a far worse case than the Gadarenes Hoggs: For the Devils
entering into Luke 8.
them presently carried them into the sea and drowned them, and so left them;
but according to this doctrine some men are prepared on purpose by God to be an
habitation of devils, and to dwell with devils for ever. But these severe men,
who cut off all hope of life from some, and with it the prayers of the Church,
are all Sheep themselves, pure and innocent, so sure of their salvation that I
can find small reason they have to pray for it; but that they may neglect this
duty, as well as they do others as necessary, upon this presumptuous ground.
But why may not we pray for all 1 Timothy 2. 6.
men, as well as Christ give himself a price for all? And is it not commanded
that prayers and intercessions should be made for all men: Which if we 1 Timothy
2. 1.
neglect, that judgment which we have laid at other men's doors will be brought
home at last unto our own. Besides, Gods Will, they say, of damning men is
secret; and if it be unlawful to pray for that which he is resolved not to do,
a great part of our devotion must needs expire, and the incense of those many
prayers of the Saints cannot send up any pleasant savor, who beg those things
at his hands which his will was never to reach forth and give. To Faith the
number of the elect appears but small; but to Charity the Church is large and
copious, and she sees none which is not or may not be a member thereof. It may
be said perhaps that I err when I pray that all may be saved; Be it so: but it
is an error of my Charity, and therefore a most necessary error. For it is the
very property of Charity thus to err. And it is not a lie, but a commendable
office, and acceptable in Gods sight, in my prayers to wish the eternal
happiness of him who perhaps shall be for ever miserable. These holy mistakes
of Charity shall never be imputed, nor be numbered amongst my sins of Ignorance.
For he that errs not thus, he that hopes not the best he can of every man he
sees, wants something yet, and comes short of a good Christian. Christianum est
errare; It is the part of every Christian, and a singular duty, thus to err.
The reason is manifest: For there is no heart so much stone which God cannot
malleate, and out of which he cannot raise a child unto Abraham; Sin may reign
in our mortal bodies ad mortem, to make us liable to death; and it may reign ad
difficultatem, that it will be very difficult to shake off that yoke which
Custom has put on: but I cannot conceive how it should reign ad necessitatem,
so to necessitate our damnation as to take off that last comfort we are capable
of, which is hope. The Church when she strikes the sinner with the spiritual
sword of Excommunication, does not with that blow cut off Hope. Vulnus, non
hominem secat; secat ut sanet; She strikes rather at the wound which is already
made, than at the man, to wound him deeper: She strikes him to heal him.
Delivers him to Satan, to deliver him from Satan: She shuts him out, to keep
him in. Abstention, Pulsion, Exclusion, Exauctoration, Ejection, Ejeration, all
these phansies we find in the ancients for Excommunication; yet all these are
not of so malignant power as to shrivel up all our Hope, but rather they beget
a hope that the excommunicated person will run back to the bosom of that
Church which did therefore cast him out that she might receive him again more
fair and healthful than before. Did Love dwell in us continually, we should not
be so willing to hear nor so ready to talk of the everlasting destruction of
our brethren. Malo non credere; sit falsum omne quod sanguinis est, as St.
Hierome spoke in another case; We should rather not believe that it were so,
and wish it false, though it were most probably true. It has been therefore
the practice of the ancient Church, and it is in present use with our own, to
pray for all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics, for all those to whose
blindness the light of the Gospel is not yet known, that they may be drawn out
of the darkness of ignorance, and be converted, and see the beauty of that
truth which may save them; even to those whose damnation sleeps not. For this
is most agreeable to that Will of God which is known, and which is therefore
known that it may be the rule of our actions. Nor do we herein offend against
that secret Will of his. For most true it is, that we may bona voluntate velle
quae Deus non vult, says St. Augustine; will, and with a very good will, those
things which God will not. And our prayers thus sent up, though they prevail
not in that against which God has secretly determined, yet shall prevail to
draw down a blessing upon our heads for thus conforming our selves to Gods
Natural and Known Will.

And this leads us one step further, to the consideration of God's Occasioned
and Consequent Will, by which he punishes those that obstinately continue in
sin. And to this Will of his we are bound to conform, although for the reasons
but now alleged we are not bound to pray that all unrepentant sinners may be
damned; but rather, that they may repent: God will proceed to punishment: He
has whet his sword, and he will make it drunk in the blood of his enemies,
whether we pray that he will do it, or not. To this Will of his they who have
made themselves the children of perdition must conform even against their will.
And our conformity consists but in this, to rest contented herewithal, and to
admire Gods uncontrollable Justice, which no Covetousness can bribe, no Power
affright, no Riches corrupt, no Fear bend; and to cry out with the Father, O
quanta est subtilitas judiciorum Dei! O quam districte agitur bonorum
malorumque retributio! O the infinite wisdom of the judgments of the Lord! O
how exactly and precisely will he reward the good and punish the impenitent
sinner! Every thing that God will do is not a fit object for our devotion, nor
are we bound to pray for every thing that he will do. Nay, in some cases, as it
has been showed, we may pray against it. God may perhaps purpose the death of
my father: For me to will the same is no less sin than Parracide. God upon
foreknowledge of Judas his transgression did determine that Judas should go to
his own place: but Judas was not bound to will the same. No, his greatest sin
was that he so behaved himself as if he had willed it indeed. In a word, I am
not bound to say, FIAT, to all that God will do; but, when he has done it, to
sit down and build my patience upon this consideration, That whatsoever he will
do, or has done, must needs be just: Absolutio difficultatum in his ipsis
requirenda est e quibus videtur exsistere, says Hilary; We must see the
resolution of doubts which may hence arise, even from that which raised them,
or from whence they were occasioned. And we cannot be at any loss in our
conformity, if we do not first mistake that Will of God to which we should
conform. The Schoolmen, who are very apt (...), to make ropes of sand, or
rather, with little children, to blow-up those bubbles which are lost in the
making, amongst many other empty and unnecessary questions, have started up
this as of some bulk and substance, when indeed it is but very airy. They ask,
Whether, if God should reveal to a particular person that he should be damned,
he were bound to conform his will and give assent, and not pray against it. A
vain speculation, like that of Buridans Ass, which stood between two bottles of
hey, and starved, because he knew not which to choose. Men may suppose what they
please, the Heavens to stand still, and the Earth to move and wheel about, as
Copernicus did. They may suppose that God will send his Angel with a
revelation, who would not send Lazarus with a message to Dives his brethren.
But let me also suppose that men are wise unto sobriety, and then I will move
one question more, and that is, What reason possibly they can imagine to move
this doubt. God does not send any such revelation: We have Moses and the
Prophets; we have the Gospel of Christ: If we look for any revelation, we must
find it there. There, as in a glass, we may see either the regularity or
deformity of our wills. There we may hear that voice which speaks comfort to
the penitent, and denounces vengeance on obstinate offenders. Nolo ut mihi
Deus mittat Angelos, says Martin Luther; I would not that God should send down
his Angel with a revelation: For he that brings any revelation to me which is
not in Scripture shall find no more credit than the Puck in the Churchyard:
And if it be in Scripture, the message, though of an Angel, is but superfluous.
Suppose God will do that which he never will, and you may raise as many doubts
and questions as you please. Again, if God did reveal it, yet it might be
lawful, nay, thou art commanded, to pray against it. God revealed to David that
the child which was born to him in adultery should surely dye; yet David
besought God for the child, and fasted, and lay all night upon the earth. And
his reason is, Who can tell whether God will be 2 Samuel 12.
gracious to me that the child may live? But when the child was dead, he arose
from the earth, and washed, and anointed himself. Which was a lively expression
of his submission to the will of God. God revealed the destruction of Niniveh;
the Ninivites repent, and he destroyed it not. A sure rule it is, Promissa
obligant, minae non obligant. God binds himself more by his promises than by
his threatenings. In what he promises he never fails, but what he threatens does
not always come to pass. But they tell us there be some persons whom God will
not suffer us to pray for; as he forbad Samuel to mourn and pray for Saul; and
the Prophet Jeremiah, Pray not for this people. To which it might easily be
replied, that the case is not the same, but differs as much as a temporal loss
from a spiritual, and the loss of a kingdom, and captivity, from the loss of a
soul, and eternal separation from God. But I will rather make use of that
excellent passage of Tertullian in his book De Idololatria, who being urged
with the example of Moses lifting up the Serpent in the wilderness, makes
answer that it was an extraordinary precept, and a type of the Cross, and
therefore stood in no opposition with that command, Thou shall not make any
graven image; nor did God forbid what he commands, nor command what he did
forbid. Well says the Father, Si eundem Deum observes, habes legem ejus; If
thou serve the same God which Moses did, thou have his law that Thou shall not
make a graven image; but if thou look upon the precept in obedience to which
the Serpent was set up, and tu imitare Mosem, nec facias adversus legem
simulacrum aliquod, nisi and tibi Deus jusserit, do then also imitate Moses,
and set no image up till God commands thee. In like manner, if thy error lead
thee to this persuasion, That there be some for whom thou ought not to pray,
because Samuel and Jeremy were forbid to pray for the King and People of the
Jews, look not upon the two Prophets, but upon the Law and the Rule, which
makes our prayers ecumenical, and our Devotion as large as the whole world.
But if their example still run in thy eyes, then stay the doing of it till thou
may do it as they did it; Do it by command. These are indeed but scruples,
and they weigh no more. And we may say of these and many the like doubts,
raised by the Schools, as Tully did of the Latin tongue in his time, Non tam
praeclarum scire Latin loqui quam turpe nescire; It advantageth not us at all
to know these doubts and questions, but perhaps it may be some disparagement
not to know and assoil them.

We therefore leave this point, and proceed to God's Permissive Will, by which
he is resolved not to intercede by his Omnipotency, and hinder those sins
which, if he permitted not could not once have being. And to this Will of his
we cannot but yield conformity, unless we forget that we are Men, and
Christians, and destined to a crown of happiness. For if Sin were not
permitted, what use were there of our Passions and Reason? or why has Man a
Will? Christianity were indeed but fabula, as the Heathens terms it, a very
sigment; and Obedience, nothing. For it is impossible that he should be
obedient who cannot possibly disobey. And what reward is due to him whose
actions are merely natural, who does what he does, and cannot do otherwise.
Permission of Sin is that which makes a way to virtue. The Devil and outward
Temptations and the World we count enemies: but they are such enemies as the
unrighteous Mammon in the Gospel; we may make friends of them. Chrysostom has
a tract upon this subject, (...); Why God does not take the Devil out of the
world, but suffers him to walk about; and he resolves the question thus, That
it is for our good. For we who perhaps would be evil if there were no Devil at
all, have now opportunity to resist and vanquish him, and so to gain an
everlasting crown of glory. So for the World; I may so use it that I may enjoy
God: the Flesh; I may (...), as the Father speaks, fight against it, and make
it my slave and captive: Temptations; They are materiam virtutum, the very
matter out of which we shape those works which we call Virtues: The Devil; He
is indeed (...), the wickedest and most malicious enemy we have; but we may
make him as profitable and useful to us as any friend. And if all these
dangers, and this opposition from the World, the Flesh, and the Devil be of
purpose placed in our way that we may struggle with them, and conquer, and be
crowned; he that is a Man, a Christian candidatus aeternitatis, who sues for
any place in heaven, will readily say, FIAT VOLUNTAS DEI, Let the will of God
be done in this respect, and conform himself to this his Permissive Will. For
by yielding our assent to this Will of God, we assent only to this, that it is
necessary that Sin should be permitted. But we do not therefore pray that
wicked men may take their swinge, and run-on in the ways of wickedness without
control. No: our Devotion is set to a contrary key. We pray, and we are bound
to pray; that God will put a bit into the mouth of every wicked person; that he
will rule the raging of the sea, and the madness of the people; that he will
put a hook into the nostrils of that great Leviathan. For as there is
permissio, so there is rectio and moderatio. As God permits Sin, so by his
wisdom and moderation it comes to pass that all the intents of wicked men do
not take effect. Scelera semper festinant, quasi contra innocentiam ipsam
festinatione praevaleant, says Gregory; Wickedness is ever on the wing; but it
does not always fly to the mark: It makes haste, as if haste would prevail
against Innocence; but God, that God who rides upon the cherubim, and flies
upon the wings of the wind, overtakes it, and sets up a bulwark against it to
stop it in its course. Pharaoh i^ in his chariot, and drives furiously after
the Israelites, but God takes off his chariot-wheels, and drowns him in the
sea. Haman procures a decree against all the Jews, the Posts to go out, and are
hastened by the King: But God by his overruling Providence crosses the bloody
design; the Kings heart is turned, Haman is hanged on the gallows he had
prepared for Mordecai, and a gracious Edict issues out in favor of Gods
people. The Scripture is full of instances of this kind. All which may teach us
to yield our assent that it is convenient and necessary that sin should be
permitted, and to interceed by our frequent prayers and devotion that, although
God in his wisdom has left every man in manu consilii sui, in his own hands
and disposing, yet in his goodness and mercy to his chosen ones he would set
bounds to wicked persons; that he would shackle, though not their wills, yet
their hands; that he would cut off the designs, infatuate the counsels, scatter
the imaginations of all those who like serpents were only born to do mischief,
and to sin against heaven and earth. So much of this point.

Now that we may say something of that which we call voluntatem praecepti, of
God's Law and Precept and Command, which every where in Scripture is called his
Will, and indeed does most of all concern us, we will draw and wind up all in
this main conclusion, That every Christian who will truly say this Petition,
Thy will be done, must bring with him a heart prepared to yield ready obedience
to do whatsoever God commands, and a cheerful patience to suffer what his hand
shall lay upon him.

THY WILL BE DONE, is the thing we pray for. And that we may do his will* God
has opened and revealed his will, and made it as manifest as the day. Jam
autem praecipitur, quia non recte curritur, si quo currendum sit nescitur,
says St. Augustine; He has taught us beforehand, because he runs not well
that knows neither his way nor journeys end. Therefore God did as it were
evaporate and open his will, writ his eternal law in our hearts, engraved it in
tables of stone, published it by the voice of Angels, by the sound of that
trumpet which the Evangelists and Apostles did blow, declared it fully and
plainly, that we may run and read it, and not turn aside to seek any other
rule, but conform our selves unto it; by a voluntary Obedience, which like an
handmaid may wait upon his Will, and by an humble and obedient Patience, which
always has an eye not upon the blow but the hand that gives it, and bows
under it; when he speaks, or when he strikes, returns no answer but this, FIAT
VOLUNTAS TUA, Thy will be done. This is the sum of this Petition, and indeed of
all Religion. For if we level our actions by that rule which is naturally
right, we can do no evil: and whatsoever befalls us, judicio bonitatis ejus
accidit, says Hilary, befalls us not by chance, but by the judicious
Providence of Gods goodness, and therefore we can suffer no evil. And this, one
would think, were enough. What can God teach us more than to pray that we may
do his will?

We might now well pass to the next Petition, and not once glance upon these
words, In earth as it is in heaven. But the word of God, as it is no way
defective, so has nothing redundant and superfluous: not a versicle, not a
clause, which does not (...), says Chrysostom, which carries not its weight
with it, and presents us with plenty and riches of wisdom. If we do Gods will,
we can do no more, the Angels can do no more. Yet if we look upon our selves,
and reflect a while upon our own tempers and dispositions, we shall find that
what is in it self enough and sufficient, is not enough and sufficient for us;
and that this clause, In earth as it is in heaven, was a necessary addition,
put in by our Savior by way of caution and prevention. It is not enough for us
to be taught to pray that we may do God's will: we shall fall short in our
obedience if we be not taught also the manner how this must be accomplished.
For we are naturally prone jussa magis interpretari quam exsequi, to boggle at
every duty that is enjoined; and, if we be left at loose, instead of executing
what is commanded, to sit down and seek out shifts and evasions and inventions
of our own, and so to do it by halves; to do it, as St. Basil says, either
(...), unseasonably, or (...), disorderly, or (...), scantly, and not in that
measure which is required; to content our selves with Agrippa's modicum; When
indeed we are subjects to every duty, we become Justitiaries, and set it
bounds, and limit and restrain it. Do his will: As Men, made up and composed of
weakness and infirmities; as Men, bruised and maimed with the fall of our first
parents; as Men in terris, dust and ashes: But sicut in coelis, to do the will
of God as it is done in heaven, our contemplation would never have set it at
this altitude. Nullum morosius animal est, nec majore art tractandum, quam
homo, says Seneca; There is not a more waiward and curious creature than Man,
nor to be handled with more art. He must be taught not only what to do, but how
and how far to do it. He must be instructed in each circumstance, he must have
a pattern as well as a duty; otherwise he will start and slip aside; he will
neither do it constantly, nor equally; he will do it, and omit it: Were he not
taught to do it as it is done in heaven, he would not do it at all. Were he not
commanded to be like the Angels in heaven, he would degenerate from himself,
and become worse than the beasts that perish. You see then this clause was not
added in vain, but is operatoria, as the Civilians speak, carries with it great
force and efficacy. And whether we interpret it of the material Spheres, quae
iterum eunt per quae venerant, as Seneca speaks, which are always in motion,
yet never alter their course; or of those super-coelestial Powers, the Angels,
those mystical wheels, as Dionysius calls them, turning themselves about in an
everlasting gyre of obedience; it must needs lift up our thoughts to this
consideration, That the performance of Gods will by us must be most exact and
perfect, heavenly and angelical; That we must make it our endeavor to be like
them as Angels here on earth, who make it our ambition to be equal to them in
heaven. I will not take those several interpretations I find, although I
censure none of them, especially since none of them swerve from the analogy of
faith, nor from that doctrine which was delivered to the Saints; and all of
them are profitable to instruction. You may take earth and heaven for the Flesh
and the Spirit, with St. Cyprian; or for Men, which are of the earth earthy,
and those celestial Orbs: for the Just and Wicked, with others, and thence
extract this Christian duty; To pray for your enemies. All these may be useful:
and with St. Augustine, I condemn no sense upon which any good duty may be
raised and built. But I rather understand, with the same Father, by heaven the
Angels, and by earth Men, because the words do best bear it, and we cannot take
a better pattern than the Angels. And in this sense we pray ut sint homines
similes Angelis, That Men may be as obedient to Gods will here in earth as
those blessed Spirits are in heaven, who readily fulfill all his commands. And
this is an holy ambition, in the performance of our duty to look upon the best,
Ambitio non respicit, says the Philosopher; True Ambition and Christian
Aemulation never look down upon those who are in the valley below, but on those
who are in culmine Sion, in the top of perfection. Optimi mortalium altissima
sapiunt, The best men look highest. Go to School to the Pismire, is a reproach,
as well as a precept. To learn of the Lilies of the field, is a task for those
who will not take notice of Gods providence at home in themselves. The examples
of good men are (...), helps and supplies to us in our way, and it is good to
have them continually before our eyes: But yet the best men being full of
imperfections. Luther tells us, Nihil est periculosius gestis Sanctorum, That
there is nothing more dangerous than the deeds and actions of the Saints,
because we are so prone to mistake them. Safer it is to take those actions of
theirs which were done beyond and without the authority of Scripture for
faults, than to set them up for examples. We may learn of Beasts, of the Ox and
of the Ass; we may learn of Men of the same mould with our selves: but the
safest and most excellent pattern we can take is from Heaven, the blessed
Angels, whose elogium it is, that they do God's commandments, and hearken unto
the voice of his word; that they Psalm. 103.
are his hosts, and ministers of his to do his pleasure. I will not trouble you
with any of those nice speculations of the Schools concerning the Nature,
Motion, Locality, Speech of Angels. For I always accounted it a grave and
judicious censure of Hilary, Stultum est calumniam in eo disputationis
intendere, in quo comprehendi id unde quaeritur per naturam suam non potest,
Lib. 3. de Trin. It is a great folly to make any anxious inquisition after that
which before we set out we know cannot be found. Of the Nature and Motion and
Locality of those blessed Spirits we have no light in Scripture: And if we
carry not this light along with us, we do but (...), make search for that which
is past finding out: We win no ground at all, but tantum deerit discere,
quantum libuerit in quirere, the more we search, the more we are at loss. But
because the Philosopher and common Reason teach us that he who will compare two
things together must necessarily know them both, and since we are in this
Petition taught to level our Obedience by this heavenly form, by the obedience
of Angels, though we cannot gain any certain knowledge of their Nature, Motion,
Locality, and Manner of conveighing their minds one to another (which
notwithstanding the Schools with more boldness than warrant have defined) yet
we shall find light enough to walk by and to direct our obedience, that it may
be like theirs, that we may strive forward to perfection, and do Gods will in
earth as it is in heaven.

First, we are taught that the word Angel is a name of office, not of nature.
Spirits they are always, but they cannot always be called Angels, but then
only when they are sent, says Gregory. And this office of theirs they execute
speedily and without delay. We will not positively say, with Parisiensis, that
their motion from place to place upon command is instantaneous, as sudden as
their Will, by which alone they move. But many expressions of their Swiftness
we have in Scripture. Zech. 1. 10. they are said to stand, as ready to hear and
dispatch Gods will; Isa. 6. to have wings and to fly. They are said to go forth
like lighning. Which note their prompt alacrity in executing all Gods commands.
Unum little solidumque officium est servire nutibus Dei, their office is ever to
be ready at Gods beck. This is a true and perfect pattern of a Christians
obedience. Festina fides, festina charitas, says Ambrose; Faith and Charity
are on the wing, Devotion is active, Obedience is ever ready to run the way of
Gods commandments. Though advice and deliberation commend other actions, yet in
this of Obedience, counsel is unreasonable, neither can there be any reason of
delay: Delicata est obedientia, quae transit in causae genus deliberativum,
says Petrus Blesensis, It is a nice obedience which takes time of
deliberation. For when the command is past, every moment after the first is too
late: nor can there be any need of deliberation in that action wherein all the
danger is not to do it. Fac quod tibi praeceptum est, says St. Cyprian to the
magistrate now ready to pass sentence of death upon him, but counselling him to
advise better; Do, says he, what you have commission to do; In so just an
action as this there is no need of consultation. Those that write of Husbandry
have a common precept, and Pliny calls it an oracle, SERRERE NE METUAS, Be not
afraid to cast thy seed into the ground; Delay not time. And their reason is
full of wisdom, Villicus, si unam rem sero fecerit, nihil proficit, The
Husbandman, if he do but one thing too late, has endangered the expectation of
the whole year, nor can he recover that loss. Negligentia enim multo operosior
diligentia; For neglect makes more business and trouble than Diligence; and
that which in time might have been done with ease and a quick hand, being put
off to a longer time, will either not be done at all, or require treble
diligence. It is so in our spiritual Husbandry; If our Obedience had wings or
feet, readily to put in execution what is commanded, we should find that of St.
John to be most true, His commands are not grievous. But Procrastination and
Delay does bemire and clog us, makes the command more horrid than that Death
which is threatened to disobedience; and we are ready to cry out it is
impossible. He who defers to do Gods will till death would not do it, says
Basil, if he were made immortal. But this is not to do his will here in earth
as it is in heaven.

Further, the obedience of the heavenly host is orderly. Qui minima nuntiant,
Angeli; qui summam annuntiant, Archangeli vocantur: There be Angels, which are
sent on messages of lesser moment; and there be Archangels, which declare
greater things, as Gabriel to the blessed Virgin. Nec tamen invident Angeli
Archangelis, says Augustine in his last book De Civitate Dei; yet no Angel
does envy an Archangel, nor an Archangel a Cherubim or Seraphim; nor desire
they to change offices, no more than my Finger desires to be an Eye. In respect
of the diversity of their ministry, says Hilary, the Angels and Archangels
and Thrones and Dominations have the observances of diverse precepts laid upon
them. And they differ not only in name, but in office. The Angel intrudes not
into the office of an Archangel, nor does an Archangel usurp the place of a
Cherubin or Throne, but every one is perpetually constant in his office, and
never fails. We cannot say our Pater noster, but we must needs conceive that
these blessed Spirits do their duties orderly: For there can be no confusion in
heaven. Nor indeed should there be any disorder in the Church of Christ; whose
government by Bishops, Priests and Deacons St. Maximus calls (...), an
imitation and fair resemblance of the celestial Hierarchy. As it is in the
Church triumphant in heaven, so should it be in the Church militant here on
earth. Order does (...), preserve and keep together both heaven and earth,
says Nazianzene. And therefore we may observe that all duties do not concern
all men. Some duties there are which are as ecumenical as the whole world;
others, more personal; Some, which if Corah attempt to do, he shall be buried
alive; if Uzzah, he shall be struck dead. Why should Sheba blow a trumpet, or
Absalom pull at his Fathers crown? Why should every artisan meddle in matters
of Divinity? every Mechanic teach Bishops how to govern, and Divines how to
preach? Why should he that handles the awl or the shuttle stand up and control
the Miter? Private persons who converse within a narrow sphere, must needs be
unskilful in things which fall not within the compass of their experience. Men
that meddle but with few things must needs be ignorant of much, and therefore
can never frame canons and rules. Paucorum est ut literati sint; omnium, ut
boni; Few men are fit for government; but there is scarce any of so shallow
conceit but he may be an honest man. Does any man go to a Physician to ask
advise in a point of Law? or to a Lawyer, when he is sick? Episcopus episcopum
non conculcet, That one Bishop should not usurp or meddle in another Bishops
Diocese, was one of the ancient Canon of the Church, and ought never to be
antiquated. Than Peace will crown the Church, and Plenty the Commonwealth, when
every man understands what is his place and station, and is not ready to leap
over it, and start into another function; when every Star knows his own
magnitude and sphere. This indeed were sicut in coelo, a heaven upon earth. For
the least place in the Church of Christ is a high preferment. Nor is there any
so low who may not be an Angel in his place to do Gods will; an Angel, though
not for power and dominion, yet an Angel for obedience. And it is not much
material, if I do the will of God, whether I do it as a Layman or as a
Clergyman; as poor Lazarus, or as rich Abraham; as a Peasant, or as a Prince;
at the Mill, or in the Throne. Only here is the difference; That duty which
concerns the Clergyman, the Layman must not tamper with; nor must the Peasant
teach the King to reign and govern. Remember what I told you out of St.
Augustine; Angelus non invidet Archangelo, The Angel does not envy to see
another Angel more glorious; nor does he desire a higher place. No: Superne
omnia serena sunt; in inferioribus fulminatur; All is serene and quiet above;
Thunders and disorders are in the lower region, here, in terra, on the earth.
And we have too much reason in the last and worst days to pray and pray again,
Fiat volunt as tua sicut in coelis, That God's will may be done on earth in
that peaceable order and quietness as it is in heaven. Will you know the reason
of these tumults and disorders? The reason is evident and plain. No man is
content with an Angels place, but would be an Archangel, a Throne, a Cherubim;
and yet neither Angel, nor Throne, nor Cherubim for their obedience, but only
for their power. Men desire, says Austine, to imitate those deeds of Angels
which beget wonder, but not that piety which gains eternal rest. Malunt enim
superbe hoc posse quod Angelus quam devote hoc esse quod Angelus, Lib. 8. De
Trinit. c. 7. Their Pride affects to do that which Angels do; but their
Devotion has not strength enough to beget any desire in them to be what the
Angels are, humble, reverent, obedient. Such Angels they would be as may be
Devils, but not such Angels as stand about Gods throne to praise him for
evermore. We conclude, and contract all in one word; If we bring weak desires
of doing Gods will, and think he will be well content with them, we have as
good reason to think that all the reward which we shall have from God will be
only a desire to do us good. If we be not active and speedy in the performance
of his will, why should he make haste to help us? Our Inconstancy is his
repentance: and when we fall from him, he is forced to break his word. If we do
it by halves, we have no reason to look for a full reward. If our obedience be
disorderly, we cannot hope to be companions of those Angels who do hate
confusion. But if we be cheerful and constant and perfect in our obedience, if
we abide in our own callings, and do the will of God orderly in that place
where he has ranked us, the Lord will come, and make no long tarrying; he has
sworn, nor will he go from it; and he will bring his reward with him, MERCEDEM
NIMIS MAGNAM, an exceeding great reward; and at last translate us from earth to
heaven, where we shall be made (...), equal to the Angels, in equality of
grace, though not of nature. I might have drawn-in many more particulars
concerning the Angels by which to direct our Obedience. But I never loved to
lease out a discourse, malens totum dicere quam omnia, desiring rather to speak
that which is most fit and pertinent than to take in all that might be said. I
shall now pass to the next Petition, Give us this day our daily bread.

The Six and Thirtieth SERMON. PART. I.
MATTHEW. VI. 11. Give us this day our daily Bread.
WE pass now from the three first Petitions, which looked up directly into
heaven upon the face of God, unto the three last, which look up indeed to
heaven also, upon the Giver of all things, but withal reflect upon our selves,
and on our present necessities. The first whereof is that I have read unto you,
GIVE US THIS DAY OUR DAILY BREAD. Before we come to handle which words, be
pleased to take notice of the method here laid down by our Savior for us to
regulate our Devotion by. Order and Method, as it makes the way easy and plain
to every design we take in hand, so it poises our Devotion. (...), says the
Historian, There is nothing so fair, nothing so commodious for use, as Order.
This is it which has given praeeminence to Aristotle above all the Writers
before him, that he brought Nature it self, and all Arts and Sciences, into a
certain order and method. Though men pursue knowledge with all eagerness and
heat of inquisition, yet, if they begin where they should end, they will be
always beginning, and never end; they will but operose nihil agere, take a
great deal of pains to be no wiser than they were: And though they strive
forwards, and pace over much ground, yet will they be farther off from their
wished end then when they made the first onset. Therefore what Vitruvius
requires in Architecture, is necessary in every work we undertake, especially
in our Prayers, that there be (...), order and disposition. There must be
nothing in our Devotion (...) or (...), ill disposed, or ill placed. For, as
the devout Schoolman tells us, that to incline too much to the sway of
Sensuality and neglect the direction of Reason, tam sensualitatem quam rationem
extinguit, so also in our Devotion and Orizons, if we place them on temporal
things and not spiritual; or on temporal before spiritual; they never reach the
mark, but fall short of both; they neither fill our hands with plenty, nor our
souls with that spiritual Manna. If we prefer Mammon before God, we may expect
to have leanness enter into our very souls, and to be punished not only with a
famine of bread, but of the Word of God also. The excellency of this method
appears from the vast distance not only between the Body and the Soul, but
also between that bread that perishes and that which nourishes us unto
everlasting life. This latter is that which alone can satisfy that infinite
appetite which God has placed in the soul of man. This is favorable to us and
benevolent; this admits at once satiety and desire; this works no
loathing. For here is the difference between temporal and spiritual blessings:
The one, when we have them not, kindle a desire in us; and being enjoyed,
quench that desire with loathsomness: But the other are never loathed but when
we have them not: when we have them, we more desire them. The more we feed, the
more we are a hungry: and yet, when we are most hungry, we are full and
satisfied. In illis appetitus placet, experientia displicet; in istis appetitus
vilis est, experientia magis placet, says Gregory. In temporal matters our
appetite pleases us, but experience is distastful: They are honey in the
desire, but in the taste gravel. But unto spiritual things our appetite commonly
is sick and queasy; but when we chew upon them, they are sweeter then the Honey
and the Honeycomb. They are gall to the appetite, but to the taste Manna. Much
more might be said on this subject, but let this suffice at present.

We proceed now to a particular application of the words of this Petition. And
every one of them is verbum operativum, full of force and efficacy, and has its
weight. We ask first for Bread; secondly for our bread; thirdly our daily
bread: fourthly we ask it not as a debt, but as a gift: fifthly and lastly, we
set a date as it were upon the petition, which puts a period to our care and
solicitude, and binds our desires within the narrow compass of a day, give it
us to day.

We begin with that which is the subject of our petition, Bread: which however
placed, yet in nature is first to be Handled. For we must first propose the
object and set it up as a mark, before we can carry our desires to it. First we
must know what is meant by Bread, or else for bread we may ask a stone.

And here I find this Bread multiplied, not by any miracle, but by the activity
of men's phansies, who have broke it out, and distributed it unto us: And if we
take it from their hands, we may fit down and eat, and of the very fragments
gather more then seven baskets full. Some take the word metaphorically, others
properly. Some take Bread in a spiritual sense, and that either first for the
bread of Righteousness, which Christians are to hunger and thirst after; or
secondly for the bread of the Word, which is (...), the bread of Angels, by
virtue of which we walk in the ways of righteousness all the days of our life,
and are nourisht up to an Angelical estate: or thirdly for that Bread which is
the WORD, even Christ himself, which whosoever eats shall never hunger; or
fourthly for Sacramental bread, which is consecrated and received in the holy
Communion, which the Fathers call (...), the holy and hallowed Bread; and
Ignatius, (...), the bread of God; and Eusebius, (...), the holy nutriment; or
fifthly and lastly, for that bread of eternal Life which we shall then eat when
we sit down with Abraham and Isaac and Jacob and all the blessed Saints, in the
Kingdom of Heaven. Quinque panes sunt necessarii, quatuor in via, quintus in
patria; There be five manner of loaves very necessary Matthew. 8. 11.
for us; four, whilst we travel here in our way; and the fifth at our journeys
end, in our country: four in this wilderness of the world, and the last in that
celestial Canaan: our corporal bread, to sustein us; our Spiritual, to inform
us; our Doctrinal, to instruct us; our Sacramental, to purge and cleanse us;
and the eternal bread of life, which the Father will give us, to make us happy.
(...), as St. Chrysostom used to speak, I embrace all Senses. For why should
not Righteousness be as our daily bread, to feed us? why should not we, with
Job, put it on, to clothe us and make it as a Robe and Diadem? Why should not
we thirst, as the Heart, after those waters which are drawn out of the Wells of
Salvation? Why should we not long for our (...), as the Fathers call the holy
Eucharist, for that holy Bread which is our provision and supply in our way?
And eternal Life is Hominis optimum, says St. Augustine, the best thing that
can befall man, the very consummation and crown of our desires. For every one
of these we may solicit the Majesty of heaven and earth, and press upon God
with a pious impudence and holy importunity; DANOBIS, PANEM HUNC DOMINE, Lord,
evermore give us of this bread, of the Bread of Righteousness, of the Bread
which thou breakest, of the Bread which thou art, of the Bread of thy Word, and
of the Bread of thy Sacrament, which are primitiae futuri panis, the
first fruits of the Bread of eternal Life, which God the Father shall
distribute with a full and bountiful hand to all his children in the world to
come. We reject none of these senses. Whether we take it in the metaphor, or
take it in the letter, we do not err, nor will our prayers return empty. For
if we regulate our devotion by the will of God, whatsoever we ask we shall
receive. Nor does the Goodness of God consider so much the gloss and
interpretation which we make as the affection which we bring. Yet I rather
admit of that signification which the word BREAD does first propose unto us.
Our discourse would be too much enlarged if we should follow and examine
metaphors, which are feracissimae controversiarum, very fruitful to engender
both discourse and controversy. Chrysostom does very seldom refer the word
Bread to the Sacrament: But in his Homily upon the Lords Prayer, deriving the
word (...) from (...), he calls it our daily bread, (...), that BREAD which is
turned into the very substance of our bodies. And Abulensis, upon Matthew. 6.
has proved by many reasons that that interpretation by which the Fathers
referred it to the Sacrament is far fetched and forced, and not so solid. And
it is most probable that our Savior by Bread in this Petition means both
food and ravment, and all other things whatsoever that tend to the sustentation
and support of this temporal life: Both Food and Raiment, I say. For though
Bread be a staff, yet without Clothes it will not uphold us: and though Lev.
26. 26. Isa. 3. 1.
Clothes be domus corporis, as Tertullian calls them, the house wherein the
Body dwells, yet without Bread the Body will sink to the ground, and pull the
house down with it. If we be either naked or hungry long, we know Psalm. 107. 5.
what follows, our soul will faint within us. The end therefore which moves us
to pray for Bread must be as a light to show us what that Bread is: Nec verba
tantum defendenda, sed ratio verborum constituenda; Nor must we so cleave to
the letter as to admit of no sense of larger compass than it is, but look
forward upon the end, which we may make gubernaculum interpretationis, as it
were a rudder to guide us, and to carry our interpretation straight and even.
The end of Bread is to nourish us and preserve life; but without Apparel it
will not have this operation; therefore we must necessarily here understand
both. With Bread our Garments are a shelter, and with Raiment Bread is a staff.

But this Bread here is not of compass large enough to take in the riotous fare
of the glutton, and the full cups of the drunkard, and it is much too narrow to
admit of excess and pride in apparel. Primum tegendo homini necessitas
praecessit, dehinc and ornando, imo and inflando ambitio successit, etc. says
the Father. If the Fathers lived now, how would they declaim against the luxury
of these our days! Shall I invite your eyes to look back upon the face of
Antiquity, and show you what commentary their Practice made upon their Pater
Noster, and what they esteemed Bread? And behold, instead of our soft beds,
they had only (...), and usually lodged themselves upon the cold earth. Instead
of our full tables, they had (...), and ate dried and parcht meats. Shall I set
before you a Monks feast out of Cassian? It is quictly done. The cates were,
Liquamen cum oleo, some Lard with Oil; Olives, every one three; Cicer frictum,
partch-Pease, every one five; and dried Figs, every one one. And these they
called trogalia, Junkets. All which might keep their stomach a work, but sure
not over-cloy the body. Vesci cocto, erat luxuria, says St. Hierom; To taste of
any thing that was boiled, was accounted great luxury. This was to them for
Bread. And for that other help of Garments, instead of our Silks and Gold and
fine Linnens, they had melotas and cilicia, their sheepskins and haircloth, in
which they wandered in Dens and Caverns of the earth; Tertullian went so far,
and it may be too far, that he thought it was not fit to supplicate God for our
sins in costly apparel; Number ergo in coccino and tyrio supplicare nos condecet?
says he; Is it fitting, think you, to pray to God in silk and scarlet? Cedo
acum crinibus distinguendis; Why then bring your crisping-pins, and your
pomanders; wash your bodies in costly baths, fill your selves with pleasant
meats and luscious Wines; and if any man ask you why you do so, Deliqui,
dicito, in Deum; You must needs make this answer, I have offended God, and am
in danger of eternal death; and therefore I thus afflict and torment my self,
that I may be reconciled to that God whom I have thus offended. Thus did that
holy Father whip the Luxury and Looseness of his time. For my self, I have no
power to enact leges sumptuarias, laws to restrain any either in their meat or
apparel. But methinks we cannot take our pattern better than from the purest
times, from the primitive Christians; who contented themselves with those meats
quae mortem arcerent, and delicias non ministrarent, which were antidotes
against death, but no philtra, no inticements to wantonness; Whose feasts were
not only chaste, but sober; Who received their bread with that modesty ut non
tam coenam coenarent quam disciplinam, that they seemed rather to have
exercised a part of their Christian discipline than to have met together at
their refection. And as I do not exact from every Christian that Monkish
strictness and severity, which notwithstanding I am not overhasty to condemn,
yet the least I can require at your hands is Nyssen's (...), frugality and
moderation, both in meats and apparel. And 1. bespeak you in St. Paul's words,
that having food and raiment, you will be therewith content, and 1 Timothy 6. 8.
count these as your daily bread. For, if we regard our bodies and the
sustentation of life, Bread is enough: and to repair this our tabernacle,
(...), says Basil, a very small care, is sufficient. Our Bread is a kind of
debt we owe it; but we must not pay more then the creditor will take: and when
we owe it but Bread, we must not take our Debt-book, and set down
Superfluities; when we owe it but one measure of wheat, take the bill, and set
down fifty. If we would abate our Superfluities in diet and apparel, we might
have enough for our selves, and something to spare for others; after we have
fed and clad our own bodies sufficiently, we might fill the bellies, and clothe
the backs of our poor brethren, and so relieve Christ our Head by supplying the
wants of our fellow members. Yea, by our sobriety and moderation in the use of
these things we shall keep both soul and body in good plight, free from those
distempers that naturally flow from Excess and Luxury. Munditia vestitus,
animae immunditia, says Hierome; They who are all for a gay outside must
needs be all foul and nastie within. For Nimia corporis cura, nimia animi
incuria, says another Father: Such as care for nothing but to make provision
for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, cannot put on the Lord Jesus
Christ, as the Apostle bids Romans 13. 14.
us. They who will still go brave, and drink deep, and feed high, and fare
deliciously every day, with the Glutton in the Gospel, are likely not only Luke
16.
to suffer Lazarus to starve at their doors, but also to pine and beggar their
own souls to eternity. It may seem somewhat strange that St. Paul calls Esau
(...), a fornicator and a profane person, since Moses no Hebr. 12. 16.
where records it: And Thalassius the Monk moves the doubt to Isidore
Pelusiote, lib. 1. Epist. who returns a ready answer, That it was no marvel
at all that he should sell his chastity, who first had sold his birthright for
a mess of pottage. For this Bread of Luxury does not only (...), as Aristotle
speaks, corrupt our health, but does aggravare animam, lays a burden upon the
soul, that she can neither take the wing, and raise her self in the
contemplation of God and his goodness, nor yet prompt the Eye or Hand or Tongue
to do those offices for which they were created. It makes her (...), weaker,
says Clemens, and (...), slower, (...), weak, senseless, stupid. For quorum
corpora saginata, eorum animi in macie, When the body is too full, straight
leanness enters into the soul.

I may seem perhaps to have divided this Bread with too sparing a hand. I will
therefore give you the whole Loaf; and more I cannot give you. And by Bread
here we will understand that provision, that wealth, those necessaries which
every particular man's calling requires, or which may fit that place which he
bears either in Church or Commonwealth. For I am not so strait-laced as to
imagine that every Artificer should be furnished as richly as a Nobleman, or
that every Nabal should make a feast like a King. Not the same measure and
proportion for Joab the Captain of the Host and for David the King, for
Shaphan the Chancellor and for Josiah, for Gellio the Deputy and for Caesar
the Emperor. It is true, in many respects there is no difference between man
and man, but all are equal. We have all one Father, who has made of one blood
all nations of men. And as we Matthew. 2. 10. Acts 17. 26.
are all made of one mold, so are we all bought with the same price. The soul
of him that sits on the throne cost Christ no more then did the soul of him
that grindeth at the mill. All are one in Christ Jesus. All true Gal. 3. 28.
Christians have the same holy Spirit to sanctify and guide them, all have an
army of holy Angels to pitch their tents about them; all are spiritual Kings
and Priests; all are now vessels of grace, and shall hereafter be vessels of
glory. And at the day of doom the great Judge will not look who lies in a
winding sheet, and who in a sheet of lead; nor will he pardon this man because
he was a King, and condemn that other because he was a Beggar. Yet for all
this, he has made up his Church here not of Angels but of Men, who live in the
world, and therefore must live under Government. Ecclesia non subvertit regna.
The Church and Secular powers stand not in opposition, but so well suit and
sort together that God has left this as a blessing unto his Church, and part
of her dowry, That Kings should be her nursing fathers, and Queens her nursing
mothers. Now Kingdoms and Commonwealths Isa. 49. 23.
cannot be governed and maintained unless there be a disparity of persons and
places. It has pleased God therefore to dispense his gifts in a wonderful
variety amongst the children of men, that so they might be fitted for several
professions and callings; men of ordinary fashion and parts for lower and
meaner vocations, to handle the Plough, or the Spade, or the Flail, or the
Sheep-hook, to trade in the Shop, or to traffic by Sea, or to serve in the
Wars: but (...), as the Philosopher calls men of more then ordinary
endowments, choice, active persons, picked out of thousands, these deserve to
become famous in their generations, to attend on Princes, to bear office in
Court, or Camp, or Church, or Commonwealth. Sic opus est mundo: There is a
necessity of disproportion between men and men. Nihil enim aequalitate ipsa
inaequalius; For there is no greater disproportion in the world then in a body
politic to have all the parts equal. Being so, it cannot long subsist. Indeed
some fantastic persons have long talked of a Parity and Community: but it is to
make themselves supreme, and the greatest Impropriators in the world. For were
the world so weak as to yield to their holy counsel and advice, you should then
see these ravenous Wolfes strip themselves of their lambsskins, and (...),
openly, before the Sun and the People, invest themselves with that power which
they cry down for Antichristian. Sint pares, protinus erunt superiores; Let
them part stakes, and they will have all: Let them be your equals, they will
soon be your superiors: and give them but leave to stand on even ground with
you, and they will before you can be aware of them lay you level with the
ground. Now a Hezekiah is no better than a Senacherib, a Constantine than a
Julian: every King is a Tyrant; every Bishop, Antichrist; no Guide, but the
Spirit; no Court, but Heaven; no lash, but that of Conscience: Meum and Tuum
are harsh words in the Church. Almost of the mind of the Carpocratians in
Clemens, who, because the Air was common, would have their Wives so too. Quid
verba audio: These words are most notoriously false and deceitful. For did they
once rerum potiri, could they but shift the scene, and return back clothed
with that power and jurisdiction which they libel, their own writings, which
most barbarously call for the blood and lives of men for no other reason, but
because they cannot be fools enough to be of their opinion, show what meek and
gentle spirits we should find them. Now, No King, No Bishop, No Government; But
then they will reign as Kings: Their little fingers would be bigger then the
most cruel Tyrants loins; and we, who before did not feel so much as a scourge,
by these unhallowed Saints should be whipped with Scorpions.

But I must not stray too far out of my way to follow Thieves. I leave them to
the mercy and justice of God, who in his due time will either work their
conversion, or confound their devilish practices and machinations. To proceed
then: God does give every man his portion of bread. He did so in the beginning
of the world, before the Flood; he did so in the restitution of the world,
after the Flood; when that which every man first laid hold on was made his
possession, which none could wrest from him, but by tort and violence and
wrong. Had men indeed retained that (...), that simplicity and planeness, which
they had at first, they had contented themselves with the water of the springs
and those fruits which the earth did naturally bring forth: But when this
failed from the sons of men (as it was not of long continuance) then there was
a necessity -- signare and partiri limite campum, for every man to become a
proprietary of that which fell unto him either by express covenant, and by
division, or in a more silent manner by occupation. And this though God did not
command, yet he has set his seal to it, and made it authentic. He gives the
land of Canaan to the Israelites. He calls upon them to make their Hin and
Ephah right. He calls false balances an abomination. He pronounces many woes
against that Oppression which grinds the face of our neighbor. He sends his
Prophet to meet Ahab as he was going to take possession of Naboth's vineyard,
and to tell him that in the place where dogs did lick the blood of Naboth, dogs
1 Kings 21.
should lick his blood also. And as it was then, so is it now, even in
Christianity. Every man has his Bread, those possessions which fall unto him
either by inheritance, or gift, or purchase, or corporal labor and industry:
Nor can any thing divide them from him but the hand of Violence, or his own
hand, when Compassion and Charity stretch it forth to help his brother in
distress. And therefore St. Augustine tells us that the Church of God is formed
ex divitum pauperumque concordia, of the concord of these two, the Rich and the
Poor; as Plato says that Love had its being by the marriage of (...) and
(...), Abundance and Want. We read indeed Acts 2. 44.
that the first Christians had all things common: But this, though it were most
laudable in them, does no more bind us than the command Christ gave his
Apostles does, to have no shoes, to be content with one coat, etc. I will not
press this further. For I do not love to quarrel for my Bread, and had rather
want it then be too careful for it. But this Bread, as it is ours, so is it
PANIS CHRISTI, Christ's Bread and patrimony. Panis Christi est perdulcis panis,
could that Atheistical Norman say, The Bread of Christ is very sweet bread,
when he sold the Bishoprics and Dignities of his Church. All that I intend is
this, to show that we may ask for all those necessaries which belong to our
place and calling, and that that wealth and provision which fits every man's
person, either in Church or Commonwealth, is his Bread. The Kings Dominions,
the Noble-mans Lordships, the Trades-mans wealth, and the Church-mans Tenth,
Abraham's Jewels, Joseph's ring and fine linen, David's changes of apparel,
Jonathans purple, the Princes royal robes, the Nobles mantle, the Churches
vestments, may all go under this name. A rich estate may be my Bread, and a
mean estate may be my Bread: The one Contempt turns ino a stone; the other,
Envy. Toll jactantiam, and quid sunt omnes homines nisi homines? Take away
boasting and vainglory, and what are all men but Men? Take away Envy, and the
richest man is as low as the poor; take away Pride, and the poorest man is as
high as the rich. We know some disgrace in all ages has been thrown on Wealth,
as if it were more than Bread. But for the most part we may observe this has
rather proceeded from love than hatred of riches. Many men have fallen upon the
distaste of them as Lovers upon dislike of their Mistresses, when they cannot
fill and satisfy their desire; they change it into deadly hatred, and think it
revenge enough to execrate that which at first they doted on. For certainly the
Rich man may dispense his Bread as well as the Poor. Christ is poor in the
beggar, but the rich man relieveth him: he is cold in the naked, but the rich
man clothes him: he lies wounded by the way side, but the rich man has oil and
wine to pour into his wounds, and a piece of money to pay for his cure: he is
imprisoned in the poor, but the rich man sets him at liberty. We know men have
feared Poverty more than Death; and yet there is indeed no such horror in it.
It was happy to Tellus, affected of Diogenes, sought for by Crates, glorious to
Epaminondas, just to Aristides. It is that wealth which Christ entitled to
happiness. It is a vain thing, and savours of great ingratitude, but a common
error in the world, for men to think themselves contemptible in low places, to
struggle and strive as if they were in fetters, and to complain as if they had
not their Bread. Art thou called being a Servant? care not for it, says St.
Paul: For he that is a servant, may be the Lords freeman. And he that is poor,
may be the Lords rich man, and confer that on Christ which the rich man cannot,
his Patience and Contentation. Perdidit paupertatem, qui nondum hoc didicit. He
has made no use of his Poverty who has not learnt to be poor: And he is
bankrupt of his Riches who knows not how to abound. He has lost his Poverty
who cannot make it Bread; and he has cankred and corrupted his Wealth who
makes it more. Thus may Poverty become riches; and the rich poor. Thus may we
hold a community even in a propriety, and observe a just proportion in an
equality. Some may have more Bread, but every man enough. Thus may our Bread be
turned into Manna. For as the Israelites gathered the Manna, so do we our daily
Exodus 16. 16.
bread: We gather it every man according to his eating; every man according to
the number of our persons, and dignity of our places; every man for them which
are in his tents. The King has his Omer and Measure; the Nobleman, his; the
Priest, his; the Tradesman, his; the Landlord, his; and the Farmer, his: But
when we mete it out, when we make use of that Bread which we pray for, he that
gathers much has nothing over, and he that gathers little has no lack;
but every man gathers according to his eating, prays for that proportion which
his place in Church or Commonwealth exacteth. And thus much be spoken
concerning the nature and extent of that which we are taught here in this
Petition to pray for. We should now pass along to that which follows, and more
particularly enquire why it is called Ours, and why our daily bread. But this
we shall begin with the next Term.

The Seven and Thirtieth SERMON. PART. II.
MATTHEW. VI. 11. Give us this day our daily Bread.
WE have heretofore showed you what is meant by Bread in this Petition. We
proceed now to enquire in the next place why we are taught to beg our bread,
and to show how it is ours. And we shall find it to be a question most
necessary. For, Possidentis melior est conditio in causa impari, is the worlds
axiom; He that possesses any thing makes it his, though he have least right to
it. And though we call them Impropriators who detain the Church-patrimony in
their Sacrilegious hands, yet most men are guilty of this crime, though their
hands were never defiled with that pitch. Paul is ours, and Cephas is ours, and
Christ is ours, and all is ours. 1 Cor. 3. 22.
Christ is ours, when we crucify him: The Prophets are ours, when we persecute
them: The Apostles and Messengers of Christ are ours, when we rob and spoil
them: The bread of Deceit, the bread of Oppression, the bread of Idleness is
ours: And, as Macrobius speaks of his book, Omne nostrum, and nihil nostrum;
All is ours, when nothing is ours.

This word then, NOSTER, Our bread, is verbum vigilans, a word awake, full of
fruitful admonitions, full of efficacy, to pull our hands out of our bosom to
labor for our bread; to keep our hands from robbery and oppression from
picking and stealing, from fraud and deceit, to stretch forth our hands to cast
our bread upon the waters; to work in us those three Christian virtues,
Industry, Honesty, and Liberality; that so our Bread may be indeed ours; Ours,
though Gods gift, even the work of our hands; Ours, by lawful purchase and
possession; and Ours, that is, not Mine or Thine, but in commune, for the
common good, the good of our brethren. Otherwise, though the windows of heaven
open and shower it down, though the Sword and the Bow bring it in as a prey,
though our Policy and Craft beat it upon any anvil, it is not ours: But the
faster we hold it, the less it is ours. That Bread which we knead with the
sweat of our brows; that which we gain sine fuco and fallaciis, more majorum,
without fraud and cousenage, according to the simplicity of the ancients and
better times; that which we give and distribute to our brethren, that is truly
our Bread.

And first, we must not think, as he said of Victory, that this Bread will fall
into our bosom, sedendo and votis, by sitting still, and wishing for it? We are
wont to feed our selves with this vain conceit both in spiritual and temporal
matters. When we read of the sudden and strange conversion of Paul and some
others, and how Solomon's great wisdom cost him but the price of his prayers, we
are too apt to think that it may be so with us, that we may be happy and
virtuous sine pulvere and sole, without enduring either wind or weather; that
though we strive not at all, yet the Grace of God will be sufficient for us.
And this conceit has brought that poverty and leanness into many men's souls,
which we may bewail with tears of blood, but not remove with a flood of
eloquence; it having taken so deep root, that when we cry it down, we are
counted bringers in of new Doctrine, and are rather wondered at than believed.
The same conceit is alike dangerous in the things of this life, which are Gods
blessings as well as the other, though but of his left hand. Metellus in
Gellius speaks indeed but like an heathen man, who knew not God: but we may
gather instruction from his words: Dii immortales plurimum possunt; sed non
plus velle nobis debent quam parents; The Gods, says he, can do all things
for us; but there is no reason they should wish more good to us than our
parents do. Now parents, if their children persevere stubbornly in evil
courses, in idleness and prodigality, do not still supply them, but disinherit
them of all. So says he. Iisdem Deos propitios esse aequum est, qui sibi
adversarii non sunt; We cannot in common equity expect that God should be
propitious and favorable to those who are enemies to themselves; that he
should make him sober who in the very act of drunkenness makes a godly prayer;
that he should make him just, who does but desire it; or him honest, who
resolves to be a knave. To apply it to our present purpose; We cannot expect
that God should give him a plenteous harvest who will not plow for cold, that
he should reach him food who will not pluck his hand out of his bosom to
receive it, or give him bread who will not labor for it, qui neque pluviam
neque solis aestum sentit, who neither feels the rain nor the heat of the sun.
Nunquid ideo non debet homo facere quod debet, quia Deus facit quod vult? Those
fruits of the earth, which as the Civilians speak, are not industriales, but
naturales, which Nature brings forth out of the womb of the earth without the
midwifery of man's Industry, even those come not forth so kindly and plentifully
without our labur. We dress and prune and dung our plants, or else our Autumn
will not answer our hopes. Look upon the vineyard of the slothful; It is all
grown over with thorns, and nettles cover Pro. 24. 30, 31.
the face of it. The worm does eat their Plants, and the locust consume them.
Therefore Labor comes sub necessitate praecepti, says Aquinas, under the
binding necessity of a law; It is not only a bare and naked condition without
which we shall not have our food and raiment; but is enjoined as a duty, that
we may have them. And he gives the reason; Quod ordinatur ad finem, a fine
necessitatem habet; That which is ordained to an end, has a necessity from
that end to which it is ordained. And if that be necessary, it is also
necessary. If we will live, we must eat; and if we will eat, we must labor. He
that will not labor, let him not eat, says the 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
Apostle. It is true, Man lives not by bread only, but by the word of his
mouth, by his blessing, that strengthens it. The blessing of the Lord, that is
it which makes rich. But he that blesses thy basket and thy bread, requires
Prove. 10. 22.
thy labor: And he will first bless thy labor, that it shall bring thee in
plenty of Bread; and thy Bread, that it may nourish thee. He will make thy
labor fruitful, and thy Bread a staff. All Christian Commonwealths should be
the Isreal's of God: and in his Israel as he promised there should be some poor
on whom to exercise charity, so he ordained there should be Deuteronomy. 15. 11.
no lazy idle beggar, as some understand that Deuteronomy. 15. 4. (...), Let there be
no beggar in the Commonwealth, says Plato in his Book De Legibus, where he
gives the most exact Idea of a Republic. The Civil Laws have flat
constitutions against Idleness, in the Titles DE MENDICANTIBUS NON INVALIDIS,
Of strong and sturdy Vagabonds. The Athenians punished Sloth in public, ut
facinorosae ita erubescendae ream culpae, as a most odious and shameful crime.
And amongst the Romans, siquis agrum indiligenter curabat, non sine poena fuit;
He that did not manure his ground, or not dress his vineyard, came under the
authority of the Censors. Nay, siquis equum habuit gracilentum, says Gellius,
if any man had but a lean horse, he was straight noted and censured for
negligence. In the art of Tillage and Husbandry not only private men, but those
also who had born office in the Commonwealth of Rome did exercise themselves.
The Curii, the Coruncani, the Fabricii, after conquests and triumphs, inter
aratra vivebant; and ne virtus quiet languesceret, triumphales senes
rusticabantur, as Latinus Pacatus speaks; They went to the plough; and, that
their virtue might not faint and languish through idleness and luxury, they
left the City, and betook themselves to their Country-labors, more happy and
glorious at their Farms than in the Capitol. Hence old Cato in the beginning of
his Book De re rustica tells us, Virum bonum cum laudabant, ita laudabant,
BONUM AGRICOLAM, BONUM COLONUM; When they commended a good man, they would say
he was a good husbandman. We read of the Indian Gymnosophists in Apuleius;
that when for dinner the table was spread, the Masters called the younger men,
and asked them what good they had done a lucis ortu ad illud diei, from the
rising of the Sun to that time of the day. One replies that he had been an
umpire or arbitratour between two that had fallen out, and had made them
friends; another, that he had obeyed the command of his parents, and been busy
in what they employed him; a third, that he had gained some new conclusion. Qui
nihil affert cur prandeat, extruditur impransus; He that could bring nothing
why he should sit down, was thrust out without a dinner. Behold here a plain
interpretation of St. Paul's words made by those who never heard of Christ. For
if Scripture were silent, Reason it self will suggest thus much, that it is fit
that Drowsiness should be clothed with rags, and that the idle soul should
suffer hunger. He that will not work in his youth, suae senectuti acriorem
hiemem parat, could the Comedian say, must needs expect a most sharp winter in
his age.

If I thought the Sluggard would hear me, I would tell him that his laziness
dulls and slugs his prayers, that they cannot mount to heaven to bring down any
blessing; that he gives himself the lie whilst he prays, Give us our bread;
that though he have bread, and more than enough, yet his idleness turns it into
stones and gravel, and fills him with the gall of asps; that he eats not his
own bread, because that he eats was not gotten with the work of his own hands
and the sweat of his own face; that, though he spoil not those who pass by, and
take their purse by force and violence, yet he is a thief and a robber. He is a
Thief, say the Civilians, qui rem contractat alienam, who handles that which
is none of his. Nay, the Ancients were so strict as to reckon him in the number
qui mutuo ad aliam rem atque accepit usus est, who uses that which he borrows
to another purpose then for which it is lent him. Certainly then the Sluggard
may be arraigned and condemned as guilty of Robbery: For he rosteth that which
he never took in hunting, and eats that bread which cost him no labor. He is
Felo de se, and robs himself. For though he be rich and have store of bread,
yet his Laziness will moulder it to nothing, will shake the very foundation of
his estate, and undoubtedly bring him to beggary. He robs also the
Commonwealth: For a most true axiom it is, Interest reipublicae ut quis re
sua been utatur, every man's careful husbanding of his private estate is
advantageous to the whole body public. Yea, the Sluggard robs his own soul.
For Slothfulness casts him into so deep a sleep, that it may be said of him as
St. Paul says of the wanton widow, He is dead while he lives. 1 Timothy 5. 6.
Ephesians. 4. 28.
Men and brethren are these things so? Must we labor with our hands the thing
that is good? Must our Hand be busy as well as our Tongue? If we work not, are
we guilty of theft and rapine? How many then are there in the world who have
food enough, and yet eat not their own bread? First, those cloistred Monks and
Friars who have left the World, but it is as many men leave Virtue and
Learning, not that they hate and loath either, but because (...), the way that
leads to them is hard and rough, because they cannot be obtained without sweat
and industry. We may truly say with Luther, Monachos igna via fecit. I speak
not of those ancient Monks who lived upon the labor of their hands, such as St.
Augustine describes Lib. 1. De moribus Ecclesiae, who had so far estranged
themselves from the world that to some they seemed res humanas plus quam
oportet deseruisse, to have exceeded and done more than they ought. Yet
notwithstanding they labored hard in manual trades, brought what they had
wrought to those whom they called their Deans, that that which before had cost
them so much labor, might not now put them to the business of a thought. (...),
by spinning and making of cloth, they provided for themselves and for the poor,
usque adeo ut onerarias etiam naves in ea loca mitterent quae inopes incolunt,
insomuch that (...), bringing their works to perfection, they laded whole ships
with the works of their hands, and conveyed them to those places where the
needy did inhabit. No: I am so far from censuring these that I wish every rich
man's house were such a Monastery. But those who came after bore the name of
Monks, but indeed had nothing but the name; umbraculo malae disciplinae se
contegentes, says Augustine, Lib. De opere Monachorum; covering their idleness
and luxury under the shadow and covert of a Monastical life and solitary
devotion; under pretense of poverty seizing into their hands the wealth and
riches of the world; removing themselves from barren places into the fattest
places of the Land, from solitary Deserts into most frequented Cities; turning
their poor Cottages into stately Palaces, their true fasting into formalizing
and partial abstinence: So that they left not the world for Christ, but under
pretense of Christ they gained the world, (...), as Nazianzene speaks.
Therefore they were justly misliked both by St. Hierome, in his Epistle to
Rusticus, and by St. Augustine in his work before mentioned. And this their
lazy Devotion they maintained by Scripture. They had read that the fowls of the
air neither sow nor reap, and thence Mat. 6. 26.
they defended not only their Sloth but also their Pride and Arrogance. It is
true, says the Father, the fowls of the air neither sow nor reap: but why do
they not read forward, nec congregant in apothecas, nor carry into the barn?
Will they be like the fowls? Why then do they fill their garners with other
men's labors? Hoc aves non faciunt; The birds do not thus, cur molunt and
coquunt? Why do they grind and boil their corn? This the birds do not do. Why
do they lay up for the morrow? why do they invent delicate dishes? This the
birds do not do. In Idleness they will be Birds, or Lilies, or any thing; but
in luxury and gluttony (...), beasts, yea, worse than any beast. They pretend
they employ their time in reading of Scripture; and do they not find in the
Scripture that he that will not labor shall not eat? What folly and perversity
is this, under pretense to have time to read, to take no time to obey any truth
that they do read?

But to let these pass, as out of our Horizon; another sort of Christians there
are who, though they labor for their Bread, because they love it well, though
they rise up early, and lie down late, and eat the bread of sorrow, to gain
that bread which perishes, yet do not think that God is thereby served, but
conceive that he rewards our labor only with Bread. They cannot thrive, they
think, unless twice or thrice in the week they leave their Shop and go up to
the Temple; what? with the Pharisee, to pray? No; but with the Hypocrite to
hear a Sermon. Without this ear-devotion they cannot thrive. And indeed many,
we see, thrive not because of this; and so starve the whole body to feed and
delight the ear. They call it Devotion, but it is the wantonness and luxury of
the Ear, which wastes their Devotion, and at last their Wealth, and many times
makes them sell their Bibles to buy their Bread. So that Demosthenes counsel
may seem here very seasonable, (...), to do the first cure upon the ear; where
this disease may dwell which is so dangerous both to our present and future
estate. I speak not this to disharten or discountenance any who are frequent
hearers of the Word, who thirst and hunger after this spiritual food; I know,
as the Wiseman speaks, that God has given us eyes, and Eccl. 17. 6.
ears, and a heart to understand. And I approve that of Tertullian, Vera
ornamenta aurium, voces Dei, that the best Jewels we can hang in our ears are
the words and oracles of God. And we are so far from condemning of frequent
hearing, that when you fill the Church, though we cannot see your hearts, yet
we make it a great part of our glory and joy. But give me leave to tell you;
Religion is not confined to the Ear, nor is it a prisoner to so narrow compass
as to be shut up in the Temple. If you will entertain her, she will come and
dwell with you in your private houses and shops; She will walk with you in the
streets and fields, sit down with you at your meals, lie down with you in your
beds, and rise up with you in the morning. The Husbandman, whilst he holds his
plow, may chant forth a Hallelujah: They they work with their hands may sing
the songs of Sion, and ipsum laborem tanquam divino celeusmate consolari, and
ease their labors and rowse up their spirits with this heavenly noise, as the
mariners do when they draw up the anchor. Religion will sit with the King in
his throne, and with the Judge on the bench: It will accompany the Preacher as
well in his Study as in the Pulpit, and the Tradesman as well in his Shop as
in the Church. It is a dangerous error to think that when we sweat in our trade
and calling we do not serve God, and that we are not holy but in the Church.
Nothing can defile and pollute the inward man but an impure and impious life
and conversation. To take off this imputation: As the Devil culls out his
disciples when they are idle, so our Savior chose his when they were busy at
their trade, either casting or else mending their nets. Nay, he himself stooped
to a trade, and was a Carpenter, or, as Justin Martyr tells us, a Plough*
wright: He made (...), ploughs and yokes. When the Heathen laid it as an
imputation on Christianity that they were infructuosi in negotiis, idle and
unprofitable to the Commonwealth, Tertullian replies that it was an injurious
and forged accusation. Look, says he, into your prisons: You see no Christian
there. And if you do find a Christian there, the fact that laid him there could
be none but this, That he was a Christian: NON SINE FORO, NON SINE MAGELLO; We
have our Marketplace; we have our Shambles; we have our Shops; we have our
Fairs. NAVIGAMUS VOBISCUM, ET MILITAMUS, ET MERCAMUR; We sail with you, we
traffic with you, we go to war with you. SI CEREMONIAS VESTRAS NON FREQUENTO,
ATTAMEN ET ILLA DIE HOMO SUM; If we do not frequent your costly and
superstitious ceremonies, yet even then are we men. Nor are we less Christians
because we work for our bread, and labor to supply our selves with food and
raiment. Christian Religion, like Manna in Wisd. 16 21.
the desert, complyeth with every taste, with every trade and occupation. Art
thou called to be an Husbandman, and to till the earth? She will help thee to
fill thy barn, and granaries. Do thou follow Merchandise? She will travel
with thee, and, like the Merchants ships, she will bring thee food from afar.
Art thou a Soldier? She will fight with thee. It is a part of our Religion to
pray for our bread; and it is a part of our Religion to make it ours by labor.
It is an old fallacy of that great Sophister the Devil; Salvation is the gift
of God; which is most sure: Therefore we need not work it out; which is most
false. And, God opens his hand, and gives us bread: This we may build upon:
But, Therefore we need never sweat for it to make it our own. This if we trust
upon, we may be starved to death.

It is high time to leave the devout Sluggard. Give me leave now to salute the
idle Gallant and the swaggering Ruffian, men who are inter pectinem speculumque
occupati, taken up between the comb and the g^ass, qui malunt rempublicam
turbari quam comam, who had rather the whole Commonwealth should be distracted
than one hair of theirs stand out of its place; who spend their whole time aut
aliud, aut nihil, aut male agendo; men of no calling, no profession at all.
They walk and talk away their time. They plow not, they spin not, yet they fare
deliciously, and are gorgeously apparelled, as trim as Solomon on the throne,
or as the Lilies in the field. How can one choose, when he meets these silken
things, but fall down and worship them? Nay, rather we will be bold to tell
these painted Sepulchers, these unprofitable burdens of the earth, who have
nothing generous in themselves but their Names, nothing noble in their houses
but the Pictures of their Ancestors, That their bread is not their own; That
the vilest servant they keep, even he that sits with the dogs of their
flocks, deserves his food and raiment better than they; That the Ox may
lawfully feed, when they should be muzzled. I know they will reply, That they
are born to lands and riches; that what they have is their own by inheritance;
that they abound with bread, and therefore need not labor for it. I do not bid
them take a Sheep-hook in their hands, yet Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob were
Shepherds; nor the Ax and the Saw, yet Joseph, yea Christ himself, was a
Carpenter; nor the Awl and the Last, yet some Philosophers, says Augustine,
have done the office of a Cobbler: but yet I cannot think that God gave them so
much Bread to make them idle, did so much for them that they themselves should
do just nothing, or, which is worse then nothing, make themselves gallant and
boisterous fools. Cain and Abel were better born then they; heirs apparent of
the whole earth, yet both of them had their employment in their several
vocations. Why should any then, because of Gentile or Noble extraction, count
himself privileged and exempt from labor, and to have license to do nothing,
but eat and drink and snort and sport? There be other Arts besides mechanical,
as the art of Living well, the art of Hospitality, that oeconomical art of
Wellordering ones household. These the greatest ought to learn and follow: And
thus doing they will show themselves thankful to God for his great bounty, and
they will not eat the bread of Idleness, but their own Bread.

Now in the next place, though Labor fill our basket, yet Honesty and
Integrity of conversation is that which gives us firm possession, and makes us
Lords and Proprietaries of that Bread we gather. Many labor, and rise up
early, and lie down late, and eat the bread of sorrow, yet eat not their own
bread. There is nothing that has esteem amongst men, whether good or bad, but
is sold for Labor and Industry. (...), says St. Basil. All things in this are
alike. Even those things which make us slaves to the Devil are bought with
difficulty and vexation of spirit: And many times laboriosior est hujus mundi
amor, says Gregory, men are more busy to destroy themselves than others are
to work out their salvation. The Adulterer waits and watches for the twilight,
studies to find out occasions and opportunities to satisfy his inordinate
lust. The Thief breaks his sleep, and lurks in the dark. Quibusdam somnum
rixa facit, says the Poet: and Solomon interprets it Prove. 4. 16. Some there
be that cannot sleep unless they have done mischief; and their sleep is taken
away, unless they cause some to fall. Tertullian limits and restrains that of
the Apostle, Let every man work with his own hands, that he may eat his own
bread: For if every one who labors with his own hands may be defended by
this, credo and ipsos latrones manibus agere quo vivant, Certainly even
thieves, says he, do labor with their hands for their bread; Falsarios utique
non pedibus, sed manibus operari; They who forge writings, and falsify
evidences, do it not with their feet, but with their hands: Histriones vero non
manibus solis, sed totis membris, victum elaborant: Stage Players themselves
may go for Apostolical, who labor for their bread not with their hands alone,
but with their tongues and every member of their body. It were even a labor to
show the diverse arts and inventions men have found out to work out their way to
meet the wealth and riches of the world, and that even amongst those who go
under the name of Christians. For, if we please to observe it, we shall easily
find that there are not any two things of more different and unlike countenance
and complexion than that Christianity which is commended to us in the writings
of the Apostles and Evangelists, and that which goes for current in use and
practice of the times. He that shall behold the true face of a Christian as it
is deciphered and painted out unto us in the Books of the New Testament, and
unpartially compare it with that copy and counterfeit which is expressed in the
life and demeanor of common Christians, will think them no more like than
those shields of Gold which Solomon made were unto those of brass which
Rehoboam placed in their stead; and may think perhaps that the writers of those
Books had brought vota magis quam praecepta, had rather phansied to themselves
some admirable pattern of a Christian, such as they could wish, than delivered
rules and laws which seriously and truly ought to be practiced in common life
and conversation.

To walk honestly is that which must regulate our Devotion, must give us right
and title to that we possess, must make our wealth, our possessions, our lands
PANEM NOSTRUM, our bread. This is commended to us by Nature it self, and by the
Religion which we profess: And yet, I know not how, though we cannot quite
banish Nature, though we cannot utterly blot out those principles of Honesty,
yet many times we interline them with false glosses, though we cannot race them
out, yet we blurr and deface them. We draw false consequences from true
principles; we hunt out tricks and evasions, but it is to cheat and delude our
own souls. And now what talk we of the Law of Nature? If you read it in the
Worlds corrupt edition, if unjust man may be the Scholiast, thus it runs,
INJURIAM FEGISSE, VIRTUTIS EST, To do injury, is virtue; To oppress, is power;
Craft is policy, Theft frugality; and the greatest wisdom, not to be wise unto
salvation. And as we slip off the bridle of Nature, and as much as we can
unlearn that law which is written in our hearts, so we are as willing to pull
our necks out of the easy yoke of the Gospel. For a strange conceit is at this
day crept into the world, and it receives warmth in the bosom of the Church,
That how regardless soever we be of those seeds of goodness, how forgetful
soever of common honesty, yet for all that we may be Christians good enough.
But as Tertullian speaks of the heathen Gods, Quot potiores viri apud inferos?
certainly there is many an honester man in Hell than they. They talk big
against the world, which is the worse for them: and out of Sodom they will go,
though they have no other Angel to hasten them than an idle fancy and the
spirit of a sick and loathsome brain, nor have any thing of Lot unless it be
his incest. It is a wonder to see what gifts of temperance, of natural
conscience, of justice and moral uprightness, did remain not only in the books
but in the lives and conversation of many heathen men. I know not how they had
Honesty without Faith, but we have Faith enough (we talk of nothing else) but
little Honesty. And indeed as many ungoverned men are the worse for the many
helps they have, and would love themselves better had they not so many friends,
so we Christians prodimur auxiliis, are betrayed by our prerogatives, and are
sick of our own strength, of Faith, and the Hope of mercy in Christ. This is, I
presume, the cause why so many Christians out-go Barbarians, Turks and Infidels
in fraud and villainy. And therefore as the Honesty of the Heathen without
Faith, so our Faith without Honesty shall be but as the Rainbow was to them
before the Flood, for show, but no use at all. And indeed this is but to
deceive our selves. For neither Faith nor Hope, especially as they are opera
intellectus, phansied in the brain, but Honesty and Integrity entitles us to
the promises of this life, and of that which is to come, and makes the good
things we enjoy to be our Bread. Though we mourn like doves, and wash our beds
with our tears, though we wish our head a fountain of tears to bewail the sins
of the people; though we tread the courts of the Lord, and nail our ears to the
Pulpit; yet after all this ceremonious piety a false measure at home, a false
weight in our bagg, a deceitful heart, and a heavy hand will wipe off our title
to our Bread, and our names too, if we repent not, out of the Book of Life. It
is a plain and undeniable proposition (yet some venture on the contrary
affirmative part) He that lies to his brother, He that defrauds his brother, is
so far from being religious, that he deserves not so much as the name of a
Christian: But we love to be deceived, and deceive our selves. We fall commonly
into one of these two Fallacies: Either A male divisis: We divide and sunder
those things which are everlastingly united, not only Profit and Honesty (which
Tullie abhorred) but Honesty and Religion, Truth and Faith; and, when both are
commanded, we rest in one: Or else into A dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciter: We take any part, any duty of Religion to be the sum and
conclusion of the whole matter, and comfort our selves with one seeming virtue
(if you will, frequenting of Sermons) against a world of vice, and that
detestable Injustice and Oppression, which in this triumph of Godliness, in
this spiritual Jubilee, will insensibly, but certainly sink our souls to Hell.

To draw then toward a conclusion of this point; All fraud, all injustice and
oppression proceed from infinite and importunate Ambition. From this riot has
sprung forth both that huge mass of wealth which private men, and that
boundless compass of government which greatest Princes have attained to.
Nothing was ever more unjust than the raising of those great Kingdoms: and, if
the Laws of common Equity had taken place, they had never been. St. Augustine,
I am sure, saw no difference between the Roman Empire and Spartacus his
conspiracy but only this, that the one lasted a little longer: Which indeed
puts no difference at all in the thing it self. And if we should look into some
rich men's coffers, we should find that this rust, this canker of Oppression and
Fraud has so corrupted their treasure that they can hardly know it to be
theirs.

To conclude, Plots and tricks and devises many times thrive in the world; But
when God makes inquisition for blood, when he rises up to set at liberty
those who are oppressed, he will take a candle, and find them out, and singe
them. With us it is wisdom and discretion sometimes to play least in sight: But
when Gods Justice pursues and overtakes us, we perish in those Meanders and
Labyrinths which we made to hide our selves in. All our reaches and tricks will
prove but like Heliogabalus his ropes of silk to strangle us, and as his
daggers of gold to stab us. Then shall we find that we have but fed and prankt
up our selves with that Bread which was not ours, ut carius pereamus, only that
our destruction might be more costly than others. Et sola in rusticulis suis
facunda justitia; Then the best eloquence will be Innocence; and they will
plead best for themselves, and make good their title, quibus integritas solida
and tota, as Tertullian speaks, whose solid integrity and entire simplicity,
whose rusticity and plainness has brought a blessing both on their labor and
basket, even this blessing, That what Bread their Industry has brought in may
truly and properly be called their own: For these two, Labor and Honesty, do
indeed make it PANEM NO STRUM, our bread.

Now being entitled to the goods of this life by these two, Labor and Honesty,
we presently account our selves possessores bonae fidei, true and lawful
possessors: And our inward thought is, as the Prophet David speaks, Psalm. 49.
11.
that they will continue for ever, and that we may call our lands by our own
names. It is true, what falls unto us by express covenant or by division, what
we gain by Honesty and Industry is wholly and entirely ours. But NOSTER PANIS,
our Bread, implies more: and as it takes not away the first, so it adds a
second: It takes not away the Propriety of our Bread from us, but it adds a
Readiness to distribute it, and cast it upon the waters. When we make it as an
Evidence and Assurance, we look upon it but upon one side, and many times ex
adverso situ, on the wrong side, and by too much gazing loose our sight: but
when we take the perspective of the Gospel, and behold it with the eye of Faith
and Christian Charity, on the other side, we shall find our poor distressed
Brethrens title so legible, that we may run and read it. NOSTER gives us livery
and seisin, makes our Bread OURS jure Quiritium, by the Law of man, and jure
Divino, by the Law of God. Nor does the Evangelical Law come in to weaken our
title, or disinherit us, or force us out of possession. But, as St. Hierom
tells us, aliud est judicium tribunalis Christi, aliud anguli susurronum, there
is great difference in pleading before the Roman Rostra, and the Tribunal Seat
of Christ. Nor must Christians make good their title only by the Common Law or
Book of Statutes, but by the Gospel and their PATER NOSTER. Who ever brought an
action against others for want of compassion? But we find a sentence past upon
them, These shall go away into everlasting punishment. Matthew. 25.
The Philosopher by the light of Reason could say, Man by nature is a sociable
creature: and, Civis non est suus, sed civitatis; A Citizen is not to consider
himself a citizen only in that capacity as able to do well for himself, and to
fill his own coffers, but in the latitude, to be useful to the whole Body
politic, and to every part and member of it; and, (...), When thou see
another thou see thy self. Shall not the light of the Gospel then show us
that Christianus non est suus, sed Ecclesiae? that a Christians Charity, in
respect of its diffusive operation, must be as Catholic as the Church. For it
is in the Church as in Pythagoras his family, which he shaped and framed out to
his Lute. There is first (...), the integrity of the parts, as it were a set
number of strings; 2. (...), an apt composition and joining them together. For
the members of the Church are (...), joined and coupled together by every
joint, says the Apostle, even by that bond of Charity, which is copulatrix
virtus, as the Father calls it, that virtue which couples all together. And
then follows (...), and every string being touched in its right place and order
begets a harmony. And this word NOSTER, our Bread, comprehends all these. For
thus not only that bread which we buy with our labor, but all the bread in the
world is ours, all the riches of the world are ours, and withal all the
miseries, all the afflictions, all the necessities of our brethren, are ours.
Oh how heavenly an harmony is heard from that charity which joyneth high and
low, rich and poor in a sweet concord and concent! This must needs delight the
ears of the holy Angels, and of God himself. Caesarius in one of his Homilies
gives this reason why God made one rich, and another poor, That the poor might
prove the rich man's faith and charity, and the rich be enriched by the poor
man's poverty, and that when to prove the rich by the poor, all the wealth in
the world cannot purchase him that has it one quiet thought, his compassion
and bounty to the poor might entitle him to the joys of heaven. Care and
Industry, without this Fellow-feeling, bring in the things of the world upon
us: but the true profit of them is in enjoying, using and bestowing them. Those
may be as servants to bring them in, but Charity is as an instructor to teach
us how to lay them out, and makes them profitable. It is a greater part of
wisdom wisely to dispend them when we have them, than to get them at first.
Many there are in the world, like Lollius in Paterculus, pecuniae quam
benefaciendi cupidiones; many that know how to gather, but few that know how to
use; many that make no end of heaping up wealth, but never bethink themselves
how to employ it: As one told Annibal, that he knew how to conquer, but not how
to use the victory. Gold and silver by lying idly by us gather rust, as St.
James tells us, chap. 5. 3. which rust eats out our soul: But Charity, abditae
terris inimica lamnae, washes off the rust of it, and rubbeth it bright by
using it. The world, I know, makes it profit enough to have wealth; but that
other profit, which comes by expense and laying out, it can hardly be brought
to learn. Ours it is if we have it: and like the Grave, or the barren Womb, we
never say, It is enough: but, when we have it, we know no other language than
this, says Basil, (...), I have it not, I will not give it. We can be content
to hear that Christianity shall be profitable to us; but that Christianity
should make us profitable to others, that it should cost us any thing, to this
we are as deaf as the Adder. It was the same Fathers observation, (...), I know
many, says he, that can with some ease be brought to fast, to pray, to lament
and mourn for their sins, to perform all parts of (...), of that piety which
will cost them nothing: but hardly shall you draw them to that part of piety
which does require but the cost of a halfpenny. And this is a^ epidemical
disease at this day. We who have the oversight of you in Christ are witnesses
of your labor of frequenting of prayers, of hearing, nay of thirsting after
Sermons. All this is but (...). You are very free of it because it costs you
nothing. But how would you be our glory and joy and crown of rejoicing, if we
might a little more understand that part of piety which holds all in capite,
and makes it yours by anointing the Head in his Members. I know not how we keep
our accounts: but it is easy to observe, that the Scripture seldom speaks of
laying up: For this is a thing which of our selves we are too ready to
practice. Dimittas licet paedagogum: There needs no pains to teach where
Scholars are so willing to learn. But Scripture oft-times and earnestly deals
with us concerning the laying our riches out, as being a hard lesson; and long
we are a learning it. Did I call it a hard lesson? Nay, it seems a Paradox to
the most, a mere speculation. The Philosopher, where he shows us the ways of
Alienation, brings in (...) as well as (...), giving as well as selling. Not
only when we make sale of our goods, but traditione dominium rerum amittimus,
says the Lawyer, when we give them, we lose all right and title to them. As
that which we sell, so that which we give is not ours. But Christ's Law teaches
us that not Keeping so much as Giving makes our goods ours. And not only To
take away but Not to give is furtum interpretativum, says Alexander of Hales:
When God comes to be the Interpreter, it will be plain theft. For (...), Every
covetous person is a thief; because he lays up that which was given him (...),
to dispense and scatter abroad. This is the end why Bread, why Riches are given
us, that we may give to them that are in need. And this is the way to make most
of them. For as Tertullian says, Christian Charity minuendo res auget,
recondit erogando, dum amittit acquirit; it lays up by laying out, and gains
by loosing. (...); Who ever became poor by giving? says the Apostate. St.
Ambrose Offic. Lib. 2. parallels that of Julian, Scio plerosque sacerdotes, quo
plus obtulerunt, plus abundasse; I have known many Bishops who the more they
did offer, the more they did abound. And if we read their Books who have
written the Lives of the Fathers, they will furnish us with many particulars,
and some perhaps which will not easily gain our belief. No doubt God often
rewards Charity with temporal blessings; but what are these to its reward in
the next life? Weigh them together, and they will prove very light. What is a
pebble to a diamond? the transitory wealth of this world to the treasures of
heaven? long life to eternity? And these we shall have for what we give to the
poor by way of exchange. And what greater increase can our money bring us in:
Fac cum tuis opibus ut unam nubeculam excites, says the Father; Try, if with
all thy wealth thou can raise a cloud as big as a man's hand: but by giving it
away thou may do greater works than that; Thou may open the windows of
heaven. It cannot turn the night into day: but being cast away it will be thy
harbinger to prepare a place for thee there where there is no night at all.

I have fallen, you see, upon a common subject, and did intend once to have
balked it, or but to have touched upon it (...), by the way. For things common
and ordinary do lose their price and credit amongst men; and the palate of many
hearers is grown so dainty that to speak to them of so common and vulgar a
lesson as this seems to be, is as if you should set before them cramben bis
coctam, or (...), some cold, course, or ordinary diet, the Gibeonites moldy
bread; like she Jews Manna, which their souls abhorred because it was so
common. But, to take away this error, I have learnt to call no useful doctrine
common or trivial; and that things common and plain are most excellent; yea,
therefore most common and plain because they are most excellent. The Jews were
wont to give out the books of holy Scripture respectively to the abilities of
men. Some few were permitted to the vulgar; the rest were locked up, to be read
only by the learned. But this lesson admits no such restraint, but lies equally
open to the use of both! Besides, methinketh the Church of Christ is much
degenerated from what it was in ancient times, and this word NOSTER generally
now-a-dayes mistaken, as if it only gave us entry and possession, and then
stood as a fense about our wealth to keep our brethren off. The primitive
Christians I am sure, did never so understand it; and therefore to feed others
who were in want was their daily Bread. If I should relate unto you the stories
of some ancient Saints, I fear their Charity and Bounty to the poor, though
wondered at by all, would be followed by none: Some, it may be, would not spare
to censure and condemn it as excessive. But is it not safer in performing of
duties to exceed then to come short? Is it not strange that some of them should
be more willing to give all they had to the poor, then we are to part with our
superfluities? that they should be so compassionate and liberal in times of
trial and persecution, and we so hard-hearted and close-handed in days of
peace and plenty? that Charity, which was so hot and active in winter, should
grow so cold in summer? Their alms were hearty and real; ours are good words
without deeds: Depart in peace; Be ye warmed, and filled; or we say, Satis est
James 2. 16.
si cord Deus suspiciatur, as the Gnostics in Tertullian; If Religion and
Charity be shut up in the heart, it is enough: outward expressions and
ceremonies are needless. We read Scriptures for no other purpose but to cull
out certain thrifty Texts to pretend unto our Covetousness and Distrust; as
that Charity begins from it self; that He is worse than an Infidel that
provides not for his family. But as for those other Scriptures that persuade us
to be open-handed; To lend, looking for nothing again; Having two coats, to
part with him that has none; these we can gently pass by as Meteors and airy
Speculations, and with some shuffling and shifting interpretations remove them
out of the way. We read that when Amasa, wounded 2 Samuel 20. 12, 13.
by Joab, lay in the way wallowing in his blood, the people that followed Joab,
stood still as they came to Amasa, till he was removed out of the way. It falls
out so with men willing to be Christians, and yet unwilling to leave the
thriving courses which are common in the world. When in their pursuit of gain
they meet with these places of Scripture, Go sell all thou have, and give to
the poor; Cast thy bread upon the waters; He that forsakes not all he has
cannot be my Disciple; and the like; cannot but be much amused; start, and
stand still, as it were at Amasa's body. Now they who have been the authors of
certain mollifying paraphrases and distinctions and restrictions, have removed
these harsher places of Scripture, as it were Amasa's body; shut up the
fountain of Liberality, and made the way clear and open to all our covetous
desires. We have lately a learned Discourse put into our hands, written by
Salmasius in defense of Usury. But for all I can perceive, the best argument he
brings is ab incommodo, drawn from those inconveniences which will necessarily
follow if Usury be not admitted. But for my self, I confess, I have not as yet
attained to that skill to know how to ground a Truth upon Conveniencie. For it
is natural to Truth to meet with inconvenience; And Martin Luther will tell us,
Allegatio inconvenientis non tollit argumenta, That to allege inconveniences
is not the way to answer arguments, nor to build up a conclusion. But the
reason why I mention Salmasius's book, is a strong position I find there, and
one ground of his Discourse is this, Alii mores, alia vita esse debuit
ecclesiae liberae and oppressae; That it is not necessary that the practice and
piety of the Church then in persecution, and now at this day flourishing,
should be the same; That then it was in vain to be careful in gathering of
wealth, when the enemy stood before their eyes ready to rob and spoil them;
That our Savior then especially commended Poverty and Contempt of riches, as
that which would best consist and comply with the Gospel and Christianity.
Willing I am to yield him thus much, That in respect of outward Government to
bring our Church, now flourishing in peace, back to the same state she was in
under persecution, is neither necessary nor possible. It is as vain an attempt,
says Castellio, as to bring the Autumn back to the Spring, or to make the
Spring in Autumn; at all times to sow, and at all times to reap. But in respect
of inward Sanctity, Piety, and Contempt of the world, it is the duty of every
Christian in this latter age not only to resemble our Forefathers, and to be
like the first Christians, but, if it be possible, to exceed them. Lay not up
treasures here on earth; Care not for the morrow; Sell all that you have, and
give to the poor; and many other precepts of the like leaven, has our Savior
delivered us in the Gospel, all which are as sour and unpleasant meats: And
our glosses and interpretations of them, what are they for the most part but
(...), delightful sawces, to make them more easy and pleasant to the palate?
Sell all that thou have, and give to the Matthew. 19. 21.
poor, the Church of Rome calls a Counsel of perfection. And we might well
enough admit of it, if she made it medium, not finem, a means, a way, and not
the term and end of perfection. We make it praeceptum singular, a particular
precept to the youngman in the Gospel; Who, like the sheep, though his fleece
was fair and white, deceived not Christ the great Shepherd of the flock, but
he quickly espied the rottenness of his heart, and with this command made a
window in his breast, that all might see it. He that had kept all the
Commandments from his youth, could not hear with patience this one Commandment,
Go, sell all that thou have, and give to the poor. This was a dagger at his
heart. For when he heard that saying, his color changed, he went away, says
the Text, very sorrowful. It was indeed an error in Pelagius, grounded upon a
mistaken part of Scripture, That no rich man could be saved. But it falls out
many times that there is less danger in maintaining some errors then in
pressing some truths. And what inconvenience can attend this error? What if
every rich man should suddenly become liberal, and disburse his money? What if
Dives had sold all, and laid it down at Lazarus his feet? What if every Gallant
did turn his Peacocks feathers into Sackcloth? What inconvenience could follow?
Or can this Devil be cast out without fasting and prayer? Utinam sic semper
errarent avari. We may make it our wish, that covetous persons did always so
err. For this no-great-error in their faith would defend them from a greater
sin in their actions, would pluck that beam out of their eyes with which the
God of this world has blinded them. Better it is a great deal that they should
thus err than that on the other hand they should effeminare disciplinam
Christi, weaken and effeminate the strictness of Christian discipline with
these sprinklings and limitations; That it is true indeed, I must give to the
poor; but it is as true, I must care for my family. That a cup of cold water is
enough for the poor; whilst I drink up a river, and, like Behemoth in Job, draw
up the world into my mouth; take possession of all the riches I can grasp. For
these truths, which sort and seem to comply with this malady, captivam animam,
dum delectant, exulcerant; do delight indeed and please the captive soul, but
withal do pierce her through, and exasperate the humor which was too malignant
before. For when our love is fixed upon the world, the God of the world, the
Devil, will soon teach us his art, veritatem veritate concutere, to demolish
one truth with another; to drown our Bounty to the poor in our care for our
family. To send the covetous person to the Pismire to School, to commend
Frugality to a Miser, is nequitiam praeceptis adjuvare, nothing else but to
whet and quicken that appetite which is too sharp already, to put wings to that
desire which is too fleet and eager. He that will not labor, let him not eat,
is (...), a principle, a fundamental axiom, with the Miser, a faithful saying,
and worthy of all acceptance, and which he hugs and adores as he does his
gold. And therefore this gentle course of Physic will never cure him. Si
prodesse vis, doce quod doleat; If you will do him good, and work a cure
indeed, you must disturb and trouble him. Go, sell all thou have, and give to
the poor, is a bitter pill; and it will so work with him, that it will make him
very pensive and sorrowful. Again, Go, sell, and give to the poor, is by some
made praeceptum generale, a general command, like the Parthian horsemen, looking
one way, and shooting another; directed upon occasion to this young man, but
striking at all the world. But then they level it by that plain position of our
Saviors, Whosoever he be that forsakes not Luke 14. 33.
all that he has, cannot be my Disciple; which cannot be understood of
forsaking in act and execution, but in will and affection, at some time and
upon some occasions. Habet and pax suos martyrs; There is even a martyrdom in
time of peace: Habent divitiae suos pauperes; Men may be poor in spirit, though
their corn and their wine and riches increase: We may say of this precept as
Tertullian speaks of some other places of Scripture, Expetit sensus
interpretationis gubernaculum; To find the sense we must steer along by a wary
interpretation. For literally this precept cannot be general; it being
impossible that all should be sellers. If all were sellers, where would be the
buyers? and if all were givers, where would be the receivers? But in respect of
that due preparation which every Christian ought to have for the Truth and the
Gospels sake, for their Brethrens sake, to offer up all their possessions as a
Holocaust, in this respect it finds no restraint or limitation, but is of as
large compass as Christendom. Non audomus dicere ut omnia relinquatis: tamen,
si vultis, omnia etiam retinendo relinquitis, says Gregory; I dare not be so
bold as to press upon you to forsake all that you have: but yet, if you please
to learn this Christian art, you may forsake, and retain; you may sell and
give, and yet keep. You may so use the world, that you may enjoy God; still be
proprietaries of them as of yours, but so esteem of them as if they were not
yours but your brethrens; still place our thoughts, not upon PANIS, Bread, but
upon NOSTER, Ours; still consider that it is not Mine, or Thine, but Ours. This
NOSTER is a kind of circle of compass large enough to take in thy self and all
thy poor brethren, to comprehend all the Christians in the world. How
scrupulous our Forefathers were in expounding this and the like Texts of
Scripture, themselves have left us notable monuments. St. Basil makes a
strange supposition, and in my opinion he gives as strange an answer to it.
Were thou brought, says he, into those streights that thou had but one loaf
left, and that thou knew no means to provide other when that is spent; yet
if there should come some poor and needy man, and ask thee for food, what
think thou would be thy duty to do? Even to take that one loaf, and put it
into his hand that begs his food; and looking up into heaven, to say, Lord,
thou see this one loaf: thou know the streights in which I am; yet have I
performed the keeping of thy commandments before supplying my own necessities.
This indeed is a point of piety cujus non audeo dicere nomen: and had I not the
warrant of so grave and judicious a Divine, I should scarcely have dared to
have taught it in this age of the world, where we are taught that we must begin
from our selves, that we must not tempt God by making our selves destitute of
means; or other such thriving Doctrines, which strongly savor of Love to the
World and Distrust in Gods Providence. I deny not but that there may be many
reasons of mollifying and restraining some Texts; but amongst these that must
be the least which is drawn from our Commodity. For thus to tamper with those
Texts which seem to stand in our light, and cross us in our way to Riches and
Honors, gives just cause of suspicion that our hearts are set upon them, and
that if no hard and fearful command came between, we would be nailed to them.
In respect of our Persons or our Purses to restrain any part of Scripture from
that latitude of sense whereof it is naturally capable, makes it manifest that
we are willing magis emendare Deos quam nosipsos, rather to correct the Gods,
nay, to conform the word of the true and everliving God to our own humor, than
to subdue our humor to the word of God; and that we are well content to deal
with our souls as the Athenians sometimes dealt with their ground; When they
will not bear good corn, to sow leeks and onions there. When the Gospel and
Christ's precepts thwart our corrupt dispositions, we learn to make them void
with our traditions, with our Pharisaical limitations and restrictions. And
thus much be spoken concerning this word NOSTER, and the reasons why this Bread
is called Our Bread.

The Eight and Thirtieth SERMON. PART. III.
MATTHEW. VI. 11. Give us this day our daily Bread.
WHat is meant by Bread, and why it is called Our Bread, we have already shown
at large. And in this word NOSTER we found a Goad, to put in the sides of the
Sluggard, to awaken him out of his slumber and lethargy; and a Chain, to
fetter the hands of the Deceitful, to keep them from picking and stealing, from
fraud and cousenage; and a Spur to our Charity, to make us cast our bread upon
the waters. NOSTER is verbum operativum, a word full of efficacy, to open the
fountain of our Liberality, and to set up banks to regulate our desires in the
pursuit of wealth.

We proceed now to enquire, in the next place, why we are taught to pray for
our daily Bread, or what is meant by (...): And here, as the streams in which
Interpreters run are diverse, so the fountain is hard to find out. Some take the
word properly, some metaphorically. Some render it Supersubstantialem, as the
Vulgar; and so with Tertullian and Cyprian take in Christ, who is the Bread of
life: So that to pray for Bread is perpetuitatem postulare in Christo, and
individuitatem a corpore ejus, to desire a perpetuity in Christ, and to be
united to him for ever. Others make it Sacramental Bread. Castellio expounds
(...) by (...), and then it is supercaelestial or heavenly Bread, by which the
Soul is sustein'd; to wit, the Grace of God, by which we overcome and remove
all difficulties which stand in our way between us and that happiness which is
the mark and the price of the high calling in Jesus Christ. Others, by (...),
eximium; and call it that bread which is singular and peculiar to us. Others
interpret (...), that which is profitable and fit to nourish us; (...), says
Chrysostom, that bread which is turned into the very substance of our bodies.
Others, (...). And the Vulgar, which in St. Matthew renders it super
substantial, in St. Luke calls it QUOTIDI ANUM, our daily Bread. (...), as St.
Chrysostom used to speak: We may embrace all senses. For why should not
Righteousness be as our daily Bread, to feed us? Why should we not with joy put
it on to clothe us, and make it as a robe or a diadem? Why should we not thirst
for that water which is drawn out of the wells of salvation. Why should we not
long for our (...), as the Fathers call the Eucharist; For that holy Bread
which is our provision and supply in our way? For every one of these we may
solicit the Majesty of heaven and earth, and press upon God with an holy
opportunity, Lord, evermore give us of this bread, of the Bread of
Righteousness, of the Bread which thou breakest, and of the Bread which thou
art, of the Bread of thy Word, and of the Bread of thy Sacrament; Which are
primitiae futuri panis, the first fruits of the Bread of eternal Life. We may
embrace all senses. For superflua non nocent, or, as the Civilians speak, non
solent quae abundant vitiare scripturas, these superfluities and
superabundancies are not dangerous, where every exposition is true, though non
ad textum, not truly fitted to the Text. But that Christ meant not Sacramental
Bread, is more than evident: 1. Because the Sacrament was not yet instituted:
And it is not probable that our Savior, when he taught his Disciples to pray,
would speak in parables. 2. We do not every day receive the Sacrament, but we
are taught thus every day to pray. Quia quotidiana est oration, quotidie quoque
videtur dici oportere: It was so determined in the Fourth Council of Toledo; It
is our daily prayer, and to be said every day; against some Priests in Spain
who would say the Lords Prayer only upon the Lords day, as we find it in the
Ninth Canon of that Council. And as it may be said every day, so every hour of
the day: Which we cannot apply to the Eucharist. 3. If we will lay upon the
word all senses it will bear without injury to the truth, we need no other
form than that one Petition, Thy will be done. For in that, as in a Breviary,
all that we can pray for is comprised. Indeed, as Seneca in his Natural
Questions speaks of the river Nilus, Nilus per septena ostia in mare emittitur;
quodcunque ex his elegeris, mare est; Nilus is emptied into the Sea by seven
channels, and every one of these is a Sea: So here we see this word conveyed
unto us by diverse interpretations as by so many channels, and every one of these
is a sea, yielding us abundance of matter. And as it is said of that river,
Ortus mirari, non nosse licuit, that men with wonder and admiration might
search but not find out the fountainhead from whence it sprang; So this word
(...) is not found in any Ethnic writer whatsoever. And the formation and
etymon is as hard and full of difficulty to find out. From (...), whence it is
commonly derived, it cannot come. For if we derive it from (...), sum, it must
be (...), not (...). Therefore we rather draw it from (...), eo: and the
participle from (...) is (...), from whence most probably comes (...), by which
we note SUPERVENIENTEM, SUCCEDANEUM, SEQUENTEM PANEM, our following, our
succeeding, our next Bread. So (...) in Synesius is taken for the morrow, and
(...) in Demosthenes, for the next hour. And this takes in the Syriack
interpretation, where it is called PANIS NECESSITATIS NOSTRAE, the Bread which
we have need of. And this interpretation is most probable. 1. Because we are
too ready to favor our selves, and under the name of Bread to understand all
superfluities whatsoever. Therefore (...), our next bread, is a word which
boundeth our desires, Hitherto shall you go, and no further. 2. It is drawn by
that rule of Hilarie, Dictorum intelligentia ex praepositis aut consequentibus
exspectatur, We best understand the Scripture by that which goes before and
that which follows after. Now under the name of Bread without this epithet we
may comprehend the Bread of Life, Super-substantial, Celestial, Sacramental
bread, or any Bread whatsoever: And that which follows is indeed nothing else
but an interpretation of this form of Prayer: and the latter part of this
Chapter is a full exposition of this word, and shows what it is we ask when we
beg our daily bread; when we are forbidden (...), and as St. Luke has it
chap. 12. 29. (...), spes nostras and cogitationes in longinquum mittere, as
Seneca speaks, to let our thoughts and hopes loose, and send them after
uncertainties; to extend them farther than a day and our present necessities.
Therefore our Savior here adds (...), or (...), Give us our daily Bread this
day. This I take to be the meaning of this word. And though we cannot give
exactly the etymon of (...), yet with Tertullian, Malo in scripturis minus quam
contra sapere, I had rather understand less, than fix any sense against the
Scripture; and where we cannot reach the fountainhead, let us keep the chanel
as clear and unmudded as we can.

Our daily Bread then is our next Bread, or that Bread which is needful and
sufficient for us, which takes off our care and solicitude for the morrow. And
this best fits a Christians mouth, who is not made for a day, or a year, or an
age, sed in magnis aeternae beatitudinis exemplis constitutus, as Hilarie
speaks, built up for eternity and everlasting bliss, peregrinus deorsum, civis
sursum, as Augustine speaks, a stranger on earth, and a citizen of that
Jerusalem which is above. What should he be solicitous for to morrow, whose
aim is Eternity? What should he think of the next day, who consisiders every
moment as his last? Semper ad mortem omnia disponere Christianum oportet; A
Christian man's care and study must be not how to live, but how to dye.
Therefore Tertullian amongst other characters of Christian men gives this for
one, That they are morti expeditum genus, a kind of men who are always ready
and prepared to dye. And Petrarch tells us of an holy and religious man, who
being invited to come the next day to a feast, made this reply, That if they
had any request for the present, he was ready; but what should be done to
morrow, he left to them to think of who had leisure: Nam ego a multis annis
crastinum non habeo: for I for these many years have had no morrow, but made
every day my last. O felix, si vera memorasti! says my Author: How happy a man
was this, if he spoke the truth! And Seneca gives the reason, Cui vita sua
quotidie fuit tota, securus est; He may breathe securely who counts every
breath his last. And in this appears the provident mercy of God, who would not
let us know how long we have to live, that we may not busy our selves about
what we may do to morrow, who may dye to day; that we may check our wandering
thoughts with the sight of Death. Latet ultimus dies, ut observentur omnes,
says St. Augustine; Our last day is hid from our eyes, that we may be more
intentive to observe all our days. That wealth, that abundance, those honors,
those delights which we hugg and embrace as friends, are but thieves which rob
us of that rich treasure of Time which we might more wisely lay out in the
purchase of Eternity. What should Poverty fright me? my journey is to Paradise,
where the poor more often enter then the rich. What should Hunger afflict me?
I may feed on the Bread of Life when I have not one morsel to eat. Fides famem
non timet, says Tertullian; Faith fears not famine, fears not poverty, fears
not disgrace, thinks them not worth a thought, and the time but lost in which
we strive against them. In what weakness is not a Christian man strong? In what
solitude has not he troops to guard him? Or indeed when is he poor, who
possesses all things? when is he alone, who has Piety and Christ himself for
his companions? when is he cast out, whose conversation is in heaven? when is
not he beautiful, who frames himself to the similitude of Christ? Let the
morrow care for it self: His care is for Eternity.

But this may seem an uncouth speculation; as indeed all discourses which fall
cross with our covetous desires, are taken for no other, and we are ready to
oppose Scripture to Scripture. Care not for to morrow. True: But, He that
labors not, must not eat; and, He that provideth not for his family, is
worse than an Infidel. This we may use to mollify the former; but not to
abolish it; to beat down Sloth, but not to build up Covetousness: as the former
does not take off all Care, but bound and limit it. Our daily bread we ask; but
we must not lengthen this Day into an Age. He that bids us Care not for the
morrow, forbids not all Care: for he commands us to pray for it. And he that
enjoins to labor for our Bread, forbids us to love it. So that, Care not for to
morrow, slays the Covetous, that he sweat not too much: and the other pulls the
Sluggards hand out of his bosom. Dividat haec siquis, faciunt discreta venenum:
Antidotum sumit, qui sociata bibit.
Take them asunder and naked, as they lie, and they are poison. The one strikes
the Sluggard with a Lethargy; the other, the Covetous with a Dropsy. But take
them mitigated, take them together, Care not for the morrow, but yet labor;
Labor, but care not; thus mixed and blended together, they make a precious
antidote against these two dangerous evils, Sloth and Covetousness.

But because it is a matter of some difficulty (...), to keep in an even and
straight line between them both, and not to swerve to the right or to the left;
and because men are too ready to devour and swallow up one duty in another, and
to forget the one by too often remembering of the other; we will determine all
ad Christi regulas, by those rules which Christ has set down in this Chapter
to poyse and direct us, that our paths may be equal and straight. And they are
two; 1. the consideration of the Providence of God; 2. of our Duty, and that
bond which Christianity lays upon us. We must desire but our next Bread, or
that Bread which is necessary for our sustentation, that we seem not to
distrust Gods Providence: And our care must be but for the day, lest we fall
short in our duty. Victus exemplum habemus aves; and vestitus, lilia, says
Tertullian; We need not be solicitous for our food; for God feeds the Fowls
of the air; nor for our raiment; for he clotheth the Lilies: And for the
second; as we depend upon Gods Providence, so must our care be no hindrance to
us in our obedience to the Gospel of Christ. Non exigua mercede sumus
Christiani, The reward is great which is proposed to Christians: and we must
not forfeit this Pearl for false riches, nor surrender Christ for Mammon.

And first, the consideration of Gods Providence is enough to pull in the
rains, and to curb our immoderate desire of the things of this world.
Therefore, says Hilarie, Fidei nostrae inviolabilem confidentiam exemplorum
autoritate confirmat, ut tanto majoris periculi res sic ambigere, quanto
impensiore cura omnem occasionem infidelitatis abstulerit; Christ himself uses
this method, and builds up a strong bulwark for our faith by the authority of
so many examples; that the danger of distrust may be there the greater, where
the ways of his Providence are so manifest. And that we may not be so
diffident on God as to sacrifice to our own nets, he has set us to school to
the Fowls of the air, to the Grass and the Lilies of the Field, that
unreasonable creatures, yea, insensible creatures, which we tread under our
feet, might teach us to look up upon him who is the giver of all things. Our
Savior tells us, v. 32. that the Gentiles seek after all these things; that
they are on the wing for honor, that they make haste to be rich, that they
bath themselves in the pleasures of this world. And how could it be otherwise?
For these were they who did excaecare Dei providentiam, as Tertullian speaks,
put out the eye of Gods Providence; either plainly holding, with the
Epicureans, Deos neque propitios cuiquam esse solere, nec iratos, denying that
the Gods did either favor or were angry with any, and instead of Providence
bringing in (...), fatal Necessity; or else confining and limiting Providence,
making it fall no lower than the sphere of the Moon, as Aristotle in
Epiphanius; or else tying it to two or three Favorites alone, as some are of
opinion in Isidore Pelusiote; or else, beholding fools on horsback, whilst
themselves are on the ground, thinking that God sees not, and that he has no
bridle of Providence, as Nazianzene speaks, to guide and govern the world; as
Diogenes in Tully said of Harpalus, a wicked but happy man, that he did contra
Deos testimonium dicere, that he was a strong argument against the Gods, in
that he lived so long. All these things do the Gentiles seek, who denied the
Providence of God. And is there not a tincture of this poison yet running in the
veins and lurking in the hearts of Christians? For from whence is that (...),
that insatiable desire, of wealth? From whence are those ambitious thoughts,
those (...), incorporeal hands, with which we catch at honors? From whence
has Covetousness gained the name of Thrift, and Fraud of Wisdom? From whence
are those (...), sensual and senseless lusts? From whence comes it that to be
Rich carries with it a greater splendour and beauty than to be Good? Is it not
even from this, that either we think there is no eye of Providence watches
over us, or that we are willing to forget it, which is in effect to deny there
is any at all? For who else would struggle for that which he knows will be put
into his mouth? Who would send his thoughts so far for that which is at hand?
Or would we be so active in the world, did we not think that the hand of God
were shortened? PANIS QUOTIDIANUS, Daily Bread, might well satisfy him who
knows that God is allsufficient, the same to day and to morrow and for ever.
Therefore Covetousness has this brand and mark set upon it by the Apostle,
That it is Idolatry; That she denies the true God, who watches over all, and
sets up Mammon, not secundum speciem, says Aquinas, not accounting Gold as
God, but secundum similitudinem, yielding all obedience to it, and trusting on
that which is but as a reed, before Gods Providence, which is a sure and
everlasting foundation. To remove this seed of Gentilism, we may say with the
Father, Humane Weakness is a bad interpreter of the Providence of God. That
must needs be a cursed gloss with Flesh and Blood, which our sensual lusts and
affections do make. No man can judge of Art but he that is a skilful Artificer.
Besides, as we find it in Commonwealths, that there are none more ready to
complain of the times, or to think they are not so well governed as they ought
to be, then those who by their own negligence and default have brought
themselves upon some hard distress, and, because they cannot thrive in peace,
will blow the coals of Sedition, that they may sit down at that fire, and warm
themselves: So we may observe in the world, that none more murmur against the
Providence of God than they who are most improvident themselves. For when they
miss of their hopes, because they have stretched them beyond measure (their seed
yields them but seventy-fold where they did expect a hundred) they begin to say
in their hearts, There is no God, and at last, (...), to sight against Heaven
it self. But let us rest assured that nothing can come amiss to us which Gods
hand consecrateth; that whether in wealth or in poverty, with him we have
enough: that wheresoever we are, we are still in the hands of God. To conclude
this point; Thus if we judge of Gods Providence; if we lift up our eyes to him
that dwells in the heavens, and like servants look upon the hands of our
great Master, and wait patiently upon him; (...), we shall cast out all that
insatiable appetite of the wealth and pomp of the world; our desires will not
be so eager; but a dish of herbs will be as a stalled Ox, and we shall be
content with our daily Bread which the hand of Providence puts into our mouths.

Again, in the second place, as we are taught in this Petition to rely upon the
Providence of God, so are we also put in mind to take heed that, whilst we make
haste to be rich, we slack not in our duty to God; that that which is ordein'd
but as a pillar to uphold our bodies, be not made a stumblingblock and an
occasion of that disaffection to piety and holiness which will destroy both
body and soul. Grave and wise Philosophers have very highly extolled Poverty,
which is so loathed of the world. Enimvero paupertas philosophiae vernacula,
frugi, sobriae, parvo potens; For Poverty was born and bred with Philosophy, as
it were in the same house, frugal and sober, powerful to do much with a little.
It was she that raised Commonwealths and built Cities, and was the mother and
nurse of all the Arts and Sciences; we may add, the mother of that Religion
which will bring us into everlasting habitations. That we may learn to bear
Poverty with patience, and escape that great snare of the Devil, the love of
riches, our Savior has here appointed us our Dimensum, commanded us to pray
for our daily Bread; and in taking away all care for the morrow, has taught us
obstare principiis, to be so far from caring for the riches of this world as
not to think of them; to beware of Covetousness, and the very beginnings of it;
not to be familiar with them, not to look upon them. Nemo diu tutus, periculo
proximus. That which was but a suggestion at first, may become a fierce and
violent desire. That which was but a pleasing sight, may be a raging thought.
The sight of the wedge of Gold may engender that evil which will trouble all
Israel, and make us fly before our enemies. At first we desire (...), faith
Aristotle, but two halfpence; and when we have handled them, they multiply in
our imagination, and in our desire are as bigg as talents. (...), Our sinful
desires, if we cut them not off, are infinite; like Numbers, nullum est post
quod non sit aliud, there is none which is last, but still one follows another;
and when one is full, another opens to be filled; And are, as the Orator
speaks, pleni spei, vacui commodorum; when our garners are stored and our purse
full, yet are we empty still, and possess nothing but new hopes. Irritat se
saevitia; As Cruelty does chafe and enrage it self, and as Beasts grow more
fierce after they have tasted blood, so Covetousness does whet it self, and
grows more keen and eager at the sight of those heaps which she has raised.
Where St. John tells us, 1 Epist. 2. 16. that all that is in the world is the
lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. A judicious and
learned Writer interprets the lust of the eyes to be Covetousness, because
covetous persons love to handle and see their wealth, nummos contemplari, to
behold their money, and feed their eye with that of which they will not take
one part to feed or cloth the body. And therefore, when riches increase, we
must not join our selves to them as to friends, but fear and suspect them as
enemies; in fidem cum armis venire; trust our selves with them, but with
weapons in our hand: When they glitter, we must turn away our eye; when they
flatter, not be attentive; when they gain us the cringe and applause of the
common rout, not listen or hearken to it. We must account them enemies, and
thus make them friends: and, as Nazianzene speaks of his brother Caesarius, we
must sub larva servire mundo, act our part as upon a stage, seem to be what we
are not; and, as the Apostle speaks, buy as if we possessed not, and use the
world as if we used it not: we must run, and press forward to the mark; and as
for the world, we must in transitu nosse, know it only as we pass, and in the
by. For conclusion then; It will be good for us timere actus nostros, to be
afraid of our own actions, to be jealous of our wishes, ever to suspect the
worst; not to make the fear of Poverty an excuse for Covetousness; not to cry
out, We must live, when we eat and build and purchase as if we were to live for
ever. Quid tibi cum Deo est, si tuis legibus? It is not for us, who are to be
ruled by the Law of God, to determine what is our daily Bread, and what not; or
to call those things necessaries which are superfluous; but rather to fit our
selves for those lessons which we tremble to hear of, as Fel^^ did at the
mention of judgment; to learn to gain riches without care, and leave them
without sorrow, that they may not cost us our sweat when they come, nor put us
to the charge of a tear when they depart; nay further, to hate and contemn
them; to sell and give them to the poor; (...), to bring our bodies in
subjection to our souls, and our temporalities to our spiritual estate; sic uti
mundo ut fruamur Deo, so to use the world as that we may enjoy Christ. And all
these, To hate and contemn riches, To sell and fling them away, To cast them on
the waters, are not paradoxes, but (...), the inventions of Faith, the
endeavors of true Zeal and Devotion; nay, they are the commands of Jesus
Christ; Who did willingly part with his life for us who count it death to part
but with a mite for him. We who are to present our selves as pure virgins unto
Christ; must keep 2 Cor. 11. 2.
our selves undefiled and unspotted from the world, we must not delight to look
James 1. 27.
upon the beauty, nor taste the pleasures, nor handle the riches of this world,
for fear we forsake our first love, and make his jealousy burn like fire.
Omnia Psalm. 79. 5.
virginis, virgo; Every part and faculty of a Virgin is so, a virgin; her Eye
shut up by covenant, her Ear deaf to profane babbling, her Hand not defiled with
pitch, and her Soul an elaboratory of pure and holy thoughts: And so are a
Christian man's affections, pure and untouched; He hopes not for wealth, but for
the reward of justice: He fears not poverty, but the flames of Hell: He desires
no honor, but to be like unto the Angels: When he dwells in the midst of
Canaan, in a land flowing with milk and honey, his conversation is in heaven;
his Love, his Hope, his Joy, his Delight, his Contentation, all are levelled on
Eternity, and concentred in Christ alone. And being thus qualified, not only
Sufficiency, but Abundance; not only that which is necessary, but great
riches; not that alone which is enough for a day, but that which may suffice
for many generations, may be PANIS QUOTIDIANUS, our daily Bread. And so at last
we have presented you with all that is material in this Petition.

The Nine and Thirtieth SERMON. PART. I.
MATTHEW. VI. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. Or, as
LUKE XI. 4: And forgive us our sins: for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us.
HAving lifted up our eyes to him that fills all things living of his good
pleasure, we here fall down on our knees for mercy and forgiveness before the
Father of mercies, who is as ready to forgive as to open his hand, and as
willing to receive us into his bosom and favor as to give us our meat in due
season on the earth, which is but his footstool. Having adored his Liberality,
we beseech his Clemency. And, as Tertullian well observes, it was most
necessary that we should observe this method: For first, unless we be heard in
this Petition, we have no reason to be confident in commencing the other, nor
to expect that God should feed us as a Father, till we be reconciled unto him,
and called his Sons. What man is there which, if his son ask him bread, will
give him a stone? says our Savior: Which implies we must be sons before we
put up our petitions. For God never denies us without a cause; and the cause
many times is no other but this, that we deny him. Was the Lord angry against
the Rivers? says the Prophet Habakkuk, when he sent a tempest; or is he angry
with the earth, when he sends barrenness? Is he angry with our Basket, when he
fills it not? No: Peccatum homicida est; Sin is the murderer and the thief, to
spoil and rob us. Sin makes the beasts of the field and the stones of the
street at enmity with us; terram eunucham, the heavens as brass, and the earth
as iron, not able to bring forth in due season. Sin dislocates and perverts the
course of Nature, and changes it, says Basil, (...), into contrary tempers.
This puts supernatural aspects upon events which have natural causes. If it be
a comet, it makes it ominous; if a cloud, that is the cataclysm; if a vapor,
that damps it into a plague. This sets up all the creatures in arms against us,
and makes us, like Cain, no better then Vagabonds and Runnagates upon the
earth. REMITTE NOBIS must be put up; else DA NOBIS will return empty. We must
sue out our pardon, or else the windows of heaven will not open to rain down
Manna upon us. Again, though our corn and our wine abound (for we cannot entail
these temporal blessings on the righteous alone) yet our Bread will be turned
into a stone, and our Wine will be as bitter as gall; nor can they feed our
hungry souls, sed ipsam esuriem animarum pascere, as St. Bernard speaks, bring
that Leanness into them which is the forerunner of death. Blessings we may call
them; and so they are: but till we be reconciled to God, they are such
blessings as will stop up our way to true happiness, and stand as a barricado
between us and those everlasting habitations. Laqueus in auro, viscum in
argento, says St. Ambrose; There will be a snare in our Gold to entrap us, and
aviscosity in our Silver to retard us. The rust of them shall be as a witness
against James 5. 3.
us, and eat our flesh as it were fire; Et quid alimenta proderunt, si illis
reputamur quasi taurus ad victimam? What is Gold to Piety? What is Wealth to
Grace? What is a Palace to Heaven? What is our Food and Nourishment, if we be
fed and fatted only as the Ox is, to be sacrificed? What are all the Riches of
the world but as the Tyrants ropes of silk and daggers of gold? or what use do
they serve to but this, ut carius pereamus, that we may tread those paths which
lead unto death with more state and pomp than other men do? I would have spared
this observation, although it be a Fathers, and one as learned as the best, but
that the general love to Riches and the things of this Life, which now reigns
and rages in the world, may raise a jealousy and just suspicion that some
there are, who as they have excluded others, and made themselves proprietaries
of all, and that by no other title than this, That they are the children of
God; so again, when they have, with Ahab, killed and taken possession, when
they have by unjust means filled their coffers, they begin to clap their hands
and applaud themselves, and to make their being rich an argument that they are
good and the beloved of God: And though with great zeal they dare call the Pope
Antichrist, yet they join hands with the Papists in this, in making Temporal
happiness a true note of the Church, and counting Poverty a curse and the just
punishment of a wicked conversation. Indeed, ask them their opinion, and they
will deny it as heretical, we may be sure, because it has no show of reason to
commend it: But surely even theirs it is: For their speech and behavior
bewrays them. For do they not lie down and sleep on their heaps? Do they not
batten in their wealth? Do they not flatter themselves when such a golden
shower falls into their laps, and think that it cannot be but God himself is in
it? And do they not flourish like green olivetrees in the house of the Lord,
when they have nothing but this dung about them? Do they not count them as
smitten of God who stay below in the valley, and are there content to dwell
with Poverty rather than to climb up that ladder, and with these seeming
Angels, to aspire to that height from whence they are in danger to break their
necks? And this is a dangerous error. But there is nothing more easy than thus
to err, than to say, nay, than to think, that we are in the favor of God when
his Sun does shine upon our tabernacle, to say, AVE, Hayl to our selves, as
highly favored, when the world smiles upon us and flatters us; and to draw
this conclusion from no other premises than a full Purse and large
Possessions. So that the Apostles axiom is inverted quite: For to these men
Godliness is not great Gain, but Great Gain is Godliness. And therefore that we
dash not against this rock, let us put up this Petition also in Gods Court of
Requests. Let us be diligent to make our election sure, and not only, with
Esau, lift up our voice and howl after our Bread, after plenty of wheat and
wine; but, with the Publican, lift up our hearts and smite them, that the sound
of a broken heart may go up into the ears of the Almighty, and return with this
delightful echo, REMITTUNTUR PECCATA, That our sins are forgiven us. For being
thus reconciled, we who could not conclude we were reconciled by our being
rich, may certainly conclude we are rich by our being reconciled. For with
Remission of sins we have that Peace which is better than Gold and Silver, and
which makes Lazarus richer than Dives. If we have not, yet we want not. If we
do not possidere, yet we do nolle. If we possess not any thing, yet we lack
nothing which we would have. And this is for a man to be Lord of all the world.
Credenti totus mundus divitiarum est, infidelis etiam obolo caret, says St.
Hierome, He that is at peace with God possesses all things; when the wilful
offender, who is careless to sue out his pardon, though he measure money by the
Bushel, yet stands in need of a single halfpenny. DA NOBIS without REMITTE
NOBIS, Give us without Forgive us makes no purchase at all, or but such a one
as will make us worse than Bankrupts. And so I descend to the exposition of the
words themselves, Forgive us our debts, or trespasses, as we forgive our
debtours, or them that trespass against us.

In this Petition we observe 1. the Form of it; 2. the Clause of modification:
first, the Thing which we desire, Remission of sins; secondly, the Manner, or
the Condition, or, as St. Cyprian calls it, the Law, by which we put up this
Petition. For we do not commence it in an absolute and positive form, as we do
the others, but conditionally. When we beg the remission of our sins, we bind
our selves by promise, we make the condition our selves, and in a manner enact
a law by which we are obliged to forgive them that trespass against us; so that
if we fail in the condition, if we forget our promise, if we break this law, if
we make not good our covenant, we make our Father a Judge, and prompt him to
the severity of a denial: If our bowels yern not, his tender mercies will be
shut up: and ex ore nostro, we are condemned already out of our own mouth. Si
hoc posterius aut non dicimus, aut dicimus fallaciter, illud certe quod prius
est dicimus inaniter, says St. Augustine; If this latter part be not
pronounced, or be pronounced from a heart full of deceit and hypocrisy; the
former, though we cry, and cry aloud, will not be heard, nor be of any force at
all, unless it be in stead of mercy to pull down vengeance upon our heads.
These be the parts of this Petition. In the former part we make an open
confession 1. of our Misery by sin; 2. of Gods Mercy and willingness to forgive
and put away our sin. For confessio non semper ad peccata referenda est, verum
etiam in Dei laudibus intelligitur, says Hilary; Confession is as well of Gods
Goodness as of our own Sin. And here they both meet and are concentred in this
Petition, which as it implies a want in us, so it supposes an ability and
readiness to supply our want in him to whom it is directed. In general then we
have these two things employed, an humble acknowledgment that we are sinners,
and a joyful recognition that God is merciful. In the first we look upon our
sins as upon so many festered and loathsome sores, with an eye of sorrow; in
the second with the eye of Faith we behold the balm of Gilead which alone can
heal us.

And first, he that beggs pardon does certainly acknowledge a fault. REMITTE
NOBIS; Vox hominem sonat; It can be the voice of none but of Man alone. Now
that we may show what Confession and Acknowledgment of sin is requisite, we
will follow the Philosophers method, and begin (...), with redargution, and lay
open those errors which do effeminare disciplinam, corrupt and effeminate this
Christian discipline, and make our Acknowledgment so weak that it cannot raise
it self so high as to join and close with Remission of sins. And first this is
one, an humble conceit, as we call it, that we cannot but sin. Thus we love
dolose versari in universalibus, to loyter and dwell in generalities, and so
deceive our selves; but not without great reluctancie do we descend unto
particulars. The total sum, men confess, is great, more then the sand of the
Sea, and the hairs of their head: but bring them to a just calculation and to a
particular account, and we find nothing but ciphers; some sins of daily
Incursion, some sins of Subreption, some minute, scarce visible sins; but not
the figure of any sin which will make up a number. They talk much of their
Weakness, as if they did nothing but sin; but yet their Strength upon the trial
is so great as if they did not sin at all. For this conceit follows them in all
their ways, and stands between them and those sins which they have left behind
them. And if at any time they cast a look back upon them, they behold them
through this imagination of Weakness as through a pane of painted glass, which
discolours all, and makes the greatest sin appear in the hue and shape of a sin
of Infirmity. To them whose furiae libidinum, those Furies of Lust, are not so
terrible, those monsters of sin are not so deformed, those sins which devour
have not a tooth. For why should they complain of a bruise who are so just as
to fall and rise seven times a day? And this is it which they call Humility.
But if it be Humility, it is but that which the Apostle calls a voluntary
humility. That Humility which God commends lifts us up as high as heaven when
it lays us on the ground, but this Humility buries us alive. That Humility bows
us down with sorrow; this binds our hands with sloth. That looks upon our
imperfections past; this makes way for more to come. That helps us forward to
perfection; this makes us more imperfect: That seals our pardon, but this blots
and cancels it. It is not good to presume of our own strength; but it is as
dangerous to be so humble as to wallow in the mire, to be humble to our own
damnation. Humility after sin is a medicine; but this which stalketh before sin
and unavoidable dangers, is not Humility, but Impotencie; not Humility, but
Cowardice and Pusillanimity, which presents her self under this name and in
this humble posture; not Humility, but Negligence, which is still afraid of a
lion in the way, and stands still at the show of difficulty; not Humility, but
Fear, which betrays all our succors. Nec mirum si vincamur, qui jam victi
sumus; And no marvel if we fail in the battle, who are already overcome. If we
sin, our duty is to call upon our Advocate; but not to suborn the Peccability
of our nature, or rather a Necessity of sinning, as an Advocate for Sin.

Again, in the second place, there be some who make this Acknowledgment of
their sin but a ceremony or piece of formality, and think that these very
words, Forgive us our trespasses, are a spell against Sin, an antidote, which
if we carry about us, no contagion can hurt us; as if REMITTE NOBIS were verba
privilegiata, as Gerson speaks, words that have a peculiar privilege and
prerogative, and do purge a sinner ex opere operato, as soon as they are
pronounced, or, like Bells after their superstitious baptism or consecration,
drive away the Devil with the very sound. The profane Gallant thunders out an
oath, and the next prayer is that God would forgive the villain. The
superstitious Wanton watches his sins as he does his beads, but drops them
faster, and is as often with the Priest as with the Adultress, as greedy to
confess his sin as of the twilight and opportunity to sin: So that Sin and
Confession of sin make up the wheel in which he is circled and turned about,
till he fall to the ground, and can neither sin nor acknowledge it. And this
has brought a scandal upon the practice of the Church, as if it rather brought
a cordial to cheer and comfort the sinner than a purge to remove the sin; and
as if Confession did but ease the stomach to make us more greedy and hungry
after our husks than before. But let every man examine himself, whether he pray
with the spirit, and pray with the understanding also; whether, when he cries
Remitte, he be not as a Barbarian unto himself, and one that speaks in an
unknown language; whether his mind be not (...), divided in his prayer. St.
Augustine says, Avarus de pecunia cogitat; The covetous asks forgiveness of
his sins when his thoughts are a forging a sin which needs another forgiveness.
Another mind is on revenge, when he beggs a pardon, Et, quod inconsultissimum
est, id agunt multi ut quod affectu and voto volunt, id ipsum re and actu nolle
videantur; And, which is the greatest folly in the world, many speak with a
great earnestness for that which they would not obtain, and pray for
forgiveness of sins, which they labor to multiply. And so pour forth nutabundam
and ebriam orationem, as Cassian speaks, a staggering and a doubtful request,
begging for mercy, but being afraid to be heard; and making the hope of a
pardon the intercessor and harbinger for Sin, which would hardly enter without
such an encouragement.

Thirdly, others there are whose thoughts are at home, and who with grief and
sorrow acknowledge their sin, but yet repent not. A man may water his couch
with his tears, and lie down in sackcloth and ashes, and yet fall short of true
repentance, and of that acknowledgment of sin that is a forerunner of mercy. A
man may lacrymis orare and ingemiscere, as Hilary speaks, weep and groan for
sin, and yet all may be vox and praeterea nihil. Those tears and that grief for
sin may flow not from the Love of God, but from the very gall of bitterness,
the Love of Sin it self. A man may be sorry, not that he has sinned, but that
it is not lawful to sin. A man may be afraid of his sin, and yet not willing to
part company, frown, and smite on it all at once; depart, and return; go from
it, and look back; and at last confess it, and yet plead for it; and so be
benignissimus Dei interpres, a most favorable and gracious interpreter of Gods
threatenings, and a merciful expounder of his judgments: And such a man will
make up but a faint and feeble and imperfect acknowledgment.

Lastly, we may know and acknowledge our sins, and repent, but relapse: Which
makes our acknowledgment and repentance void. Vera peccati confessio est sine
intermissione poenitere, says Hilary; True repentance is a constant forsaking
of sin. And unless we forsake our sin, without doubt our repentance is not
true. Omne malum aut pudore aut timore natura suffudit, Sin has naturally
Shame and Fear to attend it: And this may shut up our eyes and seal up our lips
and shackle our hands for awhile. Stomachum nobis facit cito redituris in
gratiam, It has turned our stomach a little; but when the pang is off, when we
have some ease, our appetite will come again, and we shall return with the dog
to our vomit. And thus petita relinquimus, relicta repetimus; We ebb and flow,
we rise and fall, and never remain at one stay. In gradu toti sumus. We are in
a perpetual recidivation. To conclude; This is not an acknowledgment, but
rather a contradiction infinitely multiplied, and will never be heard in the
Court of Mercy, but rather censured as a foul absurdity and gross soloecism in
Christian behavior. No, says Tertullian, Cessatio delicti radix est veniae;
The root from whence pardon and forgiveness springs is a cessation of sinning
and total forsaking of sin: And from this it will receive juice and
nourishment, and grow up and flourish, and be as the Tree of Life in the
Revelation, which will shadow and cover our sins, and whose leaves are to heal
the nations. In a word, to acknowledge our sins is not to count it a part of
our religion to cry out, We are weak, and cannot do that which we should. It is
not a complement or ceremony, a Father, forgive us; a REMITTE NOBIS, and no
more. It is not found in a breath alone, nor in a tear alone, nor in a faint
resolution, nor in a short repentance. To Acknowledge our sin is not to profess
our inability to avoid it; is not to say our Pater noster; is not, to lie down
in sorrow, and rise up again in rebellion; is not (...), to fall and rise; to
repent, and relapse; It consists not in these qualms and fits and pauses and
intervals of piety. But, as St. Augustine speaks, to Acknowledge our sin, is
perseverantissime and invictissime nolle; is to confess them, and constantly to
hate them. And this perseverant and invincible renouncing of our sins does
eructare se in superficiem, breathe it self forth outward, and is vocal in our
confession, floats upon our tears, is visible in the outward man, and so fits
and qualifies us for Gods mercy and compassion: Who as he loves his creature,
and hates sin, so he has in his infinite goodness and wisdom ordained a means
to destroy sin, and to reconcile his creature at once to himself and to
everlasting happiness. Which is the second general observation which we draw
out of this Petition, and to the handling of which we now proceed.

The Goodness and Mercy of God, though infinite and eternal, as Himself, yet in
respect of its operation ad extra it supposes some object to work on. By his
wisdom he made the heavens: for his mercy endures for ever. He redeemeth us
from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever. He forgiveth us our sins:
for his mercy endures for ever. So that his Mercy and Goodness, which are
primariae proprietates, prime qualities, in him, appear and show themselves
even in his Wisdom, Power and Majesty. For why did he create the Universe? What
moved him to make those (...), those two lights, as Nazianzene calls Angels and
Man, after his own image? It was not that he needed the company of Cherubim and
Seraphim, or had any addition of joy by hearing of their (...), It was not that
he needed the ministry of Angels, or the obedience of Men. But in mercy has
he made them all: and his Goodness it was which did communicate it self to his
creature, to make him capable of happiness, and in some degree a partaker of
those glories and graces which are essential to him. For having made Man, he
could not but love and favor the work of his own hands. Therefore as in mercy
he made him, so in mercy he made him a Law, the observation of which would have
assimilated and drawn him near unto God, and at last have brought him to his
presence, there to live and reign with him for ever. And when Man had broken
this Law, and so forfeited his title to bliss, God calls after him, not
simplici modo and interrogatorio sono, as Tertullian speaks, not in a soft and
regardless way, or by a gentle and drowsy interrogation, Where art thou, Adam?
but impresso and incusso and imputativo, he presses it home, and drives it to
the quick, not by way of doubt, but imputation and commination, Adam, where art
thou? that he might know where he was, in what state and danger, and so confess
his sin, and make himself capable of Gods mercy, which presented and offered it
self in this imputation and commination, and was ready to embrace him. Thus his
Mercy prevents us. It is first, as being, says Nazianzene, (...), natural to
him; whereas Anger and Hostility to his creature are (...), quite besides his
nature. Prior, bonitas Dei, secundum naturam; posterior, severitas, secundum
causam: illa, edita; haec, adhibita, says Tertullian, Lib. 2. adv. Marcion.
Goodness and Mercy are natural to him; Severity, forced. That is momentany and
essential; this, accidental. Mercy follows after us, and is more willing to
lift us up than we were to fall, more willing to destroy Sin than we to commit
it, more forward to forgive us our sins than we are to put up the Petition.
REMITTUNTUR TIBI PECCATA, Thy sins are forgiven thee, is a standing sentence, a
general proclamation, says Father Latimer, to all that will believe and
repent. The Scripture gives us the dimensions of this Mercy, sometimes pointing
out to the height of it; It reaches unto heaven: sometimes to the depth of it;
It fetches men from the grave and hell it self: sometimes to the length of it;
It has been ever of old: and sometimes to the breadth of it; All the ends of
the world have seen the salvation of God. And all these meet and are at home in
this act of Remission of sins; Which makes us to understand with all Saints
what is the breadth and length and depth and height of the love of God, which
passes knowledge, and fills Ephesians. 3. 18, 19
us with the fullness of God.

But though the Lord's Mercy be infinite, and he be most ready to forgive, yet
he will not remit our sins unless we repent. A lesson never taught in the
School of Nature or in the books of the Heathen. Quid Cicero, quid Seneca de
poenitentia? What have Tully or Seneca, who have written most divinely of other
duties and offices of life, written of the duty of Repentance? Non negamus
philosophos juxta nostra sensisse, says Tertullian; Many truths Philosophers
have delivered of near alliance to those which God himself has commended to
us; and in many virtues they may seem to have out-stript the most of
Christians. But of Repentance they knew no more than this, that it was passio
quaedam animi veniens de offensa sententiae prioris, a certain passion of the
mind which checked men for that which was done amiss, and caused them to alter
their mind. Here all reason and discourse is posed. But when the earth was
barren, and could not yield this seed of Repentance, Deus eam sevit, God
himself sowed it in the world, and aperuit salutis portam, opened an effectual
door of salvation, and made it known to all mankind, That if men would leave
off their sins, he would forgive them, and accept of true repentance as the
only means to wash away the guilt of sin, and reconcile the creature to his
Maker. Now join these two together, the Mercy of God and his Readiness to
forgive, and our Repentance, which he has chalkt out unto us as a way to his
Mercy, and they are a precious antidote against Despair, which so daunts us
many times that we are afraid to put up this Petition. For Despair is not begot
by those sins we have committed, but by those which we daily fall into; nor so
much from want of Faith that God is merciful and true and faithful in all his
promises, as for want of Hope, which hangs down the head when Repentance and
Amendment of life yield no juice nor moisture to nourish it. Ask Judas himself,
and he will tell you there is a God; or else he could not despair: Ask him
again, and he will tell you he is true; or else he denies him to be God: He
will tell you of the riches of the glorious mystery of our Redemption, and that
in Christ remission of sins is promised to all mankind: But his perseverance in
sin and the horror of his new offenses has weakened and infeebled his hope, and
forces him to conclude against himself. Ubi emendatio nulla, poenitentia
nulla; Where there is no amendment, there is no repentance. And though Mercy
stand at the door, and knock, yet if I leave not my sins, there must needs
follow a weakness and disability, so that I shall not be able to let her in.
But if I forsake my sins, the wing of Mercy is ready to shadow me from Despair.
Et si nudus rediero, recipiet Deus, quia redii, Though I return naked to God,
he will receive me, because I return. And if I leave the swine and the husks,
he will meet me as a Father, and bring forth his robe of Mercy to cover me. And
so I pass from the consideration of Gods Mercies in the Forgiveness of sin, to
the first particular enquiry, What sins they are which we desire may be
forgiven.

And this may seem to be but a needless enquiry. For even Nature it self will
suggest an answer. Men in wants desire a full supply: And they who are sick of
many diseases do not make it their end to be cured of one malady, but to be
restored to perfect health. In corporibus aegris nihil quod nociturum est
medici relinquunt; Physicians purge out all ill humors from those bodies which
are distempered. For when one disease is spent, another may kill me; and when I
have recovered one malady, I may be thrown down by another. Habet hoc
solicitudo, quod omnia necessaria putet; True Care and Solicitude thinks
nothing done till all be done, and is afraid that the least distemper may be as
dangerous as a disease. FORGIVE US OUR SINS] Who knows the danger of the least
sin, and will not make the gloss himself, Forgive us them all, and make his
Repentance hold analogy with the Mercy of God, which does (...), make a perfect
and universal cure. In medicines for the body that may be good for the Head
which is not for the Heart; and that may be sovereign for the Stone which has
no virtue in easing the Gout: But the Mercy of God is like his Power in this,
ita magna in magnis ut non sit minor in minimis, equal and like it self in the
purging and remission of the greatest and smallest sins. Upon our repentance he
blotteth out all our sins and transgressions; whether they be devoratoriae
salutis, those which, till they be forgiven, take away all hope of salvation;
or quotidianae incursionis, those which every day by subreption steal upon us;
or modica and media delicta, as Tertullian, those sins of a middle nature,
which are not to be reckoned amongst those of daily incursion, nec tamen culmen
tenent, and yet do not reach the highest pitch of impiety: I cannot but
acknowledge that it is necessary to distinguish of sins: And it is no Logical
deduction which the Church of Rome has made, That because we make all sins in
their own nature mortal, we therefore make them all equal: Yet in our
repentance and devotion it will be one part of our spiritual wisdom minima pro
maximis cavere, to consider our least sins as if they were of the greatest
magnitude; to think there is danger not only in Murder, but in an angry
thought; that not only our burning Lusts, but a very spark may consume us; and
vel atomos numerare, and to number up the very atoms of sins. For though those
ordinary sins which steal upon us unseen, and slip by us insensibly, do not
digg up Charity by the very root, yet certainly they proceed from no other
fountain than a defect and want of Charity, which if it were as perfect and
consummate as it ought to be, would arm us against the assault of these thieves
which steal in by night. And more wisdom it is etiam quae tuta sunt
pertimescere, to be jealous of that which will not hurt us, and to think that a
fault which is none, than to say of these sins as Lot did of Zoar, Are they not
little ones? and my soul shall live; or to sit down with the resolution of the
Casuists in almost the same case, Modicum pro nihilo est, A small sin is in
esteem as good as none at all. For by thus slighting them sins multiply and
gather strength, and numero vincunt, what they want in bulk, they supply in
number, and overwhelm thee, if not as great, yet as many. Small expenses, says
Aristotle, if frequent, overthrow a family. And it is but a fallacy to think,
if the particulars be small, the sum will be so. (...), Great is not therefore
small because it consists of many littles. And the great Orator will tell us
that that neglect which endangers a Commonwealth is not straight seen in
particular actions and miscarriages, but (...), in the conclusion and event at
last. And St. Augustine has observed of these small sins, Quanto minora, tanto
crebriora; Because they be less, we presume the oftener to commit them. I know
there is no man, when he puts up this Petition, does except any the least sin,
but would have them all buried in the bottom of the Sea: Yet we must not think
it is enough to ask forgiveness; but we must be also watchful to observe them,
and take these brats and dash them against the stones. For even these brats, if
we play and sport with them, will prove at last mighty Giants, sons of Anak,
which will fight against us to keep us out of Canaan. St. Augustine, lib. 2. De
Civit. Dei, tells us that this is a daily prayer, and that it will blot out
quotidiana peccata, our ordinary and daily sins, sine quibus in hac vita non
vivitur, as he speaks in his Enchiridion, without which the severest man does
not pass his life: and for common steps DIMITTE NOBIS PECCATA, this common
prayer, Forgive us our trespasses, may suffice. But yet he tells us withal,
Quia fiunt peccata, ideo dicitur; non ut ideo fiant, quia dicitur; That this is
said, and we are taught thus to pray, because we through infirmity fall into
these sins; but we must not fall into these sins because we are taught thus to
pray. For as there were some in his time who, mistaking this very Petition,
thought that they might persist in any sin, so they forgave their brother, and
were bountiful to the poor and needy, that with a piece of money they might
redeem their adulteries and uncleanness, and satisfy for the sins of the
greatest magnitude: So if it went once for true, that to breathe out these
words would scatter our daily sins, before the wind, and quite abolish them,
men would be very apt at last to be too favorable interpreters of God, and to
think he takes no notice of those idle words for which he has threatened to
bring us into judgment; and we should sin, and pray; and pray, and sin; and
carry this Petition with us to ease us of these sins, as some foolish women in
Chrysostoms time did certain pieces of gold of Alexander the Great to cure the
headache. And this is non tam morbo laborare quam remedio, to be sick not so
much of our disease as of the remedy; which being skilfully applied is indeed
an antidote, but taken as a charm or spell proves as dangerous as the disease
which it was to remove, and makes that mortal which of it self might have been
purged out with ease. I will say no more but with the Father, Objurgemus nostra
phantasmata, and tam nugatorios ludos de spectaculo mentis ejiciamus; Let us
check and chide our phansies when they catch at such shadows as these, and cast
out such trifling slights out of our minds; and learn to pray for the
forgiveness of these sins, and also to strive against them; to watch our hands,
and set a seal to our lips, to observe each thought as it enters, lest when we
have purged the hand and the tongue and all the members of our body, by
delighting in thoughts, because they are but thoughts, we do at last lupanar in
palatio constituere, erect a stews in the very palace of the soul. Let us
remember that we pray for the forgiveness of these sins, as we do of all the
rest, with a resolution to extirpate them by degrees. For, as the Schoolmen
tell of the Sacraments, that they are protestationes fidei, certain
protestations of the Faith which we profess, so is Prayer for remission of sins
protestatio poenitentiae, an open protestation and promise of repentance. And
we pray for the forgiveness of all our sins; but it is of those which we have
already committed, and which are past. To put up a petition for future sins, or
those which may be committed hereafter, were rather to threaten God than to
pray to him, and not so much a prayer as a further resolution to sin again, or
at least a betraying of a very weak resolution against it. Common sense will
instruct us in many duties which we owe unto God. Would any man who had
forfeited his life beg a pardon of his Prince for that fault and the next he
commits? Nemo sic rogat ut minetur, says Hierom. This were a strange way of
petitioning, a strange method of praying, to back it with threats: A strange
method of praying, to say, Forgive my sins, even those which as yet are neither
obnoxious to punishment nor capable of pardon. Forgive me that which is not,
but may be; that which with my tears I now wash out, and that which may again
pollute my soul; that which I now strive to mortify and kill in me, and that
which my lust will no doubt conceive and bring forth. This were not so much a
prayer against sin past as an encouragement to offend again; a prayer for a
pardon of that sin which, when it appears, will disannul and nullify that
which is already sealed; or rather a petition which denies it self, because it
puts together two things so contrary and opposite, as the Forgiveness of sin
past and a plain Supposal of future transgressions. For this Petition for
Forgiveness of sins, though it be no manifest proof that we shall not, yet is a
strong argument that we should not sin again. I am no Novatian, no enemy of
Gods Goodness and Mercy, nor interfector poenitentiae, a suppressour of
frequent repentance. I know Repentance is not, as Baptism, but once to be had,
and never reiterated. I know we ought to repent toties quoties, as often as we
offend, and daily to pray that God will pardon the sins we daily commit. But we
cannot expect that God should accept our prayers and our repentance, and
vouchsafe to pardon us, unless we steadfastly resolve to strive against all sin
for the future, and to serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days of
our life.

The Fourtieth SERMON. PART. II.
MATTHEW. VI. 12. And forgive us our debts, as we forgive our debtors. Or, as
LUKE XI. 4: And forgive us our sins: for we also forgive every one that is
indebted to us.
HAving led you through the land of the Philistines to the land of Canaan
flowing with milk and honey; from the mount which burned with fire, to mount
Sion, to the city of the living God; from the acknowledgment of our Sins to the
sight of Gods Mercy, which, as St. Bernard calls it, is a large cloak to cover
all our sins of what magnitude soever. Having spoken in general of the Mercy of
God and his readiness to forgive, before we show the (...), the effect and
fruit which it brings forth, and what Remission of sins is, we must make a
pause and stand, and a while take off our eyes from the Mercy-seat, and direct
them to the further consideration of our Sins, 1. as they are debts, 2. as they
are ours; and enquire 1. why they are called debts, 2. why we are taught to
appropriate them to our selves, and call them ours: And then we shall bring you
to the full taste of that pleasant fruit which grows up and has its bud and
blossom and full beauty and perfection from this dew of heaven, the rich
influence of Mercy. And in this pause or parenthesis we do but follow the
method of Nature it self, which does not present all her creatures at once, but
by degrees; or of the Eleusinian Priests, qui servabant quod ostenderent
revisentibus, who did not open all their secrets and mysteries at first, but
fed the expectation of their novices with the hope of something which they
reserved for a second view. First then, what S. Matthew. here calls debts, St.
Luke calls sins (...). As in Debts it is between the creditor and the debtor,
so is it in Sins between God and Man. Now the Philosopher, nay common reason,
will teach us that he that will compare two things one with the other, must
know them both. And we need not make any anxious search in these matters: For
who knows not what Debt is? and who knows not what Sin is? Utinam tam solicitus
affectus de fugiendo peccato, quam facilis sermo. It were to be wished that we
were as solicitous to shun them both as we are ready and active to speak of the
horror and affliction they bring; that it were as easy to avoid as to know
them. Thus has it pleased our great Master, who has taught us here to pray
for the forgiveness of sins, to teach us also to know the nature and quality of
our Sins by that which is most familiar to our very sense. I might here lay
down before your eyes the several respects in which our Sins and pecuniary
Debts bear analogy and likeness; and I might also point out certain like
effects and operations which they both produce in their several subjects, and
which are common both to men far indebted in the world and to those who are
bankrupts in the house of God: But having handled both those points at large in
another place, I shall at this time pass them over, and only observe the wisdom
of the holy Ghost in this expression, and that very briefly.

The words of God, the more we view them, the more plentifully do they evermore
offer themselves, and, like rich minerals, assidue before respondent fodienti,
the more they are dig'd, the more treasure do they yield, even (...), manifold
and various Doctrines. Therefore St. Chrysostom tells us that in reading of
the Scriptures (...), we ought to weigh every particle and syllable: For though
they seem to be but like unto rivulets, yet, if a man follow them with a
diligent and observant eye, they will lead him into a Sea and Ocean of matter.
And this has befallen me in the survey of this Petition. At the first view we
conceived this word debts to be a fit metaphor fully expressing the nature of
our Sins; but having staid longer and dwelt upon it, a bright beam of light
showed it self by which we could descry the wisdom of our Savior in making
choice of this resemblance which presents the deformity and danger of Sin as
it were to our very eye. Habemus alium sensum interioris hominis isto
praestantiorem, says St. Augustine; Indeed God has given us another sense of
the inward man, far exceeding the outward, by which we may plainly discern Good
from Evil by those species and appearances in which they represent themselves.
And this may do its office, and exercise its act sine acie pupillae, sine
foramine auriculae, without the help of the apple of the eye or the hollow of
the ear or any other sense. For quis unquam contrectavit justitiam? Who ever
handled Justice? who ever saw Vice? But Man being (...), as Chrysostom calls
him, a creature composed as it were of a double nature, made up of a Sensitive
and Intellectual part, and being (...), the bond and knot, in which both are
united, makes use of both, and many times apprehends things not so lively by
their proper species, which they present, as from those which are forinsecal,
but from some outward object more visible and familiar to him; understands
things not so well by Definitions as Comparisons; as what Sins are, by Debts;
what the Devil is, by a Jailer; what Hell is, by a Prison. We do not know
things our selves, unless our Understanding do convertere se ad phantasmata,
unless we frame unto our selves certain phantasmes, per modum exemplorum, in
which we may behold the things in their true shape. And when we would teach
others what we already know, we do it by examples and comparisons. So the
Philosopher not only in his Logicks, but also in his Physics and Metaphysics,
proves his rules by Letters, (...), and his instances are out of Arithmetic,
or Geometry, or Music, which they first learnt, and which every one had skill
in. In Definitions, we see, it falls out that both Virtues and Vices either
appear in different shapes, or else slide away, and pass by us in silence; but
being thus charactered and drawn out to the very eye by art and fit similitudes
they gain more force and efficacy; they press upon our fancy and busy our
understanding part (...), and are more visible in outward things than inwords.
When we hear Sin called a transgression of the Law, a prevarication, an offense
against God, we are not so sensible as when we hear Sins called Debts. And
therefore our blessed Savior in this does ancillari infirmitati, condescend to
our infirmity, and rem invisibilem per rei visibilis formam describit, by
telling us that our sins are Debts, he shows us the danger and the misery
they plunge us into, and the deep and heavy engagements they make us liable to.

Our next enquiry is, How these Debts are ours, and why we are taught to call
them so. And this is no vain unnecessary inquiry. For if they be not ours, why
do we put up this Petition? or what need have we of mercy and forgiveness? And
if we put up our Petition in that form and style which Christ has prescribed,
and then please our selves with I know not what extenuations and reservations,
as, That they are ours indeed, but not only ours, not fully and wholly ours;
the work of our fingers, but so that there were other hands which did help to
forge and shape them; OURS, but so that Fate had a share, and Adam a share, and
the Devil a share, and God himself a share; that is, NOSTRA, NON NOSTRA; ours,
and not ours; we do but ludere interpretationibus de peccatis nostris, delude
our selves with false glosses and interpretations; and we do not breathe forth
a prayer, but a complement, and teach God not to hear us, who are so unwilling
to understand our selves, and dare equivocate with the Truth it self. And this
may serve to wipe off the paint that men use to lay upon their sins; that they
may not appear so ugly and deformed as they are. The World has long since
learnt this art of juggling with themselves, and been very expert and cunning,
pavimentare peccata, as St. Augustine speaks, to plaster and parget their sins
over. Not my sin, says the Man, but the Woman's; Not my sin, says the Woman,
but the Serpents. Oh my Fate, says one; Oh my Infirmity, says another; Oh the
Devil, says a third. Either they are not sins, or else sins which the Devil
must father; or else compensativa peccata, sins to a good end which will
recompense the sin. Neque quisquam tam malus ut malus videri velit; Nor is any
one so desperately evil that he is willing to be thought so, or will own that
brat which his Lust has conceived and brought forth. Omnes peccata
dissimulant, and quamvis feliciter cesserint, fructu illorum utuntur, ipsa
subducunt, says Seneca; All are apt to dissemble their faults, being content,
when they are crowned with fortunate success, to reap the fruit and pleasure of
them, whilst they subduct the faults themselves, and remove them out of the
way. So that Sin, which is bred out of the corruption of every man's heart, is
exposed and cast-out; and though it have many foster-fathers, yet it finds none
that will acknowledge it: That, as Tiberius spoke of Rufus in Tacitus, a man of
obscure birth and parentage, and that could not well tell from what stock or
family he descended, Videri potest Rufus ex se genitus, Rufus may seem to have
been his own Father; So may we say of sin, Videri potest ex se natum; Since all
disclaim it in its own shape and likeness, it may be thought also that it is
grown up of it self. In other things we are not content with our own, but are
ready to claim a title to that which is properly another. How many plagiaries
have we not only of Learning, but of Virtue? how many pretenders to Integrity?
What altercation has there been which were the first inventors of the Arts?
And what an Euge do we give our selves, what a triumph does it beget, when a
man can say, Ego primus inveni, I was the first author and finder out of this
conclusion? What would we not have ours? What is not ours? Paul is ours, and
Cephas is ours, and Christ is ours, and Heaven is ours; Only Sin, which we
labor for, which we sweat for, which we are ambitious of, is not ours. That
Adultery which I waited for till the twilight, that Murder which I thirsted for
till a fit opportunity, that Deceit which I forged with that difficulty, that
Iniquity which was the study of my whole life, is none of mine. Of these we
love to deonerate our selves, to rid our hands of them; Et nolumus esse nostra
quia mala agnoscimus, and ours we are unwilling to call them, because our
Conscience is convinced, and Reason does plainly tell us to our faces, that
they are evil. Now this is a great evil under the Sun, and there is a sovereign
remedy for it shut up in this one word OURS; in which our Savior does not only
teach us to pray against it, but does give us catharticum, a receipt to purge
out this noxious and malignant humor. It is but a word, but a syllable, but as
the cloud in the Book of Kings, as big as a man's hand; but as that anon covered
all the heavens over, and yielded great store of rain, so may this word, this
syllable, yield us plenty of instruction. But we will confine and limit our
discourse, and draw those lines which we will pass by, and which we will not
exceed. We shall show 1. how Sin is ours, 2. That all sins are ours; 3. That
they are only ours; and lastly, That they are wholly and totally ours: that so
we may agere poenitentiam plenam, as the Ancients used to speak, that our
exomologesis may be open and sincere, and our repentance full and complete. And
of these in their order.

There is nothing more properly ours than Sin. Not our Bodies: For God formed
Man of the dust of the ground; de limo terrae, quasi ex utero matris, Genesis 2 7.
says Tertullian, shaped him out of the earth, as out of his mothers womb. Not
our Souls: For he breathed into us the breath of life. Not our Understandings:
For he kindled this great light in our souls. Not our Affections: For he
imprinted them in our nature. Not the Law: For it is but a beam and a radiation
from that eternal Law which was always with him. Quod lex bona est, nostrum
non est: quod male vivimus, nostrum: That the Law is just and holy and true, is
not from us: but that we break this law, this we can attribute to none but our
selves. Nec nobis quicquam infoelicius in peccato habemus, quam nos auctores;
And this may seem our greatest infelicity that when Sin lies at our doors, we
can find no father for it but our selves, and that we are the authors of that
evil which destroys us. Now this propriety which we have to Sin arises from
the very nature of Man, who was not made only Lord of the world, but had free
possession given him of himself, and that freedom and power of Will which was
libripens emancipati a Deo boni, which does hold the balance, and weigh and
poise both Good and Evil, and may touch and strike either skale as he pleases.
For Man is not good or evil by necessity or chance, but by the freedom of his
Will, quod a Deo rationaliter attributum, ab homine vero qua voluit agitatum,
which was wisely given him of God, but is managed by man at pleasure, and
levelled and directed to either object, either good or evil, either life or
death. So that it is not my Knowledge of evil, it is not my Remembrance of
evil, it is not my Contemplation of sin, nay, it is not my Acting of sin (I
mean the producing of the outward act) which makes Sin mine, but my Will.
Voluntas mali malos efficit, sed scientia mali non facit scientes malos, says
Parisiensis; Sin may be in the understanding and in the Memory, and yet not
mine: I may know it, and loath it; I may remember, and abhor it. I may do some
act which the Law forbids, and yet not break that Law. But when my Will, which
does reign as an Empress over every faculty of the soul, and over every part of
the body, which says unto this part, Go, and it goes; and to another, Do this,
and it does it; when this commanding faculty does once yield and give her
assent against that Law which is just, fit jam proprietas mali in homine, and
quodammodo natura, says Tertullian; then Sin is our choice, our purchase, our
possession; and there arises a kind of propriety, and it is made in a manner
natural unto us, because we receive and admit it into our very nature at that
gate which we might have shut against it. The Adulterer may think that he is
not guilty of sin till he have taken his fill of lust: but that sin was his
when his will first yielded. An putas tunc primum te intrare meritorium cum
fornicem meretricis ingrederis? says St. Ambrose; Do thou think thou then
first entredst the stews when thou did first set foot in the harlots house?
Intrasti jam cum cogitationes tuas meretrix intravit, Thou were in already,
when the strange woman entered thy thoughts. And when thy will had determined
its act, thou were an adulterer, though thou knew no woman. And St.
Augustine gives the reason, Nihil enim aliud, quam ipsum velle est habere quod
volumus, For to have that which I will it is enough to will it. Villicus, si
velit, nihil peccat, says Columella; The Steward or Farmer does nothing amiss
unless he will. Homo potest peccare; sed, si nolit, non facit, says the
Father: Man may sin; but, if he sin, there can be no other reason given but his
Will. For the Will is of that power as to entitle me to sin, though I break not
forth into action: and when I am forced to the outward act, to quit me from the
guilt of sin; to denominate me either evil or good, when I do neither evil nor
good, and when my hands are shackled and bound. Lucrece was ravished by Tarquin,
and yet was as chaste as before: and the Orator said well, Duo fuerunt, and
adulterium unus admisit; There were two in the fact, and but one committed
adultery. For natural Reason did suggest this, Mentem peccare, non corpus, That
it is the Mind and Will, and not the Body, which sins; and where there is a
strong resolution not to offend, there can be no offense at all. For it is not
in my power, what to do, or not to do; but it is in my power to will, or not to
will; to make choice, or refuse. And therefore there is no such danger in the
doctrine of Freewill as some have phansied to themselves, and brought it in as
an argument against it that it is dangerous: For though my Will be free, my
Power is restrained, and has bounds set it; Thus far shall I go, and no
farther. (...), says Hierocles, Those things which are before me, I may
choose; but those I cannot, which are out of my reach. I may will the ruin of a
Kingdom, when I am not able to destroy a cottage: I may will the death of my
brother, and yet not be able to lift up my finger against him. My Will is
illimited, but my Power has bounds. And indeed it was not an argument against
Freewill, but a Rhetorical flourish and empty boast, which we find in Martin
Luther, Veniant magnifici illi liberi arbitrii ostentatores, says he; Let
those loud and glorious upholders of Freewill come, and show this freedom but
in the killing of a flea. For he mistook, and made our Power and Will to an act
all one; when it is plain and manifest, that he who cannot challenge a power to
kill a flea, yet may put on a will and resolution to murder a Prince. Thus in
all our actions the Will is all in all; in those which we perfect, and in those
which take no effect; in good, and in evil; in virtue, and in sin. For as in
our diary and register of Gods deeds we may reckon not only those which we
have done, but those which we would have done; and put in not only those alms
which our hands did distribute, but those which we were willing to give, and
could not: Plus enim metit conscientia quam gesta, says Hilary; for our
Conscience may reap the fruit of more than it actually sows, and applaud us for
actions which were not in the compass of our power to perform: So in the
catalogue of our Sins we must place not only evil Actions, but evil
Resolutions; not only Adultery, but Lust; not Murder alone, but the Thirst of
revenge; not only that sin which I have committed, but those which I would but
could not. For potest aliquis nocens esse, quamvis non nocuerit; Though I hurt
no body, yet am I not hereby justified. And though the Will be frustrate, yet
it is a Will still; and ipsa sibi imputatur, says Tertullian: nec excusari
potest per illam perficiendi infoelicitatem, operata quod suum est; and having
determined its act, it is not excused by any intervening impediment which comes
in between the outward act and the Will. And being Mistress of all our actions,
of all our faculties, she it is alone when we sin, which denominates us evil.
In a word, Though Sin gather strength from Custom, yet it has its beginning
and being from the Will, which does most unhappily appropriate Sins unto us,
and makes them our sins. And so I leave this enquiry, How Sins are ours, and
pass to our second consideration, That all sins are ours.

It is a frequent saying in St. Augustine, and most commonly taken up by all
that came after him, Adeo voluntarium est peccatum, ut si non sit voluntarium,
non sit peccatum; Sin is a thing so voluntary, that if it be not voluntary, it
is not Sin. And it is true, not in this or that, but in all sins, of what
degree or size soever; in sins of Malice, and sins of Infirmity; in sins of
Ignorance, and those of Subreption, which steal upon us and surprise us
unawares. For first, in sins of Malice, which have neither Ignorance nor
Infirmity to mitigate or allay them, but are done out of knowledge and custom,
and proceed from a Will depraved with Hatred and Envy and Pride, or some such
malignant and vicious habit; we may seem to have made a whole surrendry of our
Will to study and contrive sin, to call it unto us, as the Wiseman speaks, with
our words and works, and bellum legibus Wisd. 1. 16.
infer, to wage war with the Law and God himself. For at the first entrance
of Sin we may seem to yield, as some besieged Towns which are well victualled
and stored, upon terms and composition. Some wedge of gold, some smiling
pleasure, some flattering honor, some hopes or other, we entertain before we
let the enemy enter. But in a while we make captivity a sport, and servitutem
nostram quotidie emimus, quotidie pascimus, and buy our slavery at a price. We
become devils to our selves, and fall when no enemy pursues. We count liberty
as bondage, and, like those who live in perpetual night, think there is no day
at all. We sin, and multiply our sin. And what Pliny spoke of Regulus is most
true here, Quicquid a Regulo fit, necesse est fieri sicut non oportet;
Whatsoever we do, will be done amiss, because we do it. Now in these sins of
Malice we cannot once doubt that the Will is wanting. In hac passivitate vitae,
in hac diligentia delictorum, in this pascivity and licentiousness of life, in
this study and affectation of sins, when we have incorporated and as it were
consubstantiated them with us, we may well call them ours: For we have risen up
early and lain down late to purchase and accomplish them. And yet the Will may
seem to be more strongly besieged here, than when we fall by infirmity. For
there it was but a proffer, a show, that made her yield; but now she is held
under by custom: there the enemy put up conditions; here it is, Vae victis,
and the Will is led captive in chains. Notwithstanding the sins which we now
commit are most voluntary. And the Philosopher gives the reason in his Ethics,
(...). And Seneca renders it, Principia habuimus in nostra potestate; post
ablati impetu: Indeed, now we are hurried about with a kind of violence; but
the beginning of all was in our power, and we might at first have kept off that
habit which now lies so heavy upon us, and in a manner necessitateth us to
evil. He that flings a stone has no power to recall it; but he needed not to
have flung it at all. He who has contracted a disease by intemperance, though
he groan in his sickness, yet may truly be said to be wilfully sick, because
his Will did embrace that which he knew was the mother of diseases. And he who
pretends he would leave his sin, and cannot, does at once deceive and accuse
himself: For neither is he willing to leave his sin who continues in it; and if
it were true that he could not, yet he must find the cause in himself, which
brought him under these hard terms of necessity. Besides, even his continuance
in sin is voluntary. For though it be hard to redeem himself, yet it is not
impossible. For I cannot see how the resistance of any habit can be stronger
then the Will, especially, when it meets with Gods favor and assistance to
succor it. Non est fortior nequitia virtute, says Seneca; No habit of Vice is
stronger than Virtue. Quod quasi naturaliter inolevit, poni potest, si
annitaris; That which is made a kind of second nature in us, may be cast off,
if we seriously strive. So that not only these sins of Malice, but even our
continuance in them is free and voluntary, and plainly ours. If we commit them,
if we do not leave them because of some difficulty, we cannot impute it to any
but our selves. The same may be said of our sins of Infirmity, when not Habit
or Custom, not the Love of sin, but Fear, or Anger, or some tentation of the
Flesh prevails against us. For the Will has power over all these. There is no
Anger which it may not quench, no Fear which it cannot dispel, no Tentation
which it may not tread under foot. And to him that shall ask how he may
withstand these we will give no other answer than Aquinas gave his sister when
she asked him how she might be saved, SI VELIT, He may, if he will. And
therefore though I call these sins of Infirmity, yet I do it not upon those
reasons and grounds which the Schools give, but only in comparison of those
sins which are committed with a high hand. For, first, I cannot conceive how
these Passions of the mind and tentations of the Flesh do minuere voluntarium,
make our sins less ours, or less voluntary. For the Will must have some object
proposed, or else it cannot exercise its act: and neither has the beauty or
horror of the object any force to determine the Will. Do I less will Adultery
because Beauty enticeth me? or Theft, because Money flatters me? The Will
stands as umpire between the Reason and the Sense: And, if our Sins be less
voluntary because Sense prevails, our Virtues also must be the less voluntary
because Reason then has the better. Secondly, that conclusion of Aquinas, That
we never betake our selves to action but we follow the dictate of the practick
Understanding, and that the Will cannot will evil unless the Understanding be
darkened, if it be brought to the balance of the Sanctuary, it will prove too
light. Did not Achan know that all Jericho and all that was in it was devoted
to Jos. 7.
the Lord, when he took the wedge of gold. Did not David know Adultery was a
sin, when he sent for Uriahs wife? And did not Peter know that he sinned when
he denied his Master? In sins of Infirmity, as they call them, Passion does not
so fully possess the soul of man as to shut out his Reason, and so blind him,
that, though both these principles and premises, Nothing is to be done against
the law of God, and, That Adultery is against the law of God, be visible and
plain, yet he cannot see how to draw this conclusion, That he ought not to
commit this fact. You may as well say I may see your finger which you hold up,
but not the Sun which you point to. These then which we commonly call sins of
Infirmity are voluntary and ours. For we cannot be said properly not to know
they are sins, but not well to weigh and consider it as we should; not dare
operam rationi, not so seriously to attend those dictates of Reason which give
the check to our Passions: Which certainly is a Sin too, and ours. And to think
to alleviate our sins, or make them less ours, because of inadvertency, is as
if we should incendium ignibus extinguere, strive to quench a common fire with
coals.

We pass now to our sins of Ignorance, and those of Subreption. And these may
seem to bring an excuse along with them. Petere veniam solemus cum imprudentes
erravimus, says he in Gellius; Pardon is easy where Imprudency and Error
plead. And that which we did not know we cannot properly will. But even these
sins, although we stand at distance, and look upon them as strangers, yet are
the issues of our Wills, and we must own them as ours. For I do not mean
ignorantiam Facti, the ignorance of the Fact, as if I should shoot at a beast,
and kill a man: For this is no sin at all, (...), not (...), but rather my
misfortune than my fault. Nor do I mean that affected Ignorance on which the
Will is directly carried; when I choose to be ignorant that I may the more
freely sin. For this Nolle intelligere, as the Psalmist speaks, to leave off to
be wise, and to do good; Not to be willing to hear of that physic which may
purge me; this makes my way to destruction more easy, but withal more
praecipitious; this lays me asleep in sin, and so tumbles me down into hell in
a dream. But I mean those sins of Ignorance which St. Augustine speaks of
Epist. 154. quando quisque been fieri putat quod male fit, when a man out of
error thinks that to be regular which is ill done. For even these are
voluntary, and ours. When I think I do that which is right, I may stand guilty
nevertheless as a wilful offender. Ignorance will not excuse us; nor is any act
less our sin because we think and call it our virtue. Indeed Error, as it is
merely error, cannot be a sin: For it has no moral or culpable deformity in
it; nor can it have, but in that respect alone as it is free and voluntary. A
simple man may be ignorant in many points of Divinity: and licet nescire quod
nescit. It is no sin to be ignorant in that which we cannot know. But as Martin
Luther well spoke, Non potes dicere, Volo pie errare; No man can say, I will be
piously ignorant: For this VOLO, I will, blots-out PIE, piously, and makes
Ignorance a sin. And of all ignorance the ignorance of Gods will is most
inexcusable, because it lies so open to our view. How can the Idolater plead
ignorance, where the command is so plain? Thou shall not bow down. How can the
devout Rebel stand upright, when he hears that thunder: They that resist shall
receive damnation. Or what apology can the contentious Wrangler find, when
there is a plain Text against him: If you forgive not men their trespasses,
neither will your heavenly Father forgive you. For these are as so many lights
to show us our way; these are cries and loud calls to keep us out of the
bypath of Error, and to redeem us from carnal conceits. And if I still will
err, they will make my Ignorance a circumstance almost as full of aggravation
as my Knowledge. For Nolle scire and Nescire, To sin because I know it to be a
sin, and To sin because I will not know it, are both of so foul an appearance,
that it may be a question which is the wors^ For the one commits that sin which
he knows to be a sin; and the other (...)l not know it to be a sin, that he may
commit it: The one kisseth the l(...)s of the harlot, though he know they will
bite like a cockatrice; the ot(...) will not be persuaded that they yield any
thing but honey and sweet(...)s: The one will be a Papist because his Father or
Grandfather was so (...) the other will be of the same Religion for no other
reason but because (...) is resolved to hearken to no reason against it. And it
is not easy to de(...)ne whether of the two fools deserves the most stripes.
The one h(...) a Frenzy; the other, a Lethargy: the one sins with his eyes
open; (...)e other has cast himself into a deep sleep; and, if you come near
to (...)ache him, he will thus bespeak you, says St. Augustine, Recede a me
(...)cro, recede a me: dormire volo; Depart, and leave me, I would slay(...)
nor will I be awaked till I please. Only more hope there is of the (...)er.
For that Knowledge against which he sins may at last stand up agai(...)in it
self; and the Will, which would not use it as light to keep out (...) may use
it as a weapon to drive it out of its hold: And he that did (...) Sin, and
embrace it, may at a second or third view see it again, and defy it. But he
that will err because he will err, he that so dotes on his error as wantons
do on their strumpets, and will more firmly cleave to it because it is
exploded, is (...), incurable. And you may be sure his Ignorance is his: for he
took it up as a jewel, and will not let it go, or part with it upon any
persuasion. For let us conceive as favorably as we please of our ignorances
and errors, there are none which in respect of our particular duties might not
have bin Ours, but ours they are; none which were in my power to withstand, but
are mine. If Negligence and Carelessness let them in, and a slothful
Indifferency to examine them give them a fair welcome, if we make room for them
when we might with ease exclude them, we cannot be ignorant to whom they
belong. Ex toto enim noluisse debet qui imprudentia defenditur, says the
Orator; For Ignorance is no excuse if it be not alone, and where the Will is
not firmly planted against it. If we either will them, or embrace what may
promote them or not make use of all the helps to oppose them; if we will, or
reject not, or be indifferent, we must own not only our Sins of Ignorance, but
our Ignorances as Sins: For both are voluntary, and ours.

But now, in the last place, if our sins of Infirmity, if our sins of Ignorance
be voluntary, and ours, yet our sins of Subreption, which steal upon us at
unawares, may seem to be wholly ab extra, from without, and not to have had
principium in nobis, their beginning from us; as sudden Anger, sudden Dejection
of mind, sudden Murmuring, and the like, wrought in us by the sudden assault of
some evil which is distastful and contrary to our nature. For here there is no
truce given to Reason, no time for consulation. As when a spark of fire falls
into gunpowder, you cannot tell which was first, the touch of the fire, or the
flash; so here Temptation and Sin may seem to be both at once. In other sins I
have some space and time to deliberate, and I may make a pause and stand, and
rerum expendere causas, and weigh each scruple and circumstance. The Murderer
has time to consider that that blood which is shed cannot be purged but by the
blood of him that shed it. The Adulterer has space enough to see death in a
kiss; and that to commit that loathsome fact, is to take the members of Christ,
and to make them the members of an harlot. Such kind of sins admit of parley,
and do not prevail but by degrees. But these sins of Subreption and
Inadvertency lie in ambush, and strike before they are seen, and may seem
rather to be certain recoylments and resultances from the Sense than any acts
of the Will. Yet even these sins, sudden Anger, sud^^n Dejection of the mind,
an Oath upon a blow, or a Curse upon a sudden an(...) violent injury, are
voluntary and ours: For they had not bin if the Will(...)d stood up in any
resistance or opposition: It being not necessary that a(...)ow should beget a
Curse, or that these so sudden surprizals should force th(...)onsent of the
Will. To a Christian Soldier every day is dies praeliaris, (...)day of battle;
or rather in every moment of his life he must either fight (...)repare himself
to fight. For even in our spiritual warfare there is not al(...)es (...), a
just battle drawn out, not always signa obvia signis, but so(...)mes (...),
furta belli, sudden eruptions, thefts and advantages of wa(...)nd the Soldier
of Christ must not only be ready to resist in the full show(...) march of the
enemy, but expect and wait for him, that when he comes, (...)her he come in
pomp and with troops of temptations, whether he fig(...) against us in open
field, or whether he come by night and steal upon us una(...), he may find us
as ready for defense as he is to strike. And let us arm o(...)lves with this
consideration, That as he comes forward sometimes an(...)ws himself in
Pleasures and Beauty and Wealth and the Vanities of this (...)d, so he may come
behind us in a sudden Injury, in the deceitful Ingratitude of a friend, in the
Treachery of a near acquaintance; That every moment he may come, and that this
may be the moment. And so by this providence and preparation we shall defeat
him, so that whenever he comes, he shall come too late. We read in Gellius of
Aristippus, who being asked by a luxurious wanton, who was in the same ship with
him, Why he being a Philosopher looked pale and discovered some tokens of fear
in the Tempest, when himself was not afraid, replied, That indeed there was not
the same reason to both: for he needed not be sollicitous for the life of a
wicked knave, but there was great reason there should be care taken for the
life of Aristippus that excellent Philosopher: But the other Stoick's answer
there is more full, and comes home to our purpose. For he tells us out of
Epictetus, That there be certain apparitions and Visions of the mind which the
Philosophers call phantasias, Phansies, by which the mind of man at the first
face and show of an evil is touched and moved: and these are not within the
power of the Will, but press-in by a kind of violence: And there are certain
(...), condescensions, or approbations of these phansies, which are voluntary,
and can have no existence but by the Will. So that the mind of the wisest man
may be stirred and moved at a crack of thunder, at the fall of an house, at
some sudden and unexpected message; because these quick and violent motions do
officium mentis, and rationis praevertere, prevent and hinder the office of the
mind, and step in between Reason and the Man. But yet notwithstanding (...), he
does not consent, he does not approve, these visions and phansies: and though
his color Change, yet there is no alteration in his mind, no mutation of his
Counsels, but he is constant to himself, and holds fast his resolution, That
these things are not to be feared. Now if the Philosopher could gain such
stability and equality of mind as not to condescend and yield to these sudden
surprisals, only by the light and direction of Nature; the Christian no doubt
may be as well prepared as he, yea, make a fairer progress in the arts of
living in the ways of prudence and circumspection; may not only learn to be
angry and sin not, but not to be angry at all; to have a buckler ready to hold
up against sudden strokes, as well as a sword to chase away an open enemy, to
stand in proctnctu, upon his guard, and to be ever in a readiness; that no
temptation may be sudden with him, nothing come upon him unawares. For if we
slight these sins which beset us in silence, if we have not been praeparatum
pectus, a mind well prepared against them, not only our sins of Malice, of
Infirmity, and of Ignorance, but even these also of Subreption are voluntary,
and ours. To conclude this point; As St. Augustine, asking the question Quid
bonum? replies himself, Quod nemo invitus amittit. What is Good? It is that
which no man loses against his will. So will I say, What is Evil? It is that
which no man commits against his will. If it be Sin, it is Voluntary, and ours.
I now proceed to show you first, that Sin is Only ours, and that we cannot
ease our selves of any part of our burden by complaining either of Original
corruption, or the Devil, or want of Grace; and, in the next place, That Sin is
Wholly and Totally ours; That the Will cannot be divided, and that renisus
conscientiae, the reluctance and resistance of Conscience, in which respect
some are persuaded they sin but semiplena voluntate, with but half a will, does
much aggravate the Sin, and make it more Voluntary, and more ours. And first,
of them that shift the guilt of their Sins upon Adam, and allege Original
corruption for an excuse of their transgressions.

I deny not that we have derived weakness and corruption from our first
Parents. But do not we to extenuate our actual sins, make Original sin more
contagious and infectious, more dangerous and deadly than it is? We bankrupt,
we criple our selves, and then cry out we were born poor and lame. We put out
our own eyes, and then complain we are in the dark. We make original Weakness a
pretense to cloak and cover our actual wickedness; and entitle Adam to all our
sins and defects. But let us, with Aquinas, admit of that double process or
derivation of Original sin, from the Flesh into the Soul, and from the essence
of the Soul into every power of it; let us take it in its proper subject, the
Soul, or in the Flesh, which is vehiculum, the instrument and conduit to convey
it, and we shall quickly find that we may not only subdue and overcome it, but
turn it to our benefit and behoof; that though, with Sampsons Lion, it comes
with open mouth to devour us, yet we may kill it by degrees, and find honey in
the belly of it; that we may destroy this Viper, and like skilful Apothecaries
make a precious Antidote of it. This Flesh of ours is much blamed, as being a
Prison of our soul, and a Weight to press it down, and the Manichee, observing
that war which is betwixt the Soul and it, allowed it no better maker than the
Devil, and is solidly confuted by St. Augustine: and Gregory Nyssen calls it
(...), a fuliginous ill-favored shop: But all this will not minuere
voluntarium, or make our Sin less ours. For the Father will tell us that the
Angels had no bodies, and yet they sinned, and fell. Nec suo nomine Caro
infamis, says Tertullian; Nor is the Flesh, ill-spoken of for it self: Neque
enim de proprio sapit aliquid, aut sentit; for it does neither understand, nor
will, but it is of another substance, of another nature added and joined to the
Soul as an instrument in the shop of life. Therefore the Flesh is blamed in
Scripture, because the Soul does nothing without it. And it was made, not to
press us down to hell, but by the Soul to be lifted up into heaven. Animus
imperator est corporis, The Soul has supreme power, and is enthroned there.
The Body is to be (...), obedient and tractable, to be reined and check and
guided, by the Reason. Hence Athanasius compares the Soul to a Musician, and
the Body to a Harp or Lute, which he may tune and touch as he please, till it
yield a pleasant and delightful Harmony: Nunc pietatis carmen, nunc
temperantiae modulos; now a song of Sion, a psalm of piety, a celestial Hymn,
and anon the composed measure of temperance and chastity: St. Ambrose says,
the Body was made for the Soul, as Eve was for Adam, in adjutorium, not to
tempt and seduce it, but to be a helper. And what part is there of Christianity
which is not performed by the ministry of the Body? Have thou a Hand to take
thy brother by the throat? Thou have a Hand also to lift him up out of the
dust. Have thou an Ey to take in the adulteress? Thou have no less an Ey to
pity the poor. Have thou a Tongue which is a sword to wound thy brothers
reputation? Thou may, if thou will, make it thy glory, and sing praises to
the God of heaven. Domus animae caro est; and inquilinus carnis, anima; The
Body is the house of the Soul; and the Soul, the tenant and inmate of the Body:
Desiderabit igitur inquilinus ex causa hujus nominis profutura domui; Therefore
the Soul is obliged by this very name, as she is an inmate, to watch over the
Body, and carefully to provide those things which may uphold and sustain it,
and not to put it to slavish and servile offices, to let and hire it out to sin
and uncleanness, which will bring a fearful name both upon the house and
tenant, and cast both Body and Soul into hell. But what is the Instrument, you
will say, if the Arts-man has lost his skill and all his cunning be gone? If
the Tenant cannot uphold it self, how shall it be able to provide for the
House? If the Soul it self be poisoned with this infection, what can follow but
a jarring discord and disorder both in Soul and Body? What is my Understanding
without knowledge, but an ey in the dark? What is my Will without love, but
like a pilote strong and able, but deaf, and therefore unfit for the practice
of his place? Neither can Reason command what it knows not, nor the Will act
what it does not love. It is true; two main blemishes we received in our fall,
in our Understandings and in our Wills: But what we lost in Adam, we recovered
again with infinite advantage in Christ. The loss of that portion of strength
with which our nature was originally endued; is made up with the fullness of
power in Christ. So that as St. Ambrose spoke of Peter's fall, Non mihi obfuit
quod negavit Petrus, imo profuit quod emendavit, so may we speak of the fall of
our first parents; It hurts us not that Adam fell, for in Christ we rise again,
and have power enough to avoid sin; Which if we betray, Sin is voluntary, and
ours. And this divides the Orthodox Christian from the Manichee and Pelagian,
and places him in aequilibrio, in the midst between them both. Evil, says the
Manichee, is a malo principio, from a bad original; therefore Gods help alone
is required to take it away; shutting out Freewill quite. Again, Evil, says
the Pelagian, comes from the freedom of the Will, and may be removed by natural
force; excluding Grace quite. The Orthodox agrees that Evil is from Freewill,
but that this Freedom was impaired, and is now set at liberty by the Grace of
God; and so gives to Freewill that which belongs to Freewill, and that to Grace
which pertains unto Grace. In Adam we were all lost; but in Christ we are
restored. Talk of what blemishes we please, the water of Baptism is of virtue
sufficient to wash them away. Do we talk of Darkness in the Understanding? This
is (...), an illumination. Do we complain of the perverseness of our Will? This
is (...), the perfection of the mind, as Nazianzene calls it. Does our Flesh
molest us? Baptism is (...), a pulling off the filth of the flesh, (...), a
correction of that copy which was blurred and defaced. For tell me; Why were we
Baptized? Why were we made Christians? Was it not to mortify our earthly
members and lusts, to dead in our selves this bitter root of sin, to cast-down
strong holds, and every imagination which rises against God? I speak to
Christians who have solemnly renounced the World, the Flesh, and the Devil;
whose whole life should be a continual warfare and victory over Sin. The
Schools tell us that Original sin is the same and equal in all; but that, as a
Fever, it is more or less malignant according to the several complexions of
men; or as Water, which is the same wheresoever it flows, but does not run with
that force or violence in a plain or even-ground as down a hill: And according
to these several operations we make our complaints. It is my Melancholy, may
the Envious; It is my Choler, may the Murderer; It is my Blood, may the Wanton;
It is my Appetite, may the Glutton say. But this is not to make the right use
of Original corruption, which remains in intimis naturae, in our very nature;
not to make us think we are weaker than we are, but to make us rouse-up our
selves and do all we can against this domestic enemy. The Envious has power
left to purge his Melancholy, and to rejoice at the prosperity of his brother;
the Murderer, to suppress his Choler; the Wanton, to quench that fire in his
blood; the Glutton, to beat down his body by fasting and abstinence. To
conclude; If after our ingrafting into Christ we still complain of our Original
weakness, we do but take that doctrine with the left hand which is reached out
unto us with the right, or, rather we chop off our right hand with our left,
and by a sinister and needless conceit of our own weakness, deprive our selves
of that strength which might have freed us from those sins which now are truly
ours, because we cannot derive them from any other fountain than our Wills.

But now, in the next place, if we cannot shift our sins upon Adam and that
Original weakness which we derived from his loins, we may perhaps upon the
Serpent, upon the Devil, upon that Behemoth, who can take-in a Christian with
his mouth, upon that Leviathan, into whose nostrils we cannot put a hook. Here
we cannot but remember the battle, and not venture our selves upon his great
strength. But let us but weigh his strength, and consider the weapons which he
fights withal, and we shall find that though they be fiery darts, yet we may
quench them, that he has more will than power to hurt us, and that his iron is
but as straw to a stout resolved Christian. To ask why God did create the
Devil, and left him still to be a tempter, is a question full not only of
weakness, says St. Chrysostom, but of ingratitude. For God spared the utter
confusion of Satan as men use to spare the lives of their slaves, that they may
put them in chains to do such service as may be beneficial to them. And he has
lengthened Satan's chain a little, which he might have took-up shorter, for a
purpose of his own, to do him service in the trial and exercise of his
children, to try their constancy, and to bring them to the glory of that
victory which they could not obtain without an enemy. From hence there arises
glory to God, and profit to us, who are taught and enabled to make use of the
Devil himself. Our comfort and encouragement is, that though he fight against
us with malice and craft, yet he is destitute of all strength and power to
second and back them. And as his craft is defeated by the discovery, so is his
Malice made frustrate by opposition. And when both these fail by resistance, he
cannot show any Sword or Power, as Julius Caesar did when he was denied the
Consulship, and say, (...), This shall give it me. He is termed indeed a Lion;
but it is not for his strength, but his fiercness and malice. Non tantas vires
habet, quantos conatus; He is more eager than strong. There may be as much
malice in a Waspe as in a Lion. And he is called a roaring lion, for his
greediness of the prey. But to open the mouth, to be greedy of the prey, to
seek to devour, argue no strength at all. If he prevail when he comes, it is
because we will be overcome with noise. All the weapons St. Paul gives them are
but (...), devises and enterprises, 2 Cor. 2. 11. Ephesians. 6. 11.
and (...), wiles and circumventions. Now the Glossators tell us that (...) and
(...) and (...) and (...) are all one. And then all his power is but to come
about us, to use a kind of art to deceive us. And noscere inimici arts magna
pars victoriae, to know his arts and wiles and devises is to overcome him.
Though his infinite malice searches and sifteth us, and winds it self, and
runs round in a circle, yet we may find him out at every point, at every
turn; and then God will save us out of the mouth of this Lion. The truth is,
our fear and cowardice, and our negligence in buckling on our armor of
defense, that (...), the whole armor of God, as the Apostle calls it, has
made him more Devil than he is, made him that Dragon in the Revelation, and
that wild Boar of the forest, whom none can meet without destruction; has
given him more teeth and more sting than he has, to devour those whom he could
but bite, and to break their heads whose heels he could but bruise. Satis enim
clarus apud timentem quisquis timetur, says he in the Historian: Fear makes a
child a giant to him that fears him. This conceit of the Devils great power
brought a sort of Heretics into the world which were therefore by Epiphanius
called Sataniani, because they worshipped and adored Satan himself, as the Romans
did their Goddess Febris, ne noceret, that he might not hurt or molest them. It
is a true saying, Primi in praeliis vincuntur oculi, that the first thing in a
soldier that is overcome is his Ey: And that which foyls a Christian is a
conceit that the Devil is stronger than he is. For wherein lies his great
strength? Not in any force, but in persuasion; not in violence, but in fraud;
in proposing objects, and laying snares; in suggestions and temptations. He
lays a wedge of gold in thy way, presents a Bathsheba to thy eye, shows thee
the glory of the world: And what are all these to the wisdom of a Christian,
Cuires sapiunt ut sunt, who judges of things, not by the appearance, but as
they are? That I stumble at a cold of earth, that I am bound with a kiss, that
I put-on these golden fetters, is not from any force of Satan's, but from my
self. For as Hannibal first overthrew the Romans, and then fought against them
with their own weapons; or as the Romans used the Carthaginian Ram to beat
down the walls of Carthage; so the Devil seizes upon our Sense, our Will, our
Appetites, which God had ordained to be weapons of righteousness, to fight
against principalities and powers, and with these weapons he fights against us;
(...), as Nazianzene speaks, He makes use of our selves to fight against our
selves, and fights not so much with his Temptations as with our Desires; not so
much with Beauty as with our Lust; not so much with his Suggestions as with our
Affections; not so much with his Insinuations and Wiles and Enterprises as with
our own Wills. The Devil is that Wicked one, totius crroris artifex, the worker
of all Evil in us; but yet he is bound and in chains, and cannot (...), pass
those bounds and limits which are set him. And his bounds are a Snare, a
Complement, an Allurement, a Suggestion: Hitherto he can go and no further. He
comes not to compulsion, necessitation or violence. For if this were permitted,
actum esset de humano genere, Men were far worse than the Beasts that perish.
Quantumcunque ignavis and timidis videri potest, unum animal est, as Darius
spoke of Alexander: How great soever our Sloth and Fear does make him, yet he
is but a Serpent to insinuate, or a Lion to roar; and his noise may serve as a
warningpeece against his secret approach, his Malice may teach us that
providence which may arm us against his Craft: that when he fawns upon us in a
pleasing temptation, we may remember he has teeth; and when we have beat him
off as a Lion, we may provide against him as a Serpent. For whether he roar or
ly in ambush; whether he open his mouth wide in a tempest of persecution, or
whisper to us friendly in prosperity, he cannot conquer us but with our own
strength: and, si non adjuvamus, vincimus, if we do not help him, he is
overcome. The very manner of his working is an argument that he has no power
to force us unto sin: For, if he had, he would never (...), come about us, hunt
and seek out opportunities and occasions to overthrow us; but would (...),
openly fight against us, make his sword drunk in our blood, and devour us at
once. He would presently besot our Understanding, and put-out the ey of our
Reason, and not circuire terram, make his perambulations and circuits about us.
He would not (...), be at that pains to make a net to catch us. But now finding
himself in a chain, and his power none at all, he deals with us as those do who
surprise cities, or through crooked and by-waies usurp a Tyranny which they
cannot purchase with their sword. And as their course and practice is, to get a
party of faction in that place, and those commonly of the meaner and baser
sort, people easier to be deceived and corrupted by some present gratuity to
set their country to sale, so does the Devil insinuate with that common people
of Man, the Senses and Affections, sets upon the weaker and womanish parts of
Man, those parts which are more easy to be invaded and more seduceable than
our Reason or Understanding. And these receive his grosser temptations, and
send them up refined and dressed to the nobler faculties. Therefore we must learn
wisdom from our enemies craft, milites in eo loco collocare quo hostis
insidiatur, to plant our forces there where the Devil strives to make an entry,
raise up bulwarks against him to keep him out; and that we may retein the
innocence of the Dove, be as wise as Serpents. And if we neglect that art and
those means which will defeat him; if we suffer him to work in the mine, and
look on and tremble, dally till he has blown us up; we have not lost our fort,
but betrayed it. And talk what we will of his great strength; though he
flattered as a Serpent, or roared like a Lion, though he brought all his fiery
darts along with him, yet he did rather steal a victory than win it. In a word,
his insinuations, his suggestions, his strong temptations could not force our
Will; but the Will yielded without resistance, and our fall is voluntary. If we
would not, we had not sinned: but because we would, our sins, for all these
outward incitements and allurements, are ours.

We come now to the last complaint; which is most unjust of all, as being put
up against the Justice and Goodness of God, who gives to all men liberally,
and upbraideth not. St. Hilary passes this heavy censure upon it, Impiae est
voluntatis existimare idcirco se ea quae sunt credentium propria non habere
quod sibi a Deo indulta non fuerint; It is a sign of a wicked heart, when we
are destitute of those riches which are proper to believers, to pretend we
therefore want them because they were not given us of God. One would think
indeed that M^^, being a reasonable creature, capable of Gods law and precepts,
having both Understanding to assent and Will to embrace them, there needed no
other helps than the light of the Law, the beauty of the Reward, and the
terror of the Punishment which disobedience incurs; that there needed only the
hopes of life, and the thunderbolts of Gods judgments: But God is not gratiae
angustus, as Ambrose speaks, sparing of his favors, no niggard of his grace;
but seeing the many snares in the midst of which we are placed, the many
temptations which we are to cope withal, is rich unto all that call upon him,
and has not only set up the law against Sin, and the eternal anguish of
punishment against the pleasure which is but for a season, and the eternity of
the reward against the bitterness of those momentany afflictions which may
tempt us to evil; but has also afforded us his grace and assistance, as a
staff by which we may walk. And as when the children of Israel were in the
wilderness, he rained down Manna upon them, and led them as it were by the
hand, till they came into the land of promise, and tasted of the milk and honey
there; so God deals with all that call upon his name, whilst they are in via,
in this their peregrination, ever and anon beset with Philistines and
Amalekites, with those temptations which may deter them in their journey, he
rains down abundance of his Grace, and is ready at hand to assist them against
the violence of temptations, till he have brought them to the celestial Canaan,
where is fullness of joy for evermore. And therefore, as he has given us a
command to try our obedience, so he has commanded us also to call upon him for
assistance that we may obey. Et scimus quia petentes libenter exaudit, quando
hoc petitur largiri quod jubet; And we know it is impossible he should deny us
our request, when we desire him to grant us that which he commands. We beg his
assistance against the lusts of the flesh; he commands us to mortify them:
against the pollutions of the world; his will is our sanctification: against
the Devil; he bids us tread him under foot. And can we once doubt of his help
and assistance to the performance of that which he exacts at our hands as
service due and pleasing to his Majesty? The defect of Grace cannot be in the
conduit, in the conveyance, but in the vessel which should receive it: Which if
it be vas obturatum, a vessel shut up or closed, or full already of filth and
uncleanness; or if it do (...), leak, or let Grace slip; no marvel then if the
dew of heaven fall beside, and we remain dry and empty. And what greater folly
then to complain of the Want of that Grace which we might have had, nay, which
we had neglected, and fell with our staff in our hand? were evil, when we had
helps enough to be good? when we shut our eyes, to cry out there is no light?
like the foolish old woman in Seneca who was blind through age, yet could not
be persuaded but that the room was dark. Our error and grand mistake is, that
whereas God is bountiful of his Grace to assist us, we fancy to our selves an
irresistible and necessitating Grace, as if God did raise up children unto
Abraham out of very stones. And therefore we conceive, that when we rusht upon
sin as the horse does into the battle, God might have restrained us and kept us
back; when we were adulterers, he might have made us chaste: And when we sin, we
wipe our mouths, and comfort our selves, that, if God give us grace, we will
not sin again. And what is this but to turn the Grace of God into wantonness,
and magnifying his Grace, to entitle him to our sins? It is not here, The Lord
shall fight for thee, and thou shall sit still; but thou must buckle on thy
armor, and make use of his assistance when it offers it self; thou must be as
officious to wait on that as that is on thee. If thou have a good thought, by
his Grace thou have it; and thou must not be so unkind as to stifle it: If a
holy intention, it is his Grace that raised it; and it is a kind of sacrilege
to pull it down: If a strong resolution, it is Grace that built it; and thy
care must be that it fall not to the ground. To attribute all unto God, is both
very safe and very dangerous; safe, in our thanks and acknowledgments;
dangerous, in the performance of our duty: safe, when we work our selves; but
dangerous, when we put our hands into our bosom. For he that will not rowse
himself up and make haste to fly from Sin upon a fancy that he wants Grace,
has already despised the Grace of God, and cannot plead for an excuse the Want
of that which he might have had; nay, which he had, and chased from him. And in
this respect, when we have light, and will not work in the light; when we have
Gods Grace assisting us, and will not make use of it; when we have determents
from Sin, and yet will embrace it, we must need stand guilty as wilful
offenders, and confess that it was neither Adam, nor the Devil, nor the
shortness of Gods hand did betray us, but our own will; that though we were
weak in the first Adam, yet we recovered our strength in the second; that the
Devil would have fled if we had resisted; and that Grace was not wanting unto
us, but we were wanting unto Grace; and therefore stand no more to deny or
interpret this conclusion, but subscribe to it with tears of blood, and make an
unfeigned and sincere confession, That the sins which we have committed are
OURS, and only OURS.

And now, in the last place, as they are only Ours, so they are fully and
totally Ours: And if we strive to make a defalcation, we add unto their bulk,
and make them more mountainous than before. And as we do minuendo numerum
augere, by seeking to make our sins fewer then they are, sin more, and so
increase their number; so by attempting to make them less we make them greater.
Excusando exprobramus; Our Apology upbraids us, and we condemn our selves with
an excuse. Some persuade themselves their sin is much less because they sinned
not (as they say) with full consent, but renitente and reluctante conscientia:
Their mind was long pausing and fluctuating before they did it. But this is so
far from extenuating the fault, that it does much aggravate it: For a sin it is
in the avoiding of Sin to make any stand or deliberation at all. Deliberanda
enim omnino non sunt in quibus est turpis ipsa deliberatio, says Tully; There
is no room for doubt and consultation where the consultation it self is foul
and blameable. Why should I halt so between these two, the Committing or not
committing of sin? Why should I doubt, when I know it to be sin? Why should I
ask my self that foolish question, Shall I, or shall I not? when the sin is so
manifest, and death so visible in the sin: These pawses and reluctations, which
we make our (...), which we subborn as comforts and excuses of sin, are nothing
else but certain presages and forerunners of wilful transgression. How read
thou? What are the Commandments? Thou shall not commit adultery; Thou shall not
steal: Never stand inaking demurs, nor asking of questions, but resolve not to
do them. For as Mucianus in Tacitus well observes of the common soldiers in
time of faction; so is it here, Qui deliberant, desciverunt; They who
deliberate, and are uncertain which side to cleave to; have in effect revolted
already. We take notice of that in our sins which Seneca says is observable
between the wanton and his paramour, Grata sunt, si impulerunt; gratiora, si
essregerunt; They are admitted friendly when they knock, or flatter, or steal;
but have double welcome when they break in upon us; when they enter, though we
struggle and strive with them. For then we think we may say, We have sinned
indeed, but against our will. But this is nothing else but, as Tertullian says,
gaudere de contumelia nostra, to boast and triumph in our reproach; or, as the
Apostle speaks, to rejoice in our shame; and we know all such rejoicing is
evil. A man that sins at this rate, against the dictates and checks of his
Conscience, is carried as it were by a mighty torrent, which, as the Orator
describes it, does Saxa divolvere, pontes dedignari, tumbles stones before it,
breaks down bridges, and makes a way where it finds none: So the Will here,
being vehement and stubborn, makes haste to sin, and breaks through all
obstacles that stand in its way: And though Sin appear not in its best dress,
vestitior and ornatior, gay and trim, but clothed about with Death, yet she
runs to embrace and hug it: Though she hear the Law thundering out dreadful
curses, though she have a voice behind her and a voice within her, saying,
Touch not, Taste not; this pleasant cup will be bitterness in the latter end;
yet she readily takes it from the Tempters hand, and drinks it off with
greediness, as if it were pure honey, without any mixture of gall and poison.
Surely this is to commit sin with an high hand and with a stiff neck. This
makes Sin exceeding sinful. Thus Murder and Adultery were greater crimes in
David then in an uncircumcised Philistine; and Treason was of a fowler aspect
in Judas an Apostle than it would have been in Barabbas a murderer. Hence our
Savior denounces a heavy woe against Chorazim and Bethsaida, because they did
per tantorum operum detrimenta Christum contemnere, multiply their sins when he
multiplied his mighty works and the means and helps by which they might have
avoided them; and were very evil, when each miracle bespake them to be very
good.

To conclude this point; As the Orator tells us, Honesta verba moribus
perdidimus, that by our evil manners we have lost the proper signification of
many good and honest words; so, on the other side, we have almost lost the
knowledge of our evil manners and sins in words, in deputativis and
assumptivis, in those borrowed appellations and assumptitious names which we
have given them; calling them sins of Infirmity, when we have strength enough
to avoid them; sins of Ignorance, when we dammed up our own lights; sins not
fully voluntary, when we are worse then horse and mule, and will take neither
bit nor bridle; sins committed with half awill, when our Conscience checks our
Will, and cannot prevail. But names cannot change things. Men are the same,
though they have new names given them. My servant is not a Gentleman, though I
call him master. Neither are our sins less sinful for all the excuses wherewith
we disguise them: The Poet tells us that men indeed call things thus or thus,
but that the Gods have other names for them: So let us give what titles we
please to our sins, and pretend what we will of them, as that they were done
out of Infirmity, or Ignorance, not with a full consent, with half a will, yet
(...), the sentence and judgment is Gods, and he has other names for them. And
our best way and safest course were, in rebus Dei uti sermon Dei, to use Gods
own language, and call them as he does; to hate them, as he does; to judge our
selves, that he may not judge us; to punish sin our selves, that he may not
punish us for it; and, as it is enjoined in Auricular confession, to lay open
and naked, as near as we can, every circumstance before him. For this is the
true method of reckoning with God, and casting up our accounts, the true
valuation of our debts. Thus we may hide our sins by revealing them; we may
diminish them by addition; by making them great we may make them little, and by
making them many make them none at all; and so fit and prepare our selves to
receive illapsum misericordiae, the sweet dew and influence of Gods Mercy in a
plenary absolution, in the forgiveness and remission of our sins. And so I pass
to that which, when we first entered upon this Petition, we reserved for the
clause and shutting up of all, and for the last thing to be considered, to wit,
What is meant by Remission and Forgiveness of sins.

When we say, Forgive us our trespasses, we beg of God, that although he may
most justly, yet he will not punish us for our sins, but so remit them, as to
free us from that death which is the only wages due unto sin; in a word, that
he will justify us freely by Faith in Christ, and impute to us, as he did to
Abraham, faith for righteousness. The people of Israel when they saw that Moses
delaid to come down out of the mount, began to murmur against God, and to
refuse him for their leader, calling unto Aaron, Up, make us Gods which shall
go before us. And they had a God fit for them. Nam processit eis bubulum caput,
says Tertullian, For they had an ox (or rather a calves) head to lead them.
So when men will not follow that way which God and Religion leads them, nor
rest satisfied with the SIC SCRIPTUM EST, Thus it is written, commonly they
make them Gods of their own, and have some such idol as the Israelites had,
some fancy of their own, to go before them. Est haec perversitas hominum,
salutaria excutere; Such is the folly and perversity of men, to examine those
things which are tendered to them for their health; to question their physic,
not to take it down; and when a pearl is laid open before them, not to buy it,
but ask what it is. There is no point more plain, and yet none has been more
stumbled at then the doctrine of Justification and Remission of sins. No sooner
was this seed sown by the Author and Finisher of our Faith, but the Devil
mingled his tares with it, which were ready to choke it. Ebion and Cerinthus,
denying the Divinity of Christ, and conceiving that it dwelt in him indeed, but
so as in one of the Prophets, though in a more eminent manner, conceived also
that we had not remission of sins by Christ alone, but by the observation of
the Law. The Manichees thought cujusvis esse credere, that it was a matter of
no great difficulty to believe, and that faith was as easy as a thought; and
therefore that severity of life, contempt of the world, and to sell and forsake
all that we have, were wrought out with care and solicitude; were that which
would make us acceptable before God, and make us stand upright at the great day
of trial. Neither did these monsters only blemish this doctrine, but it
received some stain also from their hands who were its stoutest champions. Not
to mention Clemens Alexandrinus, Theophilus, Cyprian, Hilary, and others, St.
Augustine, that great pillar of the truth, and whose memory will be ever
precious in the Church, though he often interpret the word Justification for
Remission of sins, yet being deceived by the likeness of sound in these two
words JUSTIFICARE and SANCTIFICARE, does in many places confound them both, and
make Justification to be nothing else but the making of a man just. So in his
Book De Spiritu and Litera, c. 26. interpreting that of the Apostle, Being
justified freely by his grace, he makes this discant. Non ait PER LEGEM, sed
PER GRATIAM; He does not say by the Law, but by Grace. And he gives his reason,
Ut sanet gratia voluntatem, ut sanata voluntas impleat legem, That Grace might
cure the Will, and the Will being freed might fulfill the Law. And in his Book
De Spiritu and Gratia, he says, Spiritus Sanctus diffundit charitatem, qua una
justi sunt quicunque justi sunt; The holy Spirit powers out his love into our
hearts, by which Love alone they are just whosoever are just. And whosoever is
but little conversant in that Father shall soon observe that where he deals
with the Pelagian he makes the grace of Justification and of Sanctification all
one. Now that which the Father says is true, but ill placed. For in every
Christian there is required Newness of life and Sanctity of conversation: but
what is this to Justification and Remission of sins, which is no quality
inherent in us, but the act of God alone? As therefore Tully speaks of Romulus,
who killed his brother, Peccavit; pace vel Quirini vel Romuli dixerim; By
Romulus his good leave, though he were the founder of our Commonwealth, he did
amiss: So with reverence to so worthy and so pious a Saint we may be bold to
say of great St. Augustine, that, if he did not err, yet he has left those
ill weighed speeches behind him which give countenance to those foul misshapen
errors which blur and deface that mercy which wipes away our sins. For
Aquinas, in his 1 a 2 ae q. 113. though he grant what he cannot deny, because
it is a plain Text, That Remission of sins is the Not-imputation of sins; yet
he adds, That Gods wrath will not be appeased till Sin be purged out, and a new
habit of Grace infused into the soul; which God does look upon and respect,
when he forgives our sins. Hence those unsavory tenets of the Romish Church,
That Justification is not a pronouncing but a making one righteous, That
inherent holiness is the formal cause of Justification, That we may redeem our
sins and puchase forgiveness by Fasting, Almsdeeds, and other good works. All
which if she do not expose to the world in this very garb and shape, yet she so
presents them that they seem to speak no less; so that her followers are very
apt and prompt to come toward them and embrace them even in this shape. And
although Bellarmine by confounding the term of Justification, and
distinguishing of a Faith informed with Charity and a Faith which is not, and
by putting a difference between the works of the Law and those which are done
by the power and virtue of the holy Spirit, and by allotting no reward but that
which is freely promised, and promised to those who are in the state of grace
and adoption, though by granting that the Reward does far exceed the dignity of
our Works, he striveth to bring the Church of Rome as near to St. Paul as he
can, and lays all the colors he has to make her opinion resemble his, yet
when he tells us that the Good works of the Saints may truly satisfy the Law
of God, and merit eternal life, when he makes our Satisfaction go hand in hand
with Christ's, and that Fasting and Prayer and Alms are satisfactory not only
for punishment, but for all punishment, and, which is more, for the guilt it
self, he has in effect unsaid what formerly he had laid down concerning the
free Remission of our sins, and made so wide a breach between St. Paul and
their Church, as neither St. Peter nor all the Saints they invocate are able to
close; In a word, he speaks as good sense as Theodorus Antiochenus does in
Photius his Bibliotheca, who makes a twofold Forgiveness of sins; the one,
(...) of those things which we have done; the other, (...), an Impeccancie, or
Leaving off to Sin. So that we may say with Photius, What this Forgiveness is,
or from whence it is, is impossible to find out. No doubt, God takes notice of
the graces he has bestowed on his children, and registreth every good work
they do, and will give an eternal reward not only to the Faith of Abraham, the
Chastity of Joseph, the Patience of Job, the Meekness of Moses, the Zeal of
Phinehas, the Devotion of David, but even to the Widows two mites cast into the
treasury, to a cup of cold water given to a thirsty Disciple. Yet most true it
is, that all the righteousness of all the Saints cannot merit forgiveness. And
we will take no other reason or proof for this position but that of Bellarmins,
Non acceptat Deus in veram satisfactionem pro peccato nisi justitiam infinitam:
God must have an infinite satisfaction, because the sin is infinite. Shall I
give my firstborn for my transgression, the fruit of my body for the sin of my
soul? Shall I bring the merits of one Saint, and the supererogations of
another, and add to these the treasury of the Church? All these are but as an
atome to the infinite mass of our Sin. Shall I yet add my Fasting, my Alms, my
Tears, my Devotion? All these will vanish at the guilt of Sin, and melt before
it as wax before the Sun: We must therefore disclaim all hope of help from our
selves, or any or all creatures in earth or in heaven. It is only the Lamb of
God who takes John 1. 29.
away the sins of the world; the Man Christ Jesus is the only Mediator between
1 Timothy 2. 5.
God and Man; He alone is our Advocate with the Father, and the 1 John 2. 1, 2.
propitiation for our sins; His blood cleanses us from all sin; In him we have
1 John 1. 7. Ephesians. 1. 7. Ephesians. 3. 12.
redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins; In him we have boldness
and access with confidence by the faith of him. In his name therefore who
taught us thus to pray, let us put up this Petition, Forgive us our debts; and
our prayer will be graciously heard, and we shall be accepted in the Beloved;
Ephesians. 1. 6.
all our Debt will be remitted through the merits of our Surety, who has made
full satisfaction to the Justice of God for us, and has cancelled our Bond,
and blotted out the handwriting that was against us, and taken it Col. 2. 14.
away, nailing it to his cross, and so obtained eternal redemption for us. I
have Hebr. 9. 12.
done with the Petition, Forgive us our debts; and proceed to the Condition, As
we forgive our debtours. Of which I shall now treat very briefly, because I
have spoken fully of it heretofore.

This Petition has this peculiar and proper to it self, which none of the rest
have, that it is put up with a Condition, Forgive us, as we (or as it is in St.
Luke, for we also) forgive. And this Condition is taken up by our Savior, who
in his wisdom thought it not enough to join it to the Petition which conteins
all the hope and expectation and happiness of a Christian, to make it a
condition without which there can be no Remission of sins; but saepius
retractare, to reinforce it again and again, as here at the end of this Prayer,
and again in the eighteenth Chapter of this Gospel. Which is as a seal to make
the Condition authentic. Therefore as we use to take more notice of those
speeches which men of great place and wisdom have often in their mouths than of
those which fall from them by chance; so we may register this REMITTE
DEBITORIBUS, Forgive those that trespass against you, in the leaves of
Eternity, as the Apothegm and sentence of our blessed Lord and Savior, who is
yesterday and to day and the same for ever, and which he commends to his
Disciples as a lasting and standing duty to the worlds end, to go hand in hand
with Remission of sins, to keep time with it, and to be in date till Time shall
be no more, till Christ's enemies and ours, till the last enemy, Death, shall be
destroyed, when neither Christ nor we his brethren shall have an enemy to
forgive. And because our Savior has made this Condition so remarkable and
considerable by joining it to that Petition which so nearly concerns us, and in
a manner consecrated it for ever by so many reinforcements, set it apart as an
Anathema, not to be touched or dallyed with, but to be preserved for ever in the
living Temple of the holy Ghost, we will briefly lay down a few reasons why our
Savior may be thought thus to have annexed and reinforced it, why he did thus
press and urge it. We may conceive them to have been these. 1. To forgive our
enemies is a duty full of difficulty, hard and irksome to flesh and blood, and
therefore had need to be set out and commended by that neerness and affinity it
has to so great a benefit, and by a kind of amiable reflection from that which
is most welcome unto us. 2. This duty of Forgiving our brethren is most proper
to the Gospel: and was therefore there set-down in a more plain and lively
character than formerly it had bin either in the Law of Moses or in the book of
Nature, extended and stretched-out beyond those bounds and limits in which the
Jew and Heathen did understand it, enlarged and perfected by him who fought not
whilst he lived, but triumphed being dead; whose every word and work was the
issue of his Tenderness and Compassion. 3. It is a duty most necessary to
Christians, whom that Religion which they profess does expose to all the
affronts and injuries of wicked men, and point-out as a mark for the world to
shoot at; because no power and resistance is so available against these as
Meekness and Patience. For a Christian overcomes not by noise and violence, but
by being silent and still. By the strict observance of this Condition the
number of Christians has been enlarged, and by the neglect of it many
inconveniences broken into the Church, which have not only spoiled her tender
grapes, but brought-in briars and thorns; not only hindered the growth of
Christianity, but made it a reproach to them which are without.

First, this condition stands in its proper place, joined with Remission of
sins, the hope of which benefit may encourage us to make the Condition good, or
the fear of losing it fright us from all thought of revenge. For as Captains
upon any dangerous adventure use to tell their Soldiers, de summa rerum
certari, that they are to try out the main matter, and to fight for all, either
to fall as slaves, or to be victorious with liberty and renown: So our Savior,
to enforce this duty, and to strengthen us against those affections which may
bare down our patience, and make way to the desire of revenge, has placed
these two, our everlasting Happiness or Misery, before our eyes; has set
before us both Life and Death; and told us that by the performance or neglect
of this duty we purchase or forfeit all. For both these must go together, Gods
Forgiveness of us, and our Forgiveness of our brother; or else both these will
meet, our Revenge and Gods severe and heaviest Judgment. Indeed the Condition
is very hard; To forgive an injury, Not to seek revenge, To forgive seventy
times seven times, that is, To forgive all injuries at all times, To teach our
Charity to keep time with all the Disgraces which men can fling upon us,
grande, durum, difficile; sed magna sunt praemia: This is a hard matter, full
of difficulty; but then look back upon Remission of sins, and that will make
Disgrace honorable, an Injury a benefit, and Oppression advantageous. And now,
though it be difficult, yet we may pace through it with ease. Nec est vir
fortis cui non crescit animus in ipsa rerum difficultate; He is but
faint-hearted who does not gather strength by the sight of difficulty,
especially when he may look beyond it, and at the end of all see Mercy ready to
embrace him, and Heaven open to receive him. It is an observation of St.
Augustines, Magna pars legis Divinae hominibus a Deo propter homines data est,
That a great part of the Divine law was given to men for the behoof and good of
every man. God is easy to be appeased, if we were so: but he first provides
for the weaker part, for Man. If we read our Saviors Sermon on the mount, we
shall find that the greatest part of the precepts it contains, concerns the
mutual conversation of men amongst themselves. We stand in need of our brothers
reconcilement; but God does not stand in need of ours. Therefore it has been
the wisdom of those who made laws, to curb and restrain this desire of
revenge, because by the light of nature they saw it was very dangerous to all
Societies, and that it would in time destroy the greatest kingdoms, and lay
their honor in the dust. But yet no policy did ever tie it up so short, and
give it so little line, as our Savior has done, who has threatened to punish
a revengful thought, which is but a thought, and has but the endurance of a
thought, with everlasting fire; and has promised eternal life to none but
those who possess their souls in patience, and are ready to kiss that hand that
struck them. And in this he lays his axe to the very root of the tree, to that
which is most radicated and grows closest to the very nature of man. Habet enim
men's nostra sublime quiddam and erectum, and impatiens superioris, says the
Orator; For the mind of Man is very lofty, and loves to advance it self; and
therefore is most impatient of injuries: because whosoever does them, does them
as a superior, and though he sit at our footstool, yet seems to usurp a kind
of power over us. Not only the rich man, when he takes the poor man's lamb, but
the poor man, if he do not bow, does seem to arrogate to himself what indeed
he has not. And all desire of revenge proceeds from Pride, quae ultima
exuitur, which sticks close unto us, and is the last garment we put off. It is,
says St. Basil, to the soul as an inflammation to the body, and makes us swell
and wax hot against our brother. Now by no better rule than this do we judge of
injuries. If our Pride be built up from Money, then he that takes from me my
coat, nay, he that will not give me his, is an enemy: if from Power; then not
to go when I am bid go, and come when I am called, though perhaps it be to do
that which is not right, is an injury: if from Beauty; then not to commend or
dote, is a disparagement: if from an Opinion of wisdom and learning; then not
to clap my hands and applaud each word as an Oracle, is detraction. He that
will not subscribe to our opinion, though it bear falsehood in the very face of
it, has contemned our persons. And here to revenge seems an act of justice,
and therefore we draw our sword with a kind of majesty, and wade toward it
with delight and great contentment, and dolor nostro utimur pro lege publica,
and use our distaste as a kind of law, as those who do but exact and fetch back
their own. Tanto proclivius est, says the Historian, injuriae quam beneficio
vicem exsolvere; quia gratia oneri, ultio in quaestu habetur; So bent and ready
we are rather to repay injuries than good turns, because Gratitude is a burden,
Revenge is sweet, and counted as a gain. With what formality and method have
men studied it? What preparations have they made? What stratagems have they
invented? How witty and sportful are they when they have washed their feet in
the blood of their enemies? Vitellius, when he had poisoned Blaesus, made it
his boast, pavisse se oculos spectata inimici morte, that he fed his eyes with
the sight of his dead enemy; and professed it optime olere occisum hostem,
melius civem, that his enemy smelt best when dead. Quoties caedes and fugas
jusserat princeps, toties grates diis actae: It was common with Tyrants, in
times of public execution, when they had commanded the lives or liberties of
their subjects, solemnly to offer sacrifice unto the Gods. Nor has
Christianity so prevailed with men as quite to extinguish this Desire. We have
just reason to suspect that the SICUT, the Condition here, is performed by very
few; As if with those in Cassian we had quite left it out of our PATER NOSTER,
and, because we will not forgive, blotted-out the SICUT quite, and concluded
the petition with Our selves. This Forgiveness of others we may find in
paginis, non in operibus, in our books perhaps in a fair character, but not so
legible in our lives and conversation. Besides, humane Laws seem to countenance
Revenge. Yet the very Heathen will tell us, Multa injuste fieri possunt quae
nemo potest reprehendere, Many actions may be unjust which are not blameable:
and I must not flatter my self that I have done that which is right because no
man can reprehend me. Some there are who think that to put-on Christ, and to
put-on that Tenderness and Mercy which he pours forth in abundance, is exuere
hominem; To be a Christian is quite to leave off to be a Man. Therefore I told
you this is a hard Condition, a duty which we do not easily digest. Though
Charity has many glorious acts which make it visible to the eye, as to Feed
the hungry, Cloth the naked, Redeem those who are in misery and iron, yet to
Forgive them that trespass against us is the hardest task of all. And alterutra
diligentia charitatis, the diligence of our mutual Love one to another, is most
eminent in this; it being far more difficult to forgive where an injury beats
upon us than to open our hands and give where misery falls down at our feet;
harder to suppress my anger than to cast my bread upon the waters; harder to
command my passions than my purse. We willingly help those who bow and submit
themselves, quia hoc facere tanquam majores videmur, because this is no
disparagement but an honor to us, and we do it as superiors: But in pardoning
an injury we seem to loose our right, to lay our hand under our brothers foot,
and to confess a kind of sovereignty of his over us. And in this respect it is
that Christ places this Condition here, and joyneth it with Remission of sins,
proposes his Mercy to challenge and encourage ours; promises Forgiveness, but
upon condition of Forgiveness. Indeed in the midst of all contumelies and
reproaches, in the midst of all contradiction, to be still and quiet, to
requite an injury with a benefit, to sendup prayers as fast as others
breath-forth curses, and to kiss our enemy when he is angry, haec omnia dura
videntur, sed ei qui non amat Christum, these things are harsh and unpleasant,
but it is to those who love not Christ, and who little set-by this crown of
blessings, Remission of sins. And so I pass to a second reason why this SICUT,
this Condition was annexed to this Petition, to wit, Because Forgiving one
another is a duty most proper to the Gospel.

And you may judge of the Gospel by him who came down from heaven to promulge
it, by the Author and finisher of our faith; Qui non fulminans and tonans, sed
vagiens and tacens in praesepi, homines salvavit in cruce, as St. Hierome
speaks; Who came not down in thunder and with a noise, but with the voice of an
infant; Who fought not whilst he lived, but triumphed being dead; Whose every
word and work was purely the issue of his tenderness and compassion. Tertullian
observes that the Apostles of Christ after his ascension did practice that
severity which Christ himself never made show of whilst he converst upon the
earth: Plagas inflixerunt Apostoli; quod noluit Christus: The Apostles
pronounced sentence of death, struck men blind, delivered them to Satan to be
tormented: Which power though they had from Christ, yet Christ would never
exercise it himself, but was as patient as a Lamb, though he had the strength
and power of a Lion. And as his coming was in great humility, so has he left
it as a charge to those who will be his disciples, to follow him in that way
which himself was pleased to tread before us. He has set-up Remission of sins,
but with a SICUT, upon condition that we will be as patient and humble and as
ready to forgive as he; that Humility, which brought him down to earth to
suffer for us, may lift us up to heaven to reign with him for ever. Therefore
this doctrine of Forgiveness e coelo descendit, came down from heaven with
Christ, and is most proper to the Gospel; For reckon-up all the precepts which
the Heathen Sages have given, all the examples which they have shown, and we
may find enough perhaps to shame us, but not that measure of goodness which is
required of a Christian. As Aristides was led to punishment, one spat in his
face; but this disgrace could move him no further than contumeliam contumeliae
facere, to revenge this contumely with a jest. Socrates rails not at Anytus in
prison; but, being to die, discourses of the Immortality of the Soul. Magna
certe exempla, and grande testimonium. These are great examples, and bear
witness to the doctrine of Christ. But Tertullian, at the beginning of his book
De Anima, has past a judicious censure on them, That the Heathen did and
suffered many things, non de siducia compertae veritatis, not from any
confidence that this virtue would make them everlastingly happy, sed ex
industria consultae aequanimitatis, but from a settled and strong resolution
that nothing should drive them to discontent. And this proceeded rather from
affectation than from a disposition raised by the celestial discipline and that
doctrine which came down from heaven. Munit nos Christus adversus diaboli
latitudines; The Gospel of Christ is a fense to keep us from these latitudes
and expatiations and extravagancies, and discovers the danger of those actions
which the Heathen approved for virtuous. But what talk we of the Heathen,
quorum religio pro certo non est, cum Dei eorum non sint pro certo, who, being
not well assured of their Gods, must needs also be as uncertain and unstable in
their religion? This doctrine of Forgiveness of sins was not understood of
those who were domestica Dei gens, the peculiar and familiar people of God, to
whom he gave his statutes and testimonies, and who were entrusted with his
Oracles. The Jews indeed do challenge the commandments of God tanquam propria
and haereditaria, says Hilary, as proper to them, and their peculiar
inheritance; but yet they never understood this command of Christ, To forgive
an enemy. Whatsoever Moses required of the Jew that does Christ exact of the
Christian, and more, more Patience, more Compassion, more Tenderness to our
enemy, because the heavenly promises are more clearly proposed in the Gospel
than they were under the Law. Multa sunt facienda, non jubente lege, sed libera
charitate, says St. Augustine; Many things are to be done, not because the Law
commands, but because Charity persuades them; quae cum liceret non impendere,
tamen dilectionis causa impendimus; Many offices are done, which we do out of
love, not upon command; when as Love it self is a command. Behold, says our
Savior, I give unto you a new command, that you love one another. When
Volusian urges the objection of Julian, That Christianity stands in opposition
to polity and government, the Father replyeth by parallelling of a sentence of
Salust with those precepts of our Savior. Romanos Remp. ex parva magnam
fecisse, quod accepta injuria ignoscere quam prosequi maluerint, That the
Romans had raised themselves to that greatness, not by revenge, but by
forgiving injuries. We know there is a righteousness most proper to the Gospel,
which the Jew for the most part saw but darkly and in a cloud, even that
righteousness of Faith which justifies an unrighteous person. And indeed in
this very respect, as the Christian has more day and light, more helps, than
the Jew, so his task should be greater. Our Savior has told us, Of him that
has much much shall be required. To forgive our enemies is a Condition and a
Law, and lies heavier upon us than it did upon the Jew. Lex ligat, a Law is an
obligation: and therefore, where it binds not, it is not a Law, but where it is
proposed as a Law, it binds. When God saw the Jews would not be kept within
those bounds in which his wisdom first had set them, he was pleased so far to
condescend as to give them line, least too strict a curb and charge might have
enraged them. Yet in all those tolerations his will did show it self, and did
shine forth. Even the very Permission was a commentary upon it self. In that he
did forbid them to practice Usury upon their brethren, he gave them a fair
intimation that it was far better not to practice it on strangers. When he gave
them leave upon slight occasions to put-away their wives, he made a kind of
exposition upon that Law, says St. Augustine, in that he commanded them also
first to give them a bill of divorce. For he does not say, Let whosoever will
put away his wife, but in a manner tells them he would not have them do it,
though it were permitted, cum hanc interposuerit moram, when by making this
delay he gave them time of deliberation, that so their wrath might be appeased
before the bill was writ. Besides, they were first to go unto the Scribes; to
whom alone it was lawful to write the Hebrew letters, as St. Augustine tells
us; who were men of great wisdom, and interpreters of the Law, men famous for
their piety and justice; that they might dissuade them. Lastly, for that law of
Retaliation, it was permitted, not as if it were good, but for avoiding of
greater evil, ut furoris non fomes, sed limes, says St. Augustine; not to
excite and provoke but to bound their malice. Nor did they, says Josephus,
receive an eye for an eye, or a tooth for a tooth; but for it took a pecuniary
mulct: Which was also practiced amongst the Romans, as Favorinus observes in
Gellius. For God did not approve of these as commendable to be done, but
permitted them as lawful for them who would not endure a sharper bit to be put
into their mouths. For even this law of Forgiving every man his trespasses in
equity concerned them as well as us; but the permission and dispensation does
not concern us, as it did them. Between the Precepts of Christ and these
Permissions there is no repugnancy, but a diversity only. For he that shall not
put away his wife, he that shall remit a private injury, is so far from doing
any thing against the Law, that he does that which the Law especially intends.
The very Heathen could tell us, aliqua esse quae non oportet fieri, etiamsi
licet, that there be some things which indeed may lawfully be done, but it is
far better and more praiseworthy not to do them. And therefore God often
charge the Jews with the hardness of their hearts, calls them a stubborn and
stiffnecked people, and by many tokens made it evident that he did not approve
of that which he did permit. He forbids them to hate their brother in their
heart. He commands them to do many common offices to their enemy, Lev. 19. 17.
to bring back his ox that went astray, to help him whose asselyeth under his
burden, and the like. He permits Revenge, but of lighter injuries; and of
greater, only by the hand of the Magistrate. And, had they been capable, he
would have yet showed them a more excellent way. I leave this point, and come
to speak of our third and last reason why our Savior annexed this Condition to
this Petition, and enforced it afterward.

It is indeed the nature of Flesh and Blood, to be exasperated and enraged by
injuries, and to thirst after revenge. But Christians have learnt a quite
contrary lesson in the School of their Master, To put-up injuries with
patience, and to requite them with courtesies; To love their greatest enemies,
and to pray for them who make it their business to seek and to work their
destruction. This our Savior has taught his followers both by his precept and
example; this we oblige our selves to perform as often as in this Prayer we beg
forgiveness of our sins. This lesson the primitive Christians had well learnt,
and still observed. And nothing was of greater avail both to themselves, and to
their profession, than this. Hereby they overcame their enemies, and possessed
their own souls; in prison they found liberty; in the greatest storms, a clam;
in torments and death, hope and joy. Meekness and Patience made them in all
their trials, and sufferings more than conquerers. Neither was the observation
of this rule advantageous to Christians alone, but also to Christianity it
self, which got ground by this means, took root, and spread exceedingly.
Crudelitas vestra illecebra est magis, says a Father; your cruelty, whereby
you seek to destroy us, is a kind of invitation to draw-on more company, and to
make us more numerous. The more you cut us down, we grow-up the faster; and the
more you lop-off our branches, the more they multiply; and by driving us out of
the world, you plant new colonies of Christians: For our Blood is as seed which
will bring-forth an hundredfold. The blessed Martyrs knowing this, when they
were led to death, did not only forgive their enemies, but pray for them; not
only pray for them, but give them thanks. (...), says Justine Martyr; Lucius
replied not, but thanked them. And thus those torments which were invented to
restore Paganism, did much weaken it, and strengthen Christianity, every
martyr, like Samson, killing more Idolaters at his death than he did in his
life. VIDE UT SE INVICEM DILIGUNT, See how they love one another, was a strong
motive, but, See how they forgive their enemies, and pray for their
persecutors, was a stronger, a plain convincement, which prevailed with the
wisest men, with great men, and sometimes with the executioners themselves. Non
omnia potest potentia; potentior est patientia; What Power cannot do, that
Patience absolves. And this is the only strength and power that a Christian
has, with which he subdues his enemies, and makes a way to victory by death it
self, and gains a crown against all opposition. We might expect perhaps that
God should break the jaws of the ungodly, and rise-up against those who rise-up
against us; that he should send diverse sorts of flies to devour them, and frogs
to destroy them; that he should knock-off their chariot-wheels, that they might
drive but heavily after us, and at last put them to utter confusion. But there
needs no miracle where our Savior has let down this Ancile, this buckler from
heaven; nor extraordinary help, where the ordinary means will suffice. For
Patience, if we will take it up and use it, will be our Angelus custos; our
Angel to protect us, and lead us through the enemies land to that city which we
would come to. If we observe the condition here, there be more with us than
against us. And by yielding we may overcome; by forgiving an enemy, not only
conquer him, but make him ours, that he may praise God in the day of visitation.

I have in another place spoken at large upon these three Questions; 1. What
Debts we must forgive our brother; 2. How we must forgive them; 3. What
dependence there is between Gods Forgiving of us and our Forgiving one another.
I shall forbear to repeat; but will only add a word or two, and conclude.

You will say perhaps, This is durus sermo, a very hard Condition, That no
Forgiveness of sins is to be expected unless we forgive all debts. It is true,
it is so; but to such only who so dote on the world that they grow vile to
themselves; not to them whose conversation is not in earth, but in heaven.
Totum durum est quicquid imperatur invitis, says Salvian; Every thing is hard
and difficult to an unwilling mind. Covetous and Ambitious men had rather mend
the Law than their lives, and hate the precepts rather than their sins. But
what if the Condition were in it self hard, and did not only appear so to
flesh and blood? What though I did loose by it my good name, my peace, my
possessions? Yet minora incommoda praemiis; the Condition is not so hard as the
reward is great. These incommodations are nothing in respect of that peace and
plenty which they purchase. Durum, grande, difficile; sed magna sunt praemia;
It is hard to forgive all debts; but without this no cancelling of our own. It
is a sad and heavy Condition laid upon sinful man; but without this, without
shedding of our blood, without emptying our selves of all rancour and desire of
revenge, there is no Remission of sins.

To stir us up to the performance of this Condition, let us consider that this
virtue of Forgiving others is never alone. It supposes Faith, which is
sigillum bonorum operum, as Chrysologus calls it, the seal to every good work,
to make it current and authentic. He whose mind is thus subact as to bear
another man's burden, to raise up virtue out of the ruins of himself, and
create out of injury and contempt, cannot be far from the kingdom of heaven,
nor destitute of those sacrifices wherewith God is well pleased. Not that we
affirm or absolutely determine that there is nothing more required than a mind
thus tender, soft, and equally poysed: But we rather suppose that all other
virtues are joined with it. Which though it be not necessary, yet is it very
probable. For these two, To be covetous, or luxurious, or wanton, and To be
ready to forgive, Cannot lodge in the same breast. For we see Prodigality as
well as Covetousness, is the whetstone to our Anger, and makes it keen and
sharp. The wisdom which is from above is first pure, then peacable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of good fruits, says St. James. And the Charity
which forgiveth trespasses, bears all things, believes all things, hops
all things, and does nothing unseemly: For the mind of the compassionate is
like the Heavens: Semper illic serenum est; There is continual serenity, and a
perpetual day there. He is as Wax, fit to receive any character or impression
of Goodness, and retain it. He is a fit object for Gods benefits to work upon.
He is melted at the light of Gods countenance, and yields at the very sight of
his hammer: And if the beams of that light, his sweet insinuations and
instructions, fall upon him, they fall not as upon a wave of the Sea, tossed with
the wind and carried about, where the impression must needs be flitting and
vanishing, and the reflection wavering and unequal; but, as upon a still and
quiet cloud, the reflection is equal and glorious. And this reflection is nothing
else but the image of God, according to which we are renewed. In our Compassion
and Longsuffering, in our Forgiveness of our brethren, we present unto God his
own image; monetam ipsius inscriptam nomine, hominem misericordem, a merciful
man, a piece of money taken out of his own mint, stamped with his own mark and
character, with his own image and superscription. And when he makes-up his
jewels, his special treasure, as the Prophet Malachy speaks, he will
acknowledge them for his own, and will spare them as a man spares his own son
which serves him. Then Mercy shall rejoice and triumph against Justice, and
open the gates of heaven to those who opened the bowels of Compassion to their
brethren. Then for that Charity which covered our brothers trespasses, we shall
have a robe of righteousness to cover ours; for curses we shall have blessing;
for a prison, heaven; and for disgrace, a crown. Then we shall feel the power
of this virtue, and how prevalent it is with God. Then as we have manifested
our selves to be his children by performance of this Condition, so will he
manifest himself a Father in removing our transgressions from us as far as the
East is from the West. And as a father pitieth his children, So will the Lord
pity those who have been pitiful and merciful to their brethren. Now to this
Father of mercies, the God of all comfort, be all honor and glory for ever.

The One and Fourtieth SERMON. PART. I.
MATTHEW. VI. 13. And lead us not into tentation; but deliver us from evil.
BEfore we make a full discovery, or enter upon a just exposition of this
Petition, we shall first observe the order and connection which is between these
two, between REMITTE, Forgive us our trespasses, and NE INDUCAS, Lead us not
into tentation; as Travelers, which hasten to their journeys end, yet take
notice of every remarkable object in their way. After we have deprecated the
greatest evil, that evil of Sin, which entitleth us to an everlasting curse, we
here deprecate the least evil, even the occasion of evil, which may lead unto
it. And being unfettered by a plenary indulgence from a merciful Father, we are
afraid of those shackles with which we were formerly bound. FORGIVE US OUR
SINS: Hoc omnia optanda complectitur; This comprehends all the happiness of a
Christian. This is the center wherein all our hopes and desires are at rest.
What can a Christian desire more? Yes; unum adhuc superest; there is one thing
more; Not to sin any more, to abstein from all appearance of sin, and, as good
Captains use, not to be so confident of a truce, of that peace of conscience
which is sealed unto us by Remission of sins, as not to prepare our selves for
war, quod, etiamsi non geritur, indictum est, which, though battle be not
offered, is denounced against us. And this is the condition of every Christian.
He must leave off sin before he can be forgiven; and when he is forgiven, he
must fly from it as from a Serpent which has stung him; startle at the very
sight and thought of it; prepare and arm himself against those tentations which
may engage him, and make him stand in need of a second Forgiveness; which may
wheel and circle him about from the love of Sin to the desire of Pardon, and
from Pardon to Sin again, till he can neither ask pardon nor sin any more. In
this order these two Petitions stand. Remission of sins goes before; but is not
alone. It is first REMITTE, Forgive us, and then NE INDUCAS, Lead us not into
tentation. REMITTE is not all; all is not Forgiveness: We must pray also to be
strengthened against tentations; plead at the bar for this consequent Mercy,
that takes away sin; and cooperate with preventing Mercy, which may quite
abolish it. And with these we shall exercise your Devotion at this time.

First, before Remission, before we are reconciled to God, we are no better
then the Devils mark, at which he shoots his fiery darts: We are a prey for
this Fox and this Lion, who will first deceive, and then devour us. Though we
avoid diverse tentations, though we yield not when he flatters in some pleasing
allurement, though we tremble not when he roars in the terrors of some biting
affliction, though we stand strong against all his assaults, yet those sins
which we have already committed will sink us. Not that I think that all the
actions of a person not justified are sins; or that in this state he can do
nothing which can please God or be accepted with him; or that his best works
are venial sins, as Luther, or an abomination unto God, as Calvin has taught;
that his Prayers, his Alms, his Patience, his Meekness, his moral Honesty, are
mortal sins, as the Schools too boldly have determined; that whilst he remains
unreconciled, he offends God not only by his sins, but by his virtues, by
Temperance as well as by Riot, by Hearing the Word as well as by Contemning it,
by doing Good as well as by doing Evil. For he who has published the rule, and
as it were imprinted his will in his Law, cannot be offended with that action
which is answerable to that rule. He who has endued us with Reason, cannot be
displeased with his creature when he does operam dare rationi, as Augustine
speaks, make use of that talent which he has given, and walk by that light
which he has kindled in his soul. For what is our Reason but a portion from
Gods Divine Wisdom, a beam from his infinite Light, which he has given us not
only to procure those things which are necessary for the uses of this life, but
for those actions which may (...), as Plato speaks, make us in some degree like
unto God. Therefore even Heathens themselves have acknowledged that Life and
Reason are given to Men to this end, (...), that we may follow God. Now so far
as we follow him, so near are we to him. And though he be angry with that
person who has not sued out his pardon, yet he loves his virtues. Though he
will not know him, not acknowledge him to be his, yet he does not frown upon
those actions in which he resembles him. He is not angry with his Patience, his
Fidelity, his Truth, but with those his sins which make him guilty of eternal
death. For suppose a Christian that believes be of a wicked, and an Infidel of
an honest conversation, certainly of the two the Infidel is nearest to the
kingdom of heaven. No: These actions of piety are not sins, but they are not
conducible to eternal life. They have their reward, but not that reward which
is laid up for the righteous. The Law is broken: and all the works, I do not
say, of all the virtuous Heathens, but of all the Saints, of all the Martyrs,
that have ever been, cannot satisfy for the least breach of the Law, no more
than a Traitor can redeem his treason against the King by giving of alms, or,
which is more, by dying for his country. For whosoever commits sin is the
servant of sin, to bear not only its heavy burden, but the whip; not only to be
at its beck, and when it says, Do this, to do it; but to be punished for sin, to
be liable to those lashes of conscience and to be reserved in everlasting
chains of darkness unto the judgment of the great day. He is captive, sold
under sin, driven out from the face of God, under the power of that Law which
is a killing letter, obnoxious to all the Woes which are denounced against
sinners. And thus he stands till he does postliminio recipere, recover and
receive his liberty, till he be redeemed and brought back again: And by
justification and free pardon quasi jure postliminii, as by a law of recovery,
he is reinstaled into that liberty which he lost, and does omnia sua recipere,
receive all that might be his, his Filiation, his Adoption, his Title to a
Kingdom; and putatur semper fuisse in civitate, he is graciously accepted as
if he had never been lost, as if he had always been a free denizon of the City
of God, and never fled from thence, as if he had never forfeited his right. His
sins are wiped out as if they had never been.

This we beg in the first place, That we may be reconciled unto God; That being
justified we may have peace. But then, in the next place, our Petition is, NE
INDUCAT, That he will not lead us into temptation, That we may sin no more. Not
that we approve of that error of Jovinian, That after we are baptized, after we
are reconciled unto God, we cannot be tempted by Satan; and That those who sin
were never truly baptized, were baptizati aqua, non spiritu, baptized with
water only, and not with the holy Ghost; or That this Petition did belong only
to the Catechument, those novices in Christianity which were not yet admitted
into the Church, and not to believing Christians. This error is at large
confuted by St. Hierom. For why else those warnings, those preparations, those
warlike oppositions against Satan? Why should we say this Prayer at all, if
after reconcilement there were an impossibility of sinning? But it is
impossible only impossibilitate juris, as the Civilians speak; not that it
cannot be done, but that it should not be done. For thus the Law supposes
obligations to be performances, and that necessarily done which we are bound to
do. What should be done is done; and it is impossible to be otherwise. When we
are justified, there is mors criminum, and vita virtutum, as St. Cyprian
speaks, or as the Apostle, we are dead to sin, and alive to righteousness.
Indeed Justification is nothing else but an action of God, or a certain respect
and relation* by which we are acquitted of our sins. And although it be done
without any respect had to good works, yet it is not done without them.
Although it be not a change from one term to another, from Sin to Holiness, yet
is no man justified without this change. Therefore not only Faith but Charity
also is required as a condition at their hands who will be saved. But it has
pleased God to justify us freely by his grace, and to impute, Romans 3. 24.
not our Goodness, but Faith, to us for righteousness. Christus justificat,
Romans 4. 22.
sed justificabiles; Christ indeed justifies, but not those who make themselves
incapable of his Grace: As Fire burns, but such matter as is combustible; and
the Soul animates a sick or crasie body perhaps, but not a carcass. So That
Faith justifies a sinner, and That Charity does not justify, are both true:
but it is as true, Faith cannot justify him who loves not the Ephesians. 6. 24.
Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity: Christus justificat impium, sed poenitentem,
Christ justifies a sinner, but a sinner that repents. It is true that the
Schools tell us, Justificatio non fit sine interna renovatione; We cannot be
justified without renewing and inward change: But this change does not justify
us. Therefore where they enhaunce Good works, and give them a share in our
Justification, they do veritatem tenere, non per vera, as Hilary speaks, speak
some truth, but not truly apply it, or rather, as Tertullian speaks, veritatem
veritate concutere, shake and overthrow one truth with another. Good works are
necessary; they must abound in us; God delights in them, and rewards them: But
what concurrence have these with Remission of sins, which is the free gift of
God, and proceeds from no other fountain but his own Will and infinite Mercy?
To bring this home to our present purpose; Our victory over tentations is
neither the cause of Remission of sins, nor yet the necessary effect: Not the
cause; For what power have the acts of Holiness to abolish the act of one sin
which is past, and for which we are condemned already? Nor the necessary
effect; For then, when Sin is once forgiven, we could sin no more, nor be lead
into tentation. Therefore when we read that the justified person is freed from
sin, we must understand that he is free from the guilt of former sins, not from
the danger of future; and in the Fathers, fides est genitrix bonae voluntatis,
that Faith is the mother of a good will, we find not what Faith always does,
but what it should do, and what it is ordained for, what it would produce if no
cross action of ours did intervene to hinder it. In a word, let us not only in
our Pater Noster, but in the whole course of our lives, join these two
Petitions together: When our sins are forgiven, Let us pray, and labor too,
that we be not led into tentation; And that for many reasons, which we must
duly weigh and consider, as we tender the welfare and salvation of our souls.

First, Remission and Forgiveness, as it nullifies former sins, so does it
multiply those that follow: as it takes away the guilt from the one, so it adds
unto the guilt of the other, and makes Sin over-sinful. We are now Children,
and must not speak our former dialect, words clothed about with Death; but our
language and voice must be Abba, Father; and every action such a one as a
Father may look upon and be well pleased. And this first word of our Nativity,
as Cyprian speaks, Our Father which art in heaven, is as a remembrance to put
us in mind that we have renounced all carnality, and know only our Father which
is in heaven. Reatus impii, pium nomen, says Salvian; A good name is part of
the guilt of a wicked man. Our Religion which we profess will accuse us; and
that relation which we have to God will condemn us. Plutarch said well, I had
rather a great deal men should say there were no such man as Plutarch, than
that they should say there was one Plutarch that would eat up his children as
soon as they were born, as the Poets speak of Saturn: And better it were that
it should be said we were no Christians, than that we were Christians ready to
devour one another, Christians, but adulterers: Christians, but malicious: the
children of God with the teeth of a Lion; delighting in those sins which we
abjure, and every day committing that for which we beg pardon every day. This
consideration was it, I suppose, that caused diverse Christians to do what some
of the Fathers have condemned, defer their Baptism. And when they were
baptized, what a multitude of ceremonies did they use? what prayers? what
geniculations? what fastings? what watchings? First they breathed upon them
thrice, and thrice bad Satan avoid, that Christ might enter. Secondly, they
exorcised them, that the evil Spirit might depart and give place. Then they
gave them salt, that their putrid sins might be cleansed. Then they touched
their nostrils, and their ears; They anointed their breasts and their
shoulders; They anointed their head, and covered it; They put upon them white
apparel; They laid their hands upon them, that they might receive the grace of
the Spirit. Of all which we may say as Hilary does of Types, Plus significant
quam agunt, They had more signification than virtue or power, and were
intimations, what piety is required of them, who have given up their names unto
Christ, how foul Sin appears in him that is washed, and how dangerous it is
after reconcilement. Now as in the conversation of men we cannot easily judge
where Love is true and where it is feigned by a smile, or by fair language, or
by the complement of the tongue or hand; and therefore some opportunity, some
danger, must offer it self, by the undertaking of which our friendship is
tried, as Gold is in the fire; so we cannot judge of Repentance, that it is
true, by an exterminated countenance, by the beating of the breast, by the
hanging down of the head; no, not by our sighs and groans, by our tears and
prayers, by our ingemination of DIMITTE NOBIS, Lord, Forgive us; which many
times are no better than so many complements with God, than the flattery of our
lips and hands. But when temptations rush-in upon us, when they threaten in
afflictions, when they smile upon us in the pleasures of the world; then it
will appear whether that which was in voto, in our desires, were also in
affectu, in our resolution. And if we bear not this trial, we have no reason to
be too confident of our Pardon. Again, if we sue for pardon of sin, and then
sin afresh, we become more inclinable to sin then we were before. It is more
easy to abstein from the pleasures of Sin before we have tasted them then it
will be afterward, as its harder to remain a widow then to continue a virgin,
harder not to look back toward Sodom after one has left it, then it would have
been to have kept out of it at first. That which is once done has some
affinity with that which is done often, and that which is done often is near to
that which is done always. God indeed in Scripture is said to harden men's
hearts, and some be very forward to urge those Texts; yet Induration is the
proper and natural effect of continuance in sin. For every man, says Basil, is
shaped and formed and configured as it were to the common actions of his life,
whether they be good or evil. Long continuance in sin causes that which
Theodoret calls (...), a reverberating heart, an heart which is as marble to
all the threatenings and promises of God; it works in the sinner that
difficulty and inability of resisting tentations that he becomes even a devil
to himself, and will fall without them. And this may seem to fall as a just
judgment of God on those who fix their eyes so steddily upon the Mercy-seat
that they quite forget the two Tables; who are all for the REMITTE, but not at
all for the NE INDUCAS; very earnest for Remission of sins, but faint and
backward in resisting Tentations; I will not deliver it as a positive truth,
but it is good for us to cast an eye of jealousy upon it as if it were so,
That there may be a measure of sins which being once full God will expect no
longer; a certain period of time, when he will neither comfort us with his
Mercy, nor assist us with his Grace, but deliver us up to Satan, to his
buffetings and siftings, to his craft and malice; deliver us up to Sin and to
the Occasions of Sin; that having held-out his hand all the day, as the Prophet
speaks, he will now call them in again, and, as we mocked his patience, laugh at
our calamity. Prove. 1.
It is a sign of a pious mind to fear sometimes where no fear is, and even in
plano, in the plainest way, to suppose there may be a block to stumble at. If
it be not true it is a wholesome meditation to think the measure of our sin is
so near full that the next sin we commit may fill it; that there is a Rubicon
set, as to Caesar, which if thou pass thou art proclaimed a Traitor; a river
Kidron, as to Shimei, which if thou go over, thou shall dye, thy blood shall 2
Kings 2. 37.
be upon thine own head. Now is the acceptable hour, now is the day of
salvation; 2 Cor. 6. 2.
and if thou art so dazzled with the beauty of Mercy that thou can not see
death in a Tentation, horror upon Sin to morrow will be too late. And here in
the last place, as the case stands with us, we have as much reason to be afraid
of Mercy as of a Tentation, and to beg it at the hands of God that it do not
prove so, even a temptation and occasion of sin. For at the very name of Mercy,
we lie down and rest in peace. This is the pillow on which we can sleep in the
midst of a tempest, and dream of heaven when we are entering the very gates of
hell. We make the Pardon of sin commeatum delinquendi, but a kind of faculty or
safe conduct that we may sin the more boldly. A heavy speculation it is, but
Experience has made it good; We have learnt a cursed art how to change and
transelement the Mercy of God. We make our selves worse for the Goodness of
God, and continue in sin because he is long-suffering. Forgiveness blots-out
sin, and Forgiveness revives it. We will not be rich in Good works, because God
is bountiful of his merits; and we are many times most sinful upon no other
inducement then a faith unhappy and ill applied, That God is most merciful.
Deus, inquiunt, bonus, and optimus, salutificator omnium, says Tertullian;
This is the plea of most men, GOD IS GOOD, AND MERCIFUL, AND THE SAVIOR OF THE
WORLD. Haec sunt sparfilia eorum; These are those sprinklings of comfort with
which they abate the rage of that hell which Sin has already kindled in their
breast. And as it fares with us in respect of temporal life, so does it also in
respect of spiritual life. We lay-up for many years, when we cannot promise to
our selves a night; and we talk of to morrow, when the next word may be our
last: and though the keepers of the house tremble, and the strong men bow
themselves, and the grinders cease, yet we nourish a hope of life, even then
when our voice fails us, and we have not strength enough to publish our hope:
So when we lie bedrid in sin, almost at the last gasp; when our members are
withered, when our understandings are darkened, and our memories fail us, when
we are nothing else but the carcass and shadow of a Christian, we talk of the
glories and riches of the Gospel, hope to be saved by that Grace which we have
slighted, and by that Mercy which we have trampled under our feet. We force
Mercy to these low offices in our health and jollity, to sit with us in the
seat of the scornful, to walk with us in our inordinate courses, and to make
the way smooth and pleasant which leads unto death; and at last when we lie
on our deathbeds, we get it to persuade us that we who have believed, and no
more, who all our life long had no other virtue than Faith, may now dye in
hope; that we may dye the death of the righteous, who have made our members the
weapons of unrighteousness. Thus we pray, That Gods will may be done, That we
may overcome Tentations; but we live as if there were no other Petition but
this, Forgive us our Trespasses. Tertullian says, Solenne est perversis
idiotis, It is a common thing with ignorant and foolish men, with men of
perverse hearts, to lay hold upon some one fair promising Text, and to set it
up adversus exercitum sententiarum instrumenti totius, against a whole army of
those sad and ill-boding sayings which qualify it. HABEMUS ADVOCATUM, If we
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father; This is a fundamental truth, and to
this we stand, and never heed those passionate Texts in Scripture, those
expostulating Texts, Why will you dye? Oh fools, Ezekiel. 33. 11. Psalm. 94. 8.
Psalm. 81. 13.
when will you be wise? those wishing Texts, Oh that my people would
understand! that Israel would hear my voice! those forewarning Texts,
Tribulation and anguish on every soul that does evil; and, They that do these
things Romans 2. 9. Gal. 5. 21.
cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven: and those begging and beseeching
Texts, I beseech you, brethren, be reconciled; I beseech you, abstain from
carnal lusts. 2 Cor. 5. 20. 2 Pet. 2. 11.
I have often wondered within my self how it should come to pass that so many
Heathen have surpassed most Christians, in the commendable duties of this life,
that even Turks and Pagans do loath those sins which Christians swallow-down
with ease and digest with all their horror and turpitude; why the light of
Reason should discover to them the foul aspect of Sin, which the Christian many
times does not discern with that light and with another to boot, the light of
Scripture; why the secret whisper of Nature should more prevail with them, then
does with many of us the voice of God himself and the open declaration of his
will in Scripture. But it is too true, They are not always best who have most
motives to be so. For as it falls-out sometimes in men of great learning and
subtilty, though they are able to resolve every doubt, untie every knot, and
answer the strongest objections, yet many times they are puzzled with a mere
fallacy and piece of sophistry: So the formal Christian can stand strong
against all motives, all beseechings, all the batteries of God, against the
terror of hell, and allurements of promises; but he is puzzled with a piece of
sophistry, and cannot extricate and unwind himself; with the Devils fallacy a
dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, That Mercy does save sinners which
are penitent, and therefore it saves all: And upon this ground the Pleasures
which are but for a season shall win upon us, when Heaven with its eternity
cannot move us; and the supposed Tediousness and Trouble which is in Goodness
shall affright us from Good works more than the Torments which are eternal can
from Sin. So that that Mercy which the unbelieving Heathen wanted to make them
happy, the Christian has but ad poenam, to make him miserable, being made by
him the savor of death unto death: And that which is his privilege here,
shall be to his greater condemnation, and urged as a reason why the Christian
shall have more stripes than the Infidel. To restrain this evil, which is the
cause of all evil, and the abuse of Mercy, which envenomes it and makes it
malignant, and leaves us so incurable that infinite Mercy cannot restore us,
that ipsa Salus, Salvation it self, cannot help us, the primitive Christians
admitted public penance in the Church but once after Baptism. They had (...),
as Clemens speaks; primam and unam poenitentiam, as Tertullian, but one
repentance, but one, which was first and last, fearing lest if they did laxare
fraenos disciplinae, slacken the reins of discipline, and admit of notorious
sinners toties quoties, though they laid-down and took-up their sins at
pleasure, they might make that a fomenter of Sin which was ordained to kill it.
The Novatian was yet stricter, and would not admit it once, and therefore
underwent the Churches heaviest censure, as an enemy to God and to his infinite
Goodness, and one who shut-up the bowels of that Compassion which is open unto
all. The Fathers would have it once, Novatus not once; and, for ought appears,
both upon the same ground and reason, To teach men that after Remission once
obtained, their work is to subdue Tentations, and to fight against the Devil,
whom they have so solemnly renounced. It is true, Novatus was in the error: But
against a wilful offender his error is as useful as their truth: and though it
be no cordial for a broken and contrite heart, yet is it a good antidote
against Sin. For how wary would men be in ordering their steps, if they could
persuade themselves that every fall were irrecoverable, and that God is as
jealous of his Mercy as of his Truth, and will not afford too frequent a view
and sight of her to those who every day prostitute her to their lusts. I am
sure the Fathers, even where they oppose Novatus, deliver the doctrine of
Repentance with great wariness. Invite loquor, says Tertullian; I am unwilling
to publish this free mercy of God. (...), says Basil, I speak in fear. when I
speak of Mercy. For my desire is that after Baptism you would sin no more, and
my fear is that you will sin more and more upon presumption of mercy. Upon
presumption of Mercy it is that we do return with the dog to our vomit, that we
have alternas inter cupiditatem and poenitentiam vices, those courses and that
interchange between our lusts and repentance, that we are whirled about like
the Spheres, which reiterate their motion, and return to the point which they
passed. Our whole life is a motion and circumvolution from Sin to Repentance,
and from Repentance to Sin again; from Want to Mercy, and from Mercy to the
Need of it. And thus we turn and return, till at last we all burn in the common
conflagration, and our souls shall shrivel up as a scroul. We woo sin and
embrace it, but upon some pang that we feel we begin to distaste it. When it
flatters, we are even sick with love; but when it after chides us, we are weary
of it, and would fain shake it off. Our soul cleaves to it, and our soul
loatheth it. We send it a bill of divorce, and after marry and join with it.
And all this arises from our Presumption of Mercy. I should be loath to confine
the Mercy and Goodness of God, which is infinite. I know Repentance is not as
Baptism, but once to be had, and never reiterated; that he who was overcome at
first may (...), secundo certamine superare, recover the field, and at a second
onset gain the conquest over that enemy who before had foiled him. But it
concerns us Christians to be very wary that our best remedy turn not into a
disease, ne nobis subsidia poenitentiae blandiantur, that these succors and
supplies do not flatter us so long till we grow at last enamored with their
very shadows and names. Let us beg Remission upon our knees, but then stand-up
against Tentations. Our first care should be ne peccemus, that as far as is
possible we do not sin at all: but then, si peccemus, if we sin, we have an
Advocate, unto whom we may lift-up our eyes, till he have mercy upon us; And if
we obtain favor at his hands, we must sin no more, lest a worst thing fall
unto us; lest that sin which did but prick us to some sense of it; at last
sting us to death: In a word, we must watch and pray, lest we enter into
temptation, and so bring a nullity on our Pardon. And this we learn from the
order and connection of these two Petitions. NE INDUCAS, Lead us not into
tentation immediately follows after REMITTAS, Forgive us our trespasses, that
we may learn not to pardon that sin which God has pardoned. We should now
unfold the Petition it self. But so much at this time.

The Two and Fourtieth SERMON. PART. II.
MATTHEW. VI. 13. And lead us not into tentation; but deliver us from evil.
THIS is the sixth and last Petition. And I make it but one, although some
there be who have divided it, and made it two, that so they might make up the
full number of Seven, and so compare them to the seven Stars, to the seven
golden Candlesticks, and the like. But, for ought I know, we may find as great
a mystery in the number of Six as others have in that of Seven. But this were
exercere ingenium inter irrita, and nihil profuturis otium terere, to catch at
atoms or shadows, and spend our time to no purpose. I am sure the Petitions can
borrow no virtue from the number; nor do I see how the number should derive any
mystery from the Petitions. Be they six, or seven, it is not much material. But
most plain it is, in the Vulgar Latin edition in St. Luke this latter
particle, SED LIBERA NOS A MALO, but deliver us from evil, is wanting; Which at
this day is extant in all the Greek copies, and in the Syriack edition.
Although it is more than probable that in the time of the Old Interpreter there
were some Greek copies which had it not. And therefore the diverse reading, and
the defect of this part in St. Luke, is a probable confirmation that there is
nothing contained in this last part of the Petition which was not virtually in
the former, and that it is no distinct petition from it, but rather an
explication of it, affording us light more exactly to discover what it is we
desire when we pray NOT TO BE LED INTO TENTATION. Eo respondet clausula
interpretans quid sit, NE NOS INDUCAS IN TENTATIONEM, says Tertullian. For we
then are victorious, and overcome tentations, when we are freed not only from
them, but from the power of that Evil one who multiplieth them, and with them
works upon the soul with an intent to ruin and overthrow it.

And here, before we descend to particular enquiries concerning the Nature, the
Power, the Variety and the Ends of Tentations, and the Manner of their working,
together with the Remedies or Means by which we may overcome them, we must stay
a while upon the words here Tentation, and to be led into temptation. For the
word; Tentation in Scripture has diverse significations, all drawn from one and
the same Etymon of the word, which is, To assay or make trial what another will
do, To attempt to work some new and unusual thing. And so God is said to tempt,
and the Devil to tempt: and God does make trial, and the Devil makes trial;
although God does it only to make trial of our obedience, the Devil does it
with a further purpose, to destroy us. So God is said to tempt Abraham, when
Genesis 22. 1.
he commanded him to sacrifice his Son; which was rather a Probation than a
Tentation; ut per eum faceret exemplum praecepto suo, says Tertullian, that
upon this command he might build up a glorious ensample for us, and teach us to
esteem our Children, the fruit of our body, our best hopes and expectation, as
nothing in respect of God. And the Devil is said to tempt Job, but to another
end, to make him curse God to his face. In both under the name of temptation
those adverse and contrary things are comprehended, by which we may be
withdrawn and hindered in the race which we run. For the command to Abraham was
a grievous command, grievous to flesh and blood, for a father to slay his son,
and might have shook his faith: And the Devils tentation was such a touch of
Job as might have overthrown him. Only here is the difference; There was love
in Gods trial, which made it a trial of a Father, and no more; but there was
malice in the Devils, which made it the trial of an Enemy, a bloody trial, to
undermine and overthrow. Gods trial did bespeak obedience; but the Devils trial
breathed-forth nothing but destruction. But here the word INDUCAS, or INFERAS,
Lead us not into tentation, may seem to imply that God sometime not only brings
us but leads us into tentations, there to be as it were shut-up and detained.
For that may be the force of the word, as if we were so cast upon tentations
that they might lay-hold and take possession of us. And if it would not bear
this sense, yet even the word Tentation may signify no less than a Withdrawing
us from God. And so it is taken 1 Cor. 7. 5. where Paul admonishing the married
couple to separate themselves but for a season, adds the reason, Lest Satan
tempt you for your incontinency; Which is nothing else than, Lest Satan make
you sin through incontinency. And Gal. 6. 1. he bespeaks them, brethren, If any
man be overtaken in a fault, restore him in the spirit of meekness, lest thou
also be tempted; which must needs be the very same with that before, Lest thou
also be overtaken with a fault. And 1 These. 3. 5. Lest the tempter have tempted
you, and our labor be in vain. For though by adversity or some other
temptation they were solicited to sin, yet it does not follow that their labor
should be in vain: but it was then in vain when they yielded unto the
temptation, and did actually sin. Now it cannot be attributed to God that he
thus tempts us. God is a Tempter of no man. We Jam. 1. 13.
will therefore, before we descend to particulars, lay-down these two
positions, 1. God does permit us to be led into tentations; 2. God does but
permit us. That we are led unto tentations is by the permission of God; and
this permission is not efficacious, for, if we will, we may overcome them.

Nothing more contrary and abhorrent to the will of God than Sin, and yet the
Permission of Sin is a positive act of his will: for he will permit it. For
though God made Man upright, yet he made him also mutable: the root of which
mutability was the freedom of his Will, by which Man might incline to either
side, and either embrace tentations, or resist them. Man being thus built-up
did owe unto his Maker absolute and constant obedience: and obedient he could
not be if he had not been thus built-up. Therefore his Understanding and Will
were to be exercised, the one with Arguments, the other with Occasions; the one
of which might discover the Resolution, the other the Election of Man, which
way he would take, whether to the right hand, or to the left. These arguments
and occasions are that which we call Temptations: Which, though they naturally
light upon the outward man, yet do formally aim at the inward. For Obedience
has reference to some law by which it must be squared and directed: and
therefore God has made Man capable of one, made him Dominum rerum temporumque,
Master and Lord of his own actions; and imprinted in him a Will, which may
either join with the Sensitive part against Reason, which make us to every good
work reprobate: or else with Reason against the Sensual appetite; which works
in us a conformity to Gods will. He that is capable of this Law must have some
power and faculty left to break it: Otherwise, it were a vanity to enact a Law.
Who would speak to the Grass to grow, or to the Fire to burn, or to a Stone to
lie still and move no more? Quis unquam lapidem coronavit quod virgo
permanserit? says St. Hierome; Who ever put the crown of virginity upon a
Stone, upon his head who could not possibly defile himself? There is a nullity
in every Law if the persons to whom it is given be necessitated to either part
of the contradiction, to keep, or not to keep it. Obedience is nothing else but
a bowing of the Will and conforming it to the Law of God against all those
assaults which, like so many winds, beat upon the Will, which is a free
faculty, to drive it from that object to which the will of God confines it, to
that which indeed it may choose, but for the VETO, the prohibition, written
upon it, to dull and take off that inclination. Now the Will of man, having
this natural propriety to be libripens emancipati a Deo boni; to weigh that
good which is proposed as it were in the scales, and to choose and refuse it, is
that which turns Tentations from that end for which they were permitted and
ordained, makes Satan's darts more fiery, his enterprises more subtle, his
arguments more strong, his occasions more powerful, and his tentations more
persuasive, than indeed they are; so that what God ordained for our trial and
crown, is made a means of our downfall and condemnation. All the weakness of our
soul, all those sad symptoms and prognostics of death, all the sins of the
world, though permitted by God and suggested by Satan, are properly and
principally from the Will. Suppose a darkness on the Understanding, the cloud
is from the Will: and therefore God often complains, not that we do not, but
that we will not understand. That, my Anger rages, my Love burns, my Grief
is impatient, and my Joy is mad, all is from the Will. All arguments, all
occasions, all tentations, all provocations supposed, no outward force, no
flattery, no violence, not all the power of Hell, can determine our Will, or
force us unto action. NULLUM MALUM EST NATURAL, That no evil is natural, is
the substance of that great dispute of St. Augustine against the Manichee. And
then certainly nullum malum est supernaturale, no evil is or can be
supernatural. The highest Heaven is not the coast from whence this pestilential
wind does blow. And therefore the Father lays it down as a fundamental
principle, MALUM NON EXORTUM NISI EX LIBERO ARBITRIO, Sin could have no
beginning or being but from the Will of man. God permits; the Devil tempts;
outward objects are busy in our eyes; every place is full of snares, full of
dangers: but, as Palladius speaks of the Husbandman, Villicus, si nolit
peccare, non facit, the spiritual husbandman does nothing disorderly unless he
will. No man sins, or can sin against his will. If Sin were not permitted,
why have we a Will? Cur permiserat, si intercedat? cur intercedat, si
permiserit? says Tertullian. And if there were no tentations to sin, how weak
would our Obedience be? how easy to obey, where there is nothing to hinder or
retard us? The things which are in this world are the good creatures of God,
and by their first institution served to show the bounty of God, and to provoke
Man to thankfulness, and to the contemplation and exspectations of those better
things which shall never perish. Nae Mundus schola magna patet, says the Poet;
The World is a great School, in which we may spend our time with profit, and by
visible things grow up to the knowledge of those things which are invisible.
The heavens declare the glory of God, and the firmament shows his mighty
Power. Day unto day teaches knowledge. And by these Heavens I may be brought
to a view of those new heavens wherein dwells righteousness. By this
temporary Light, which when time comes I shall see no more, I may learn how to
value that light which is everlasting; by the Riches of this world, what to
think of the riches and glory of the Gospel; by a span of Time, to conceive
more rightly of Eternity. But then it is as true, that this world as it is a
School to teach us, so is it officina tentationum, a Shop full of tentations:
And we may make it so. We may turn these good creatures of God, and make the
Beauty of the world a snare; the Riches and Glory of the world, as prickles and
thorns; and that which is very good a provocation to induce and entice to that
which is very evil. One said of Rome, Talis est qualem quisque velit, It is
such a place as we will make it. And as it is the commendation of our Obedience
to stand out against those assaults, against the Wine when it is red, against
Beauty when it smiles, against the Pomp of the world when it glitters in our
eyes: so does it aggravate our Disobedience if we entertain that as an occasion
of sin which indeed in it self is an inducement to virtue; if we choose Gold
before the Maker of it, a Pearl before the Kingdom it represents, and had
rather have villam quam coelum, a farm here than a mansion in Heaven. There is
nothing in the world, nothing in our selves, which we may not make either good
or bad use of, a means to avoid and prevent sin, or an occasion to commit it.
That by which we dishonor God, by the very same we may glorify him. The
Understanding may be as the Sun in the firmament, to lead us in our way, that
we hurt not our foot against a stone; and it may be as a Meteor, to lead us
into bypath and dangerous precipices, till we fall headlong into hell it
self. The Will may be (...), a shop and workhouse of virtuous actions; and it
may be a forge of all iniquity. The Memory may be a book fairly written with
all the characters of goodness; and it may be a roll blotted and blurred with
lust and uncleanness. So then if we seek the true immediate and proper cause of
Sin, (...), we must not turn our eyes outward, to look abroad, either on the
Will of God; for it is against his will: nor on the Devils malice; for he can
but occasion and promote it: nor on those many Tentations which daily assault
us; for to a resolved Christian they are but as so many atoms, and cannot hurt
him unless he drink them down: But let us search the closet of our hearts, and
look upon our own Will. This is the very womb which conceives that viper that
eats it out and destroies it. God has no interest in our sins: All he does is,
that he permits them. And as he permits us to commit them, so he permits, nay
he commands, us not to do them. Et quid velit Deus, non quid permitmittat,
considerandum, says Cyprian: The rule of our Obedience must be this in all the
course of our life, To consider, not what God does suffer to be done, but what
he would have us do. For as Augustine says, Deus bonitatem suam alia voluntate
non praevaricatur; God does not prevaricate; nor does he bring in one will to
destroy another: his will to permit Sin does not cross that will of his which
does forbid it. Let us give God no further interest in our sins than this, That
as a just and wise Lawgiver he does barely permit us to fall into those
tentations to which when we yield we break that Law, and become obnoxious to
punishment, who by a constant resisistance and withstanding of it. Nay, he may
suffer us to be led into tentations, though he call to us to avoid them. And
this leads me to that which I proposed in the next place, That this Permission
is not efficacious; That it is not necessary for any man to be taken in the
snare, and to fall into tentation. If it were not possible he might fall, he
could not merit, he could do no good; and if it were necessary he should fall,
he could do no evil. And yet such an ungrounded position there is, and it
passes current amongst many, That upon the Permission of Sin it must
necessarily follow that sin must be committed; For indeed I find they make
great use of this word Permission. If we read their tractates, we shall find
that under this one word they cunningly wrap-up Excitation, Compulsion, and
what not? Nay, they speak it (...), before the Sun and the people; Deus vult
fieri, quod facere vetat. Deus non semper vult quod se velle significat. And
again, Ab aeterno reprobantur, ut indurarentur, Some, they say, there are who
are reprobated and castaway from all eternity, that they may be led and shutup
into temptation, and be hardened. And this with them is nothing but Permission.
We cannot be too wary in our approaches to God and his Majesty, nor in our
discourses of him. De Deo vel serio loqui periculosum. It is dangerous after
mature deliberation to speak of him, says the Philosopher. But either directly
or by way of deduction or consequence to entitle him to our Sins is blasphemy
against his infinite Goodness. To think that he leads any into tentation is to
fashion him out to be like to our own Lusts, and to our Adversary, who, though
he be not alone in the work, yet alone has the name of Tempter.

But now some places of Scripture there are brought-forth which seem to favor
this efficacious Permission, and to speak no less than that God does not only
permit tentations, but lead us into them; not only shows us that which may hurt
us, but betrays us to it. And no doubt such there are. But here we must be wary
that we raise not arguments from mere sound of the words. Expetit sensus
interpretationis gubernaculum, says Tertullian: We must make use of the light
which a just interpretation may bring. Universa Scriptura quasi una propositio
copulativa, says Gerson; there is such a sympathy, such an analogy between one
part and another that the whole Scripture may seem to be but one entire
copulative proposition. Therefore where two places seem to look diverse ways,
we must not be too forward to adhere or fasten to either, but ex praepositis
and consequentibus, as Hilary teaches us, by comparing that which goes before
with that which follows after, by help of plain and open places, bring them
together, and make them one in understanding, which cannot possibly be opposite
in sense. It cannot be that that should be the sense of any part of Scripture
which contradicts any principle of truth, or violates any attribute of God, as
his Goodness, his Wisdom, his Justice. I will not say as the Father upon
occasion does, Talia si dicunt Prophetae, non erunt mei; If the Prophets or
Apostles speak any such words, they shall be none of mine; but rather be
confident that whatsoever at first to an indiligent Reader the words may sound,
the Prophets and Apostles could not mean. And in common reason, that which is
plain and acknowledged on all sides to be true should give light to that which
is obscure, and be, as an Oath, for confirmation to set an end to all strife
and controversy. To examine some places of this nature; In 2 Samuel 24. 1. after
we are told that the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel, it presently
follows, and he moved David against them, to say, Go number Israel and Judah.
And some have been too ready to lay hold on this, and urge it as a plain
testimony that God many times makes Satan his instrument, and by him inciteth
and moves men to sin. Which notwithstanding the gross absurdity of the thing
it self, and a plain testimony of Scripture, That God tempts no man, that is,
incites or solicites Jam. 1. 13.
none to sin, does evidently demonstrate to be most false. And this He in
Samuel is pointed-out by name, and is no other than Satan himself. Now the 1 Chronicles. 21. 1.
reason of this grand mistake and blasphemy was no other than this, that this,
He moved David, is brought-in close to that, That God was angry; so that it
might seem to be referred unto Him, because there is no mention there of any
other. But yet they might have observed that it is a common thing with the
Hebrews to bring-in their Verbs many times without the Person who is the agent;
so that these words, ET INSTIGAVIT DAVIDEM, he moved David, by the common
opinion of Grammarians may be thus supplied, ET INSTIGAVIT IS QUI INSTIGAVIT,
He moved him that moved him, that is, the Devil.

But that 1 Kings 22. is more plain. There comes-forth an evil Spirit, and
offers as it were himself to assist and help God to destroy Ahab. For when God
asks, Who shall persuade Ahab to fall at Ramoth-Gilead? the evil Spirit answers
him, That will I: How? says God. I will go forth, says he, and be a lying
Spirit in the mouth of all his prophets. Go, says God, and prevail. If we take
the words as they sound, here was more than Permission: Here was a Command; and
God may seem to have given the Spirit a Commission, and deputed him as an
instrument to destroy Ahab. But if we rightly weigh each circumstance, all will
amount to no more than Permission. For though God gave-way to the evil Spirit,
yet was it not infallibly necessary that Ahab should be deceived. If he would,
he might have hearkened to Micaiah the true Prophet, and cast the lying
Prophets into prison, there to eat the bread of sorrow, and drink the water of
affliction. GO, AND DO SO, are the words of an offended God, who, when he found
an instrument, ready to his hands, would not hinder that voluntary profer of
the evil Spirit, which he knew how to use to execute his vengeance upon that
wicked King. Occulta justitiae licentia malignis spiritibus datur, says
Gregory, ut quos volentes in peccati laqueo strangulant, in peccati poenam
etiam nolentes trahant: Even the evil Spirits have a kind of license, a Writ De
puniendo peccatore, given them, that they who are so gentle and willing to be
led into the snare of the Devil, may be dragged by them to punishment against
their will.

Again, God indeed is said in Scripture to have hardened Pharaoh's heart, to
give-up men to their own lust, to vile affections, and to a reprobate mind,
etc. But all this in effect is no more, (as I have elsewhere shown at large)
than that God has so ordained, has set things in such a course, that, if men
continue in sin, they shall be hardened; if they love temptations, they shall be
led into them; and if they will needs play and sport with these Serpents they
shall at last be stung to death. To conclude then; God tempts no man, God
solicites no man to sin, much less does he lead or force men into this snare.
No: God is faithful, and will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength.
He does not bid us fight when he has disarmed us, nor assist that enemy which
he bids us resist, nor lead us into those tentations which we are sure to fall
under. But (...), God is true and faithful: and to expose us a prey to a
merciless and invincible enemy is prejudicial to the Faith and Truth and
Sincerity of God. He leaves Tentations as they are, allurements and terrors,
and no more: And he leaves us as we are; with Understanding, to discern what is
true, and what is counterfeit; and with a Will of greater activity than the
Rhetoric of a pleasing or the terror of a fearful tentation. As he leaves us
Sense to receive objects, so he leaves us Reason to weigh and ponder them, to
consider what deceit may be in Beauty, and what danger in Honor; to consider
that a light affliction may bring a great weight of glory; that though Pleasure
flatter, yet I may run from it; and though Affliction threaten, yet I may
embrace it, and count the strokes of the one better than the kisses of the
other. God is faithful, and will with the tentation also make a way to escape.
(...), says the Apostle; not make a way with the breath of his Omnipotency,
but make a way so plain and easy and passable that, if thou will, thou may
escape, flee from the noise of the fear, and yet not fall into the pit, and
come out of the midst of the pit, and yet not be taken in the snare; flee one
tentation, and yet not be driven upon another. So that though the word INDUCAS
does seem to import that God does sometimes lead us into tentations, and give
them a kind of possession of us, yet we must conceive no such thing of God.
Therefore St. Augustine explains NE INDUCAS by NE PATIARIS INDUCI, Lead us not,
that is, Suffer us not to be led into tentations. Which makes God not a party
in Tentations, but a Deliverer out of them, and forbids all jealousy of God,
and teaches us to call upon him as upon our Buckler, our Strength, our
Salvation. For conclusion; We may thus paraphrase this Petition; Heavenly
Father, if it be thy will that, whilst we strive to serve and please thee, the
World and the Devil fight against us, and even for this cause, because we
strive to serve and please thee; If pleasures show themselves to delay us, and
Afflictions beat upon us to drive us back from the prize and price of the high
calling, we murmur not, we repine not: But we beg this favor of a just and
gracious God, That thou will not in a manner throw us into tentations, or cast
us upon them, so that we be held or detained by them; but rather grant thy help
and assistance, that we may make an escape; that leaving these pleasures behind
us, and bearing these afflictions about us, and even trampling upon the necks
of our enemies, and treading them down under our feet, we may run with joy the
race which is set before us, and pass from one degree of perfection to another,
and so fit our Heads for that crown which thou will give to all those who
overcome. And this I conceive is the sense of these words; Of which we shall
speak now at large.

The Three and Fourtieth SERMON. PART. III.
MATTHEW. VI. 13. And lead us not into tentation; but deliver us from evil.
WE have discoursed in general concerning the Ground of all Tentations, that
they are as natural to Man as the faculties of his Soul. We will now give some
particular Reasons why God does permit them, why he leaves the world so full of
snares, so full of stumbling blocks, and lays Man thus open and naked to
temptations, and sets him up, as Job speaks, as a mark for the Devil to shoot
his fiery darts at. And first, herein God acts the part of a Father, when by
tentations he makes trial of our faith in him and of our love and obedience to
him. The skill of a Pilot is best seen in a tempest, and the sincerity of a
Christian in the midst of tentations. He who either yields to the flattery of
pleasure, or falls under the burden of affliction, he who either by fair
weather is enticed or by foul weather is driven from the right way, behaveth
himself neither like a son nor a servant. Probandus prius quam laudandus
Christianus, A Christian must be tried first, and not till then be commended.
Habendo tentationem, habet probationem, Being tempted, he is proved and tried,
as Gold in the fire. Then are the chosen and golden vessels of God known, when
they are brought to the touchstone of Temptation. Thus does God exercise his
servants in the spiritual conflict of Temptations. And thus the evils of this
world usu bono vertuntur in bonum, by well managing of them are made good,
whilst they do not increase our concupiscence, but exercise our patience.
Therefore God has placed a difficulty (which is a kind of tentation) upon
every thing that is truly desirable. The object of our Faith are things not
seen; the object of our Hope, happiness at a distance; the object of our
Charity, that Enemy that persecutes us. And the Invisibility of the object, the
Distance of the object, the Unloveliness of the object, these are as so many
temptations to shake my Faith, to dead and wither my Hope, and to destroy my
Charity. And to believe upon this probability is the merit of my Faith; to hope
on earth for that which is laid up in heaven, is the life of my Hope; and to
love that which my very blood rises at, is the crown and perfection of my
Charity.

Again, as God does permit Temptations and exercise us with afflictions ad
probationem fidei, for the trial of our Faith, so does he also many times even
send them upon us ad emendationem labilis vitae, as St. Augustine speaks, for
the amendment of our sinful lives, that being foiled by one temptation, we may
be raised by another; being wounded by pleasure, be cured by grief: that the
bitterness of affliction may sour those sins which we drunk-down as the Ox
does water, and make us distaste them. Productior est poena quam culpa, says
St. Augustine, ne parva putaretur culpa, si cum illa finiretur and poena. Our
sins were no longer then they were a committing; but their guilt still remains:
And lest we should let them sleep with small notice, lest they should put-on a
lovely shape, and so deceive us, when the sin is past, the rod is on the back;
which makes us turn our countenance, and behold our sins in their own ugly
shapes. O beatum servum, cujus emendationi instat Dominus, cui dignatur irasci,
says the Father; O blessed and happy servant upon whom God takes such pains,
whose amendment he thus urges and forces, whom he honors so highly as to
vouchsafe to be angry with him! We may think indeed that when God thus brings
on his armies and changes of sorrows, that he comes to fight against us, that
he sticks his arrows in our sides to destroy us, that he brings these evils
upon us to make us worse, and lays us on our beds of sickness to fling us upon
that impatience which will sink us into hell, that he pursues us as an enemy.
But this is to make those Temptations which should destroy Sin to be exceeding
sinful: this is not to savor the things which are of God. For even those
smiling temptations, if we had not been willing to be deceived, might have
helped to increase that joy which is real. Had we frowned on them, we had had no
sin. But having sinned, God comes toward us in blackness and darkness, in the
horror of temporal afflictions, to see whether we have more patience toward
these temptations of his left hand then those of his right hand; not to sink us
deeper, but to draw us out of the pit. He writes bitter things against us, and
makes Job 13. 26.
us possess the sins of our youth, as Job speaks: So to possess them that we
may drive them out, so to look upon them that we may loath them. He places
them in order before us, that we may read and detest them and wipe and blot
them out with our tears, and draw a new copy in the reformation of our lives.
They are indeed Temptations; but, if we please, they are invitations to mercy.
They give indeed but an unpleasing sound; but, if we will attend and hearken to
them, they are sermons and instructions, and they may serve to order and
compose rotam nativitatis, the whole wheel of our nature. And first they work
upon the Understanding part, to clear and enlighten that. We see not only seeds
of moral conversation, those practick notions which were born with us, but also
those seeds of saving knowledge, which we gather from the Scripture, and
improve by instruction and practice, never so darkened and obscured as when
Pleasures and Delights have taken full possession of our souls. And as we see
in sick and distempered men, that the light of their reason is dimmed, and
their mind disturbed; which proceeds from those vicious vapors which their
corrupt humors do exhale: it is so in the Soul and Understanding, which could
not but apprehend objects as they are and in their own likeness, as it were not
dazzled and amazed with intervenient and impatient objects and phantasms: but
being blinded by the God of this world, it sees objects indeed, but through the
vanities of the world, which, as colored Glass, present the object much like
unto themselves. Sin has now the face and beauty of Virtue: Envy is emulation;
Covetousness, thrift; Prodigality, bounty; the Gospel, a promulgation of
liberty, and a privilege to sin. Things now appear unto us as upon a stage, in
masks and vizards and strange apparel. Now when the hand of God is upon us,
when to expel that sin which a delightful tentation has occasioned, he maks us
feel the smart of one quite contrary, and to drive out that which entered with
delight he sends another with a whip; when this cross tentation has cut of all
hopes of enjoying such pleasing objects as have taken us up, the Understanding
has more liberty then before to retire into it self, and begins evigilare, to
awake as a man out of sleep, and to enjoy a kind of heaven and serenity, which
before did (...), as the Platonicks speak, sleep in a hell of confusion and
darkness. Now the seeds of Goodness being freed from the attractive force of
allurements, begin to recover life and strength, and sprout forth into those
apprehensions which bring with them a loathing of that evil which before they
converst withal as with a familiar friend: And anon every sin appears in his
own shape: Envy is Murder; Covetousness, Idolatry; Prodigality, Folly; and the
Gospel, a Sanctuary not for Libertines, but Repentants. In my prosperity I
said, says David, I shall never be moved. Lord, by thy favor thou have made
my mountain to stand strong. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. I
cried unto thee, O Lord, Psalm. 30. 6, 7, 8
and unto the Lord I made my supplication. It is strange, says Calvine, that
God should enlighten David's eyes by hiding his face, without the light of whose
countenance even Knowledge it self is no better than Darkness. But we find it
most true, that, when one temptation does infatuate, a contrary is brought-in
to make men wise. Secondly, the Will of man as it is a free so is a perverse
and froward faculty, and many times Planet-wise moveson in its own way contrary
to the strong circumvolution of the First mover: But the Temptations of the
left hand serve to settle its irregular motion, and to make it wait upon
Reason. For having followed the deceitful allurements of the World, and finding
gall and bitterness upon every seeming delight, having found death in the
Harlots lips, and misery in every way she wandered, she begins to renounce her
self, and, though she be free to every object, yet she fastens her self on one
alone, and has her eye always upon the Understanding, as the eye of the
handmaid is upon the eye of the mistress who directs her. Lastly, Tentations
may have their operation on the Memory, and revive those decayed characters
whether of Gods blessings or of our own sins, and bring those sins which did
lurk in secret into the open light. How soon when we are at quiet and ease do
we forget God? how soon do we forget our selves? How many benefits, how many
sins are torn out of our memories? Who remembers his own soul in this calm, or
can think that he has a soul? Who thinks of Sin in Jollity? So that it may
seem to be a kind of tentation to be long free from tentation. We read in the
book of Genesis that Joseph's brethren made no scruple of the sin they
committed against him for fourteen years together: but being cast into prison
they presently call it to mind, and that upon no apparent reason, We are verily
guilty concerning our brother; and therefore is this distress come upon us.
Beloved, afflictions are to us a memoria: and though they be tentations to
distrust and murmuring, yet they may prove (and so they are intended) like
Joseph unto his brethren, remembrancers to us, to remove the callum, the
hardness, of our consciences, and make them quick of sense, that we may ab ipso
morbo remedium sumere, force a remedy from the disease, and make even Sin
advantageous to us, by removing it out of the Affection, where it plays the
parasite, and fixing it in the Memory, where it is a fury, where it is as
operative to destroy as it was in the Affection, to increase it self. To
contemplate Sin and to view the horror of it, and the hell it deserves, is
enough to break our hearts, and bow our wills, and to make us hate and detest
Sin more than Hell it self.

Again, in the third place, this exercise in tentations does not only draw us
to repentance for sins past, but also serves as a fence or guard to those
virtues and saving graces which make us gracious in the sight of God; it does
temper that portion in us which is the Spirits, that it prove not more
dangerous and fatal than that of the Flesh. For as Bernard discanteth upon
Porphyrie's definition of Man, HOMO EST ANIMAL RATIONALE MORTALE, Man is a
rational, but mortal creature: The Mortal, says he, does temper the Rational,
that it do not swell; and the Rational strengthen the Mortal, that it do not
weaken and dead our spirits. And therefore St. Augustine was bold to pronounce
that it was very happy for some men that they did fall in tentations. For
Pride, which threw down the Angels from heaven, will grow not only upon Power
and Beauty and Pomp of the world, but upon the choicest virtues; and like those
plantae parasiticae, those parasitical plants which will grow but upon other
plants, it sucks out the very juice and spirits of them, and is nourisht with
that which quickens those virtues and keeps them alive. When we have stood
strong against temptations, quadam delectatione sibimet ipsi animus blanditur,
there arises in our soul a kind of delight, which does f^^tter and tickle us
to death. Fovea mentis, memoria virtutis, says Gregory; Too much to look back
upon our beauty, and too steddily to view our own perfections, is to dig a pit
and a grave for those virtues we boast of. When the soul is lifted up thus
high, it will fall with all its honor into the lowest pit. It is St. Hieroms
observation of some Monks in his time, That if they did but for some few days
cloister up themselves and fast, they did presently think themselves alicujus
momenti; and did begin to look big and scornfully on their brethren. Let a
blind Votary devote himself to poverty, or go in Pilgrimage to some created
Saint, and his own opinion full soon will canonize him. Do we hear a Sermon, or
give an alms to the poor? we are in heaven already. But if we keep our selves
from those sins which make others the song and proverb of the people, then we
seem to walk upon the pavement of heaven, to converse with Angels, with
Seraphim and Cherubim: from which imaginary state we look down and behold our
brother on the ground; and how vile does he appear in our eyes? a worm, a
wretch, a son of perdition; and we begin to thunder when God is well pleased to
be silent. Now this Pride and Contempt of our brother, ortum habet a pace quam
habemus a tentationibus, says the Schoolman, arises from a peaceable conceit
which we are very willing to cherish, that we have stood strong against the
violence of temptations. And then with us he is scarce a Christian who is
tempted: Therefore St. Paul makes Temptation an argument against Sin, and the
Possibility of being tempted a motive to have compassion on those who are
fallen into tentation; Brethren, if a man be overtaken Gal. 6. 1.
in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of
meekness, lest thou also be tempted; When Alexander was wounded, who would be
thought a God, Callisthenes tells him that certainly the Gods had no such
blood. Heracleotes Dionysius was a great professor amongst the Stoics, who
knew not grief, nor pleasure: but he soon forfook their School, says Tully,
propter dolorem oculorum, when he was troubled with a great pain in his eyes:
Beloved, when we have run on smoothly and evenly a long time, and met with no
rub or check in our ways, when we have fought prosperously, and gained some
few victories over our spiritual enemies; we may flatter our selves that we
reign as Kings, and are indeed the sons of God, whilst we esteem others as
worms and no men: But when the Devil has flung his dart at us, and drawn blood
from us; we begin to think that this blood is not the blood of God, that those
sins cannot issue from any heart but his who is full of imperfection, who is
subject to passions and tentations, even as they are who for our seven times
fall seventy times a day. And though we number our selves amongst the strictest
professors, and separate our selves from our brethren as from the Goats on the
left hand, yet when we feel the pain, not of our Eyes, but of our Conscience,
we then are content to rank our selves with the brethren of low degree, with
vulgar Christians, with Publicans and Harlots, and join with them in one common
Letany, God be merciful to us miserable sinners.

Lastly, this conflict with Tentations makes us look-up unto the hills, from
whence comes our salvation; that we may not say with that proud King in
Daniel, Is it not I that built Babel? Is it not I that have been wiser than the
Serpent? that was not ignorant of his enterprises? that have encountered him
both when he roared as a Lion, and when he put on the shape of an Angel of
light? Is it not I that have coped with him in every shape he puton? that have
met with Pleasures in their fairest dress, and past them by with a slight and
disdain? that have had Honor woo me, and have run from it? Riches thrown into
my lap, and flung them away? nay, that have met Satan in all his horror, in
misery and affliction and disgrace, and have made him fall off and retire? And
this is a tentation greater than all those we have avoided. And therefore the
servants of God, being taken with it, have been turned back to grosser sins for
a remedy, and as that proud King was made a beast to learn humility, so were
they delivered to more brutish affections, to learn that God in their weakness
whom they forgot in their strength; to ascribe the victory to him who teaches
our hands to fight, and girdeth us with strength; to acknowledge that, though
we sweat and labor and fight it out even unto death, yet the victory is the
Lords, even of that God who is not gratiae angustus, as Ambrose speaks, any
niggard of his grace, but seeing the many snares in the midst of which we are
placed, the many temptations we are to cope withal, has not only made a Law
against Sin, and proclaimed a reward to the righteous, and punishment to the
breaker of the Law, placed Punishment against that Pleasure which is but for a
season, and eternity of Reward against the Bitterness of these momentany
afflictions, but has also afforded us his Grace and assistance, as a staff by
which we may walk. And as when the children of Israel were in the wilderness he
rained down Manna upon them, and led them as it were by the hand till they came
into the land of Promise, and tasted of the milk and honey there: so God deals
with his children and servants whilst they are in via, in this their
peregrination, ever and anon beset with Philistines and Amalekites, with those
tentations which may deter them in their journey, and drive them back; he rains
down abundance of his Grace to assist them against the violence of Temptations;
sometimes beating back the blow, removing the temptation; sometimes diverting
our thoughts; sometimes strengthening and encouraging us in the very skirmish;
sometimes washing off those colors with which the Devil has painted the
object, making Pleasure irksome for the sting in its tail, and Grief delight
some for that weight of glory which it works; teaching us our postures;
discovering to us the enemies stratagems, and where his great strength lies;
girding and fencing and compassing of us in on every side, till he has brought
us to the celestial Canaan, where there is fullness of joy for evermore. And
therefore as he has given us a command to try our Obedience, so he has
commanded us also to call and depend upon him for assistance. Et scimus quia
petentes libenter aexaudit, quando hoc petitur largiri quod jubet; And we know
it is impossible that he should deny our requests, when we desire him to grant
us that which he would have us ask, his help and assistance to do that which he
commands. We beg his assistance against the lusts of the Flesh; he commands us
to mortify them: against the pollutions of the world; his will is our
sanctification: against the Devil, he bids us tread him under foot. He bids us,
who is Xystarchus, the master of the race, and Epistates, the overseer of the
combat. His Grace is Bellonia, that divine Power which shall drive-back our
enemies. And if the Devil inspire evil thoughts, God is both able and willing
to inspire good; and in all our trials, in all time of our tribulation, in all
time of our wealth, in the hour of death, and in the day of judgment, his Grace
is sufficient for us; that our rejoicing and boasting may be in the Lord; that
the glorious company of the Apostles, the goodly fellowship of the Prophets,
the noble army of Martyrs, that all the victorious Saints of God may cast-down
their crowns at his feet, and confess that Salvation is from the Lord. And thus
much be spoken of the Reasons why God does exercise his servants with diverse
tentations.

The Four and Fourtieth SERMON. PART. IV.
MATTHEW. VI. 13. And lead us not into tentation; but deliver us from evil.
THE Reasons why God permits Tentations, and has placed mankind as it were in
open field to fight it out against spiritual enemies, we laid before you the
last day. We proceed now to discover the Manner of their operation and working,
and to find-out when they become sins, and how we may know they have prevailed
and overcome us.

The Will of Man, as his Desire, is led with respect of somewhat that is good,
or at least seems so. This provokes and draws both Sense and Will to
perform her actions. And though the Desire, which is first, and the Delight,
which follows, be inward and inherent, yet those things which we affect and
would attain are then external when we pursue them; and when we enjoy them,
they are but in a manner conjoined with us in opinion or possession, which
contenteth both body and soul. St. Augustine, upon the 79 Psalm, makes two
roots of Sin, Desire, and Fear; Omnia peccata duae res faciunt, Desiderium, and
Timor. St. James tells us that every man is tempted by his own lust, which is
the nurse and mother of Sin. Nor does St. Augustine jarr with St. James; who
sets down Lust for the first spring of every tentation to Sin. For either
that Tentation which St. James speaks of is a delightful provocation to sin
resting within us; or that Terror which St. Augustine adds is nothing else
but a violent and external inducement working from without. Or else we may join
the one as a consequent to the other; since the natural Desire we have of our
own ease breadeth in us the Dislike and Fear of evil which so strongly urges
and forces us. From whence we may conclude that if Desire and Fear, as St.
Augustine speaks, be the motives and inducements to all sins, and the Desire
and Fear, on which depend the rest of the affections, be passions of the
Sensitive part of the Soul permixed in this life with corporal Spirits, then
all have their provocation and incitement from the bodily senses, spirits or
motions, (...), says Clemens Alexandrinus, All Desires and Fears and Sorrows
have their original rising and motion from the Body. For the Father will tell
us, (...), that Passion is nothing else but a sensible motion of the Desiring
and Appetitive faculty upon the imagination of good or evil. The passions of
the soul, as Desire, Fear, Joy, Sorrow, do not move in this life without the
Body. First, in that they are sensible motions, they must be perceived in the
Body: Secondly, in that they rise from the Sensitive appetite, they are
conjoined with the Body: Thirdly, in that they come from the Fancy or
Imagination of good or evil, whether truly so or but in appearance, they are
kindled from the Senses of the Body. What the Eye sees beautiful, awaketh my
Desires; what terrible, provokes Hatred and Disdain; What is good and
atchievable, lightens my Joy; What is evil and unavoidable, begets Sorrow.
According as things objected to Sense, or remembered after, seem good or evil to
the powers of the soul, so is Desire or Anger kindled by Pleasure on the one
side, or Dislike and Grief on the other; which presently and with a kind of
violence prevails with the Soul, if we do not stand up strong to resist them.
Thus the Body has its operation upon the Soul, as the Soul has upon the Body.
Adeo autem non sola anima transigit vitam, ut nec cogitatus licet solos, licet
non ad effectum per carnem deductos auferamus a collegio carnis, says
Tertullian; So far is it that the Soul should be alone in the actions of our
life, that we cannot take those thoughts which are alone, and not yet by the
flesh brought into act, from the society and fellowship of the body: For in the
flesh and with the flesh, and by the flesh that is done by the soul which is
done in the heart and inward man. In all sins not only the Doers and Actors,
but the Leaders, Directors and Advisers, Consenters and Allowers are guilty
with the Principal. All the Instruments are justly detested where the Sin is
worthily condemned. The Creatures of God, which in themselves are very good,
being made snares and pricks and thorns unto man, are subjected Romans 8. 20.
to vanity, and have no better ruler than Satan the God of this world; because
that by infecting Man with sin he has altered and inverted the use and end of
the whole world. The Eye that wanderd after vanity shall be filled with horror:
the Ear that delighted in blasphemy shall be punished with weeping and gnashing
of teeth: the Touch which luxury and wantonness corrupted, shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone. Men, as well as Angels, sin in their whole natures, in
their bodies and in their souls. Otherwise, one part must be placed in hell, as
peccant; the other in heaven, as innocent. And this the Fathers made an
argument and strong proof of the Resurrection of the dead: Sic ad patiendum
societatem carnis expostulat anima, ut tam plene per eam pati possit, quam sine
ea plene agere non potuit; The Soul must have the society and company of the
Body in the punishment, as she made it a fellow and companion in sin; that now
she may as fully suffer by it and with it, as before without it she could do
nothing. And they bring her in thus bespeaking the Flesh, Thou did let open
the gates at which the enemy enterd that destroyed us both. Thou had Beauty,
for which I was more deformed; Riches, for which I was the poorer: Thou were
clothed sumptuously, for which I was the more naked. Thou had Strength, for
which I was the weaker. Thou had Eyes, which let-in those colors which are
now blackness and darkness. Thou had Ears, which suckt-in that music which
is turned into mourning. In thee was the sin shaped and formed which begat
death. I have sinned in thee, and with thee; and now we must both smart
together. I went-out by thy Ears and Eyes and Hands, and wandered abroad after
forbidden objects; and now, being returned home, I find my self naked. It is
evident then that the Senses of the Body are the Windows of the Soul, and that
through them Tentations make their entrance into the inward man. Why do men
disbelieve and impugn the word of God, but because they measure Divine things
by humane Sense and Experience? Thus did Mahometism get a side presently, and
overflow the greater part of the world, because it brought with it a carnal
Paradise, an eternity of Lusts, and such promises as flattered the Sense to
blindfold the Reason, that it might not see its absurdities. For the Turk,
destitute of truth, and so not able to judge aright of Gods favors in this
life, casting an eye on the worldly miseries of Christians, and puffed-up with
his own victories, condemns the faith of Christ as displeasing to God,
because by reason of afflictions it is so unto the Flesh, and prefers and
magnifieth his own, for no other reason but that it is more attempered to the
Sense, and answerable to the desires of the Flesh. The Atheist, who has no
Religion at all, no God but his own right hand and his arm, no Deity but
Policy, is, carried with the same respects to deny and despise the Providence
of God. For being earthly minded, and even buried alive in the contemplation of
the things of this world, and seeing the wicked flourish as a green bay tree,
and Innocence clothed with shame, brought to the stake and the rack, concludes
there is no God, and derides his Patience and Justice, because his Providence
waits not upon his desires, governs not the world as he would have it, and is
wanting sometime to his expectation. Nay, beloved, how many are there of us who
draw-out our Religion by this model, and if Religion will not condescend and
meet with our sensual Desires, draw them up and mix and temper them with our
Religion; and if we do not find Religion fit to our humor, we make one.
Christianity of it self is a severe and simple Religion, and does so little
favor our fleshly part that it commands us to mortify and kill it; and yet
how by degrees has it been brought to join and conform it self to our Sense,
which lets-in those tentations which are the very seed out of which many
monstrous errors are engendered. Of a severe Religion we have made it a sportful
Religion, an easy Religion, a gaudy and pompous Religion; of a doing active
Religion, a heavy Religion; of a bountiful Religion, we have made it (...), a
cheap and thriving Religion. For from our Senses and fleshly desires have those
corruptions and mixtures crept into Religion which carry with them a near
likeness and resemblance to them. Ambition has brought-in her addition or
defalcation, and Covetousness hers, and Wantonness hers; and the Love of
pleasures has cast-in her poison; and all these have left their very mark and
character in the doctrines of men. Nor can I attribute it to any thing more
than to this, that we do (...), take our Senses from the world, and sanctify
and consecrate them to God. One would think indeed that Ambition and
Covetousness and Sensuality were of a quite contrary strain, and not competible
with those more speculative errors. For what can the Love of money or honor do
to the stating of a question in Divinity? But by the art and craft of the Devil
these have been made tentations to error, have been, as the Popes claim runs,
infallible, far more potent with us than an ecumenical Council. For these
tentations of the World and the Flesh first strike the Sense with delight,
which by the help of the Fancy does soon inflame the Affections; and the
Affections will soon build-up an opinion. The Love of honor makes the Judgment
follow it to that height and pitch which it has marktout. My Love of money
will gloss that Blessing which our Savior has annexed to Poverty of spirit. My
Factions humor will strike at the very life and heart of Religion in the name
of Religion and God himself, and destroy Christianity for excessive love of
Christ. Every humor will venture upon any falsehood which is like it. There is
nothing within the compass of our Sensual appetites which we are not ready to
embrace, and believe it to be true, because we wish it so, being advantageous
and conducible to the end which we have proposed and set-up to our selves. When
Christians did revocare mentem a sensibus, take and withdraw their Hand from
those objects which were busy with the Sense, when they were within
themselves, and framed their lives to the simplicity and plainness of the
Gospel, there was scarce the name of Heretic heard amongst them, no
contentions, no exsecrations, no thundring-out excommunications against one
another. But within a while this simplicity abated, and the doctrine of Faith
was made to give attendance on sensual humors that did pollute it. Therefore
the Heathen, to make the Christians let go their hold, and fall off from the
acknowledgment of the truth, did use the Devils method, and laid before them
temporal contentments and the sweetness of life. Their common forms were,
CONSULE TIBI; MISERERE TUI; Have a care of your self; Pity your self; NOLI
ANIMAM TUAM PERDERE; Destroy not your own life. They made large promises of
honors, riches and preferment, And these Tertullian calls devilish
suggestions. But when they could not thus prevail, when these shining and
glorious tentations* could not shake or move them, then Tormenta, carcer,
ungulae,
Stridensque flammis larina,
Atque ipsa poenarum ultima,
Mors; --
then torments were threatened, the Hook, and the Whip, and the last of
punishments, Death it self.

And as Tentations inter ento the soul by the Senses, so they look-out by the
Eye. Facies, intentionum omnium speculum, says Tertullian; The face is the
glass wherein you may see the very intentions of the mind. Anger, Sorrow, Joy,
Fear, and Shame, which are the affections of the heart, appear in the
countenance. Why art thou wroth? and why is thy countenance Genesis 4. 6.
fallen? says God to Cain. When Esau was well pleased with Jacob, Jacob tells
him, I have seen thy face as the face of God. Habitus mentis in corporis Genesis
33. 10.
statu cernitur, says St. Ambrose; You may view the state of the soul in the
outward man, and see how she changes and alters, by those outward motions and
impressions which she makes in the body. When the Soul of man likes the
object, and apprehends it under the show of good, she kindles and moves her
self to attain her desire, and withal incenseth the spirits, which warm the
blood, enlarge the heart, and diffuse themselves, to embrace that good which is
either in the approach or present. And when she sees evil which she cannot
decline, she staggereth and sinketh for fear; which quenches the spirits,
cools the blood, closes and contracteth the heart. At one object it leapeth
for joy, at another is cold and dead. Thus by these gates of Sin, as Gregory
calls them, do those Tentations enter which will soon overthrow the state and
peace of the mind. A^d^^it auris, and intentionem inflexit, etc. says St.
Ambrose; He did but hearken, and lost a good intention; he did but look, and
his mind was overthrown; but smell, and his thought perished; but taste the lip
of the harlot, and he devoured a sin; but touch, and he was all on fire.

Now as Tentations work by the Sensitive part upon the Rational, so in the last
place, they have a diverse operation according to men's several Constitutions
and Complexions. In some they soon prevail, in others by degrees, and in some
not at all. For every man is not equally inclined to every sin. This stays
the eye of one which another will not look on. And this our own uncharitable
censures of each other may teach us. For ^e see that this man blesses himself
and wonders how such a one could commit such a sin, and the other wondreth no
less that he or any one else should commit the contrary. Therefore the Devil,
who knows how we (...) elemented and composed, has (...), says Macarius;
di(...)s inventions, diverse back-doors, by which he may slip and return at
pleasure, and, if his first bait be distastful, come again, and present
another, which will fit our taste and palate. He applies himself to every man's
humor and complexion. Omnium discutit consuetudinem, ventilat curas, scrutatur
affectus, says Leo; He examines every man's customary behavior, he marks where
we place our care and solicitude; he searches our affections and observes our
constitution, and enters with such forces as we are not willing to withstand;
with a Sword, which a Choleric person will snatch at; with Beauty, which the
Wanton at first sight will fall down and adore; with Honor, which the
Ambitious will fly to; with Riches, which the Covetous will dig for. He knows
whom to inflame with lust, whom to incite to luxury, whom to pour the poison of
envy into, whom to cast down with sorrow, whom to deceive with joy, whom to
amaze with fear, whom to seduce with admiration. And he so fits his temptations
that something about us, something within us, our very natural temper and
constitution, may quicken and promote the activity of those tentations which
may destroy us. Again, that we may conclude, as their operation is either
farthered or slacked by the several tempers and complexions of men, so is it by
many outward circumstances: of Time: at one time a birthright for a mess of
pottage; at another, not receive a drove of cattle, but say, I have enough, my
Brother. Of Place: Not look upon that bait in public which I will devour in my
closet; be very attentive at Church, and as busy a knave in my shop. And
lastly, of humane Laws, which are many times more powerful against Sin then the
Laws of the Eternal God, whence it comes to pass that we resist temptations to
the greatest sins, as Murder, Adultery, and the rest of those which are the
grosser and of the highest nature, because they are hung round with curses, and
the Magistrate stands by; and, if we yield, he lays the whip upon our backs, or
draws his sword and destroys us; but those lesser sins, secret and speculative
sins, Wanton thoughts, Idle words, and the like, we scarce take notice of,
because there is no penal statute to repress them. And we are ready to say of
every such sin as Lot did of Zoar, Is it not a little one? and my soul shall
live. For as Tentations work by the Sense, so are we led by it. We fear that
Power which is seen more than that Omnipotency which is invisible: we fear Man
more than God, and the shaking of his whip more than the scorpions of a Deity:
and therefore we fly greater sins, and run into less; prevail against the
Anakim, and are beat with a grasshopper. For though Tentations make their
entrance by pleasing and flattering the Sense, and being admitted are polished
and decked-up with glory, and so presented to the nobler faculties, though this
be their natural operation and common way of working, yet they work differently
and unequally according to that variety which is observable in the tempers and
constitutions of men, and by outward circumstances of Time and Place or the
like, are either hindered or advanced in their operation. And this may suffice
to discover the Manner how Tentations work upon the Soul.

I should now proceed, and enquire when Tentations prevail with us and overcome
us. But having upon another Text, Matthew. xxiv. 42. handled this point at large,
and shown that though the Sense and Fancy receive the object, which is the
tentation, and that with some delight, yet it may be without sin; yea, though
our natural temper incline to it, and raise in us some kind of desire, yet if
we stand upon our guard, and watch, and keep it within the limits that God has
set us, we shall be so far from sinning, that our obedience will be the
greater; these things having been there fully treated of, I will now passover.
Only this I add, That there may be yet more than an Inclination. There may be a
kind of Desire, a sudden motion of the mind, which may at unawares strike
through the heart of man, but yet not so entangle it as to procure the assent
of the Will; may but show it self, and vanish like lighning; may be extinguished
in the very flash. Now that this is not truly and properly a sin, we may gather
from the very nature of Sin, to the committing of which these two things
concur, 1. an Assent of the Will, 2. a Power in man to avoid it. * * * *

-- We think of it to hate it, and by thinking love it. We must therefore give
them no line, but curb and restrain them at the first; not only shun (...), the
work, but (...), as the Philosopher speaks, the causes and beginnings which may
produce it; chase away (...), as Justine Martyr speaks, the first smoke, the
first inclination, of our sensual appetite; and when tentations offer and
present themselves, not revile and embrace them, say we would and we would not;
but to give them a peremptory denial by our serious distaste of them, and that
detestation which may take these brats of Satan and dash them against the rock.
Nemo sic negantem iterum rogat; When we have given them such a denial, a denial
with anger and indignation, they will keep a distance, and not suddenly come so
near as to solicit us to sin. But if we first give them admittance, and then
take pleasure in them, it is a sign we will make them our friends and
companions; nay, it is a sign that we have made them our Lords and Masters, and
that they have already prevailed against us.

The Five and Fourtieth SERMON. PART. V.
MATTHEW. VI. 13. And lead us not into tentation; but deliver us from evil.
WE have already showed you how Tentations work upon the soul, and when they
prevail. The Devil does make use of our own strength to overthrow us; and
seeing the greatest force he has limited and bounded by an eternal and
indissoluble law, that he cannot ruin all mankind at once, he attempteth to do
that by our own folly and improvidence which is above the power either of his
subtlety or malice. He makes use of our Eye, to blind us; of our Ear, to make
us deaf to the voice of God; of our Touch and Taste, to make us senseless and
stupid, that we may not savor and relish the things which are of God; of our
Fancy, to work upon our Affections; and of our Affections, to persuade and
overruled our Will. And here hostis habet muros: When the Will is once brought
to yield, the Tentation, which smiled as a friend, is enterd as an enemy, and
has prevailed against us, and brings in that ataxie and distemper into the
parts and faculties of the soul which is fatal to it: although peradventure it
declares not its infection and malignity by any outward symptoms and
indications, by the violence of the Hand, or the pride of the Tongue, or by
breathing forth its venom in the outward act. It is now high time upon the
discovery of the disease to prescribe the remedies. And this is so much the
more necessary, because we are not more inclinable and obnoxious to the disease
than we are apt to mistake the remedy, and to draw diverse medicines, but not e
vero Narthecio, out of the right box. To the tentations of the left hand we
many times apply those of the right. We sweeten Afflictions with Jollity, and
cure carnal Sorrow with carnal Pleasure. To drive away the fear of smart we
take something which may raise a hope of delight, we blot-out the remembrance
of our sins with the pleasures which are but for a season, and strive to keep
off the disease with that which makes it more malignant. We know no remedy for
Poverty ^ut Riches; no release from Imprisonment, but Liberty; no help for
Grief, but impatience. And with Ahab King of Judah, we seek not to the Lord but
some physician of our own. Nec tam morbis laboramus quod remediis. Nor is there
so much danger in our disease as there is in those remedies we use. As for the
Tentations of the right hand, those smiling and flattering tentations, we soon
give them the right hand of fellowship; we woo, we embrace, we study them; we
kiss them when they wound us, and rejoice when they are enterd even into our
very Soul; and are so far from thinking them to be a disease that we are scarce
well without them. We will therefore take those remedies which are most
sovereign e communi medicinae officina, as the Father calls it, out of that
common shop of Physic, the Word of God, where are remedies against all
diseases of the mind; where are corrosives and cordials, cordials for a
drooping spirit, and corrosives to work-out the corruption of our flesh: Where
the Wanton may find what will cure his itch of lust; the Covetous, what will
take-away the lust of his eyes; and the Ambitious, what will abate his pride of
life; that which will tame the Wanton, and make the Covetous go upright, and
the Ambitious stoop: Remedies which will not deceive us, if we do not deceive
our selves: Scriptura hominem non fallit, si se homo non fallit; The Scripture
never fails us, till we be wanting to our selves. And there we are taught To
resist Tentations. Which we may do 1. by not giving our consent, or yielding to
them; 2. by flying from them; 3. by beating them back by the discovery of
something in them which we may take-up and use against them, as David found a
sword in the hand of Goliath to cut off his head withal. And this that we may
the more easily do, we have many helps proferd and presented to us, many means
prescribed; 1. the knowledge of Our selves; 2. the knowledge of the
Temptations; 3. the knowledge of God, to whom we are as a spectacle in this
fight: Who looks down upon the children of men, and beholds them in all their
ways. And these, if they have their natural operation, and be not dulled and
hindered in their working will raise us up to a healthful estate, and beget in
us 1. Watchfulness, against Security, 2. spiritual Valor, against Distrust and
Cowardice, by presenting to us both the horror of that punishment which will
follow us if we fail, and the glory of the reward which will crown us if we
overcome.

And first, that we be not led into Tentations, we must resist them. For, as
the Apostle speaks, Brethren, you know your calling, that you are called unto a
warfare. When you gave-up your names to Christ, you made your (...), your
solemn abrenunciation of all his enemies, and pressed your selves as Soldiers
under the King of heaven. And as in war nullae feriae, nullae vacationes
admittuntur, there are no holy days, no times of vocation, so in this your
exercise nunquam quies, nunquam otium, there is no rest, no cessation, but you
must always be in arms, ready to resist. And indeed this is the difference
between Gods commands and the tentations of the Devil, the World and the Flesh,
That his commands are quoddam dilectionis pignus, a kind of pledge and
assurance of his love, but Tentations are promises of that which they cannot
yield. God commands, that he may reward us; but the Devil profers, that he may
deceive us. The one is harsh and irksome to flesh and blood; the other is
opposite to the spirit. And as it is truly said, Obsequio mitigantur imperia,
That Obedience makes the hardest Command easy; so is it as true, that
Resistance makes the strongest temptation weak. Now to resist Tentations there
is no more requisite than this, Not to consent unto them when they press upon
us; When they plead vehemently for admittance, when they are importunate (as
Tertullian calls the Forbidden tree importunam arborem, the importuning tree)
to give them a check, and say, I know you not: You shall have no place in me,
(...), as Clemens speaks, to block-up the ears, and shut-up the eyes against
them; and though they come clothed in all their beauty and royalty, to resolve
not to entertain them, but to repel them quantum possumus, imo plusquam
possumus, as far as we can, nay, if it were possible, more than we can. For we
may resist tentations, and yet consent unto them. We may resist them at the
first knock, but, when they make a second or third adventure, open unto them
and consent. These elevations of the mind, these theorici conatus, as the
Schools call them, these airy speculations, these faint endeavors of the
thoughts will not make it up. These are strivings, rather than resistings,
similes conatibus expergisci volentium, as Augustine speaks, like to the
turnings and liftings of men who would awake, but that sleep is so heavy on
them that they cannot. They resist, and fall off, awake and fall down again
upon their pillow fast asleep; some sparkles, some scintillations, and the
business of the mind. We may consent for all these, and join with them after we
have bid so many defiances to them. That which makes up our consent is a strong
and undaunted Resolution upon no parley, upon no terms to admit them; though
they flatter, yet to stand out; though they threaten, yet to stand out; though
they come in a low voice or though they come in the whirlwind and earthquake,
though they promise kingdoms or threaten death, not to consent. In this case
what is fully resolved is done already. Quicquid imperavit sibi animus
obtinuit: The mind of man is of that power as to create that which it commands
it self. If it lay upon it self the strictness of Temperance, it has set-up
that virtue in it self. If it command Chastity, it is an Eunuch for the kingdom
of heaven. Whatsoever it will, it does; whatsoever it purposes it has. In a
word; if we truly resolve, we shall never give consent: and if we give consent,
we may be sure that we did never truly resolve. For to speak truth, the reason
why tentations are so importunate can be no other but this, That we make them
so, and by our indifferency and irresolution prepare a way for them, and even
invite them to come on, and do, as the Aequi told the Romans, ostentare bellum,
non gerere, rather denounce war against them than wage it, vow against them,
profess against them, bid them open defiance, but never resolve to keep them
out. And this is the great error of our lives, this is the shame of a Christian
Soldier, to beat his brains and exercise his thoughts in these vain
ventilations and flourishes; in big words and loud defiances, in promises and
vows, as the children of Ephraim, to be ready harnessed, to talk of the Sword
of the spirit and the Shield of faith, and the Helmet of salvation, and then
turn Psalm. 78. 9.
back in the day of battle. Nihil indignius quam consumi virtutem ubi non
potest ostendi, says the Historian; There is nothing more unworthy a soldier
than to wast and spend his strength in those low employments where it cannot be
shown. The strength and virtue of a Christian is most seen in a firm
resolution, which makes quick dispatch, and at once puts the enemy to flight.
It is no more but Nolle, Not to be willing to consent, and the victory is ours,
and the Temptation overcome,. nay, put to confusion and annihilated, is no more
a tentation. There is no delight in Pleasure, no beauty in Riches, no
loveliness in Honor, no horror on Afflictions, no terror on Death. If you ask
how you may conquer them, I will give no other answer than Aquinas did to his
sister, SI NOLIS, You have done it already if you will not consent.

But yet, in the next place, though the Will be of greater activity than all
the Temptations of the world, yet it is a faculty seducible, and which may be
swayed and bowed to incline to that object which it loathed. Nor is there any
clock which is carelessly looked unto so loose and disordered in its wheels and
parts and indication of the hour, as is the Will, if it be not carefully
watched, sometimes pointing to this, and sometimes to that, and then running
back again to that point where it was before. Therefore our safest course is to
be indeed always ready prepared to the battle, but not to provoke the enemy to
fight, fugiendo pugnare, to fight flying, and by removing our selves at such a
distance that no dart of Satan may reach us; to fly from Tentation as from a
Serpent, tanquam a facie aspidis, as from his gaping mouth and deadly poison;
and tanquam a facie, to fly not only from its poison and sting, but from the
very face and sight of it, and, as St. Paul exhorts, to abstain from all
appearance of evil, not only from 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.
those gross and palpable tentations, but from the very phantasmes and
apparitions, the very image of them; non a vero tantum sed and a picto malo, to
detest Sin not only in the deformity of it, but in the very representation,
and to hate it even in a picture. Therefore St. Hierome counsels Eustochium
that she should not have access into Noble-mens houses, nor often see that by
the contemning of which she was a virgin; Disce, says he, in hac part
superbiam Sanctam; Learn in this respect a holy pride, and vouchsafe not to
converse with them whose pomp and glory may bewitch thee to a liking. Scito te
illis esse meliorem, Know thou art far better than these. Nazianzene tells us
of his mother Nonna that she would not give her hand to a heathen woman, though
she were of alliance to her, not salute her, non commune saledere, not eat, or
sit at table with her. Cyprian Epist. 77. lays it down as his opinion, That we
ought not to feast or talk with Schismatics, but be separate as far from them
as they are from the Church. Tertullian, though he permits Christians to live
with the Heathen, yet he would not have them die with them; licet convivere,
commori non licet. And therefore he interdicts them the feasts of shows of the
Ethnicks. Nay, so scrupulous is he in removing the occasions of sin and every
thing that may prove a tentation, that he does blame not only the making of
Idols, but the very art of the Statuary, as unlawful; and proceeds yet further,
to inhibite Christians from being Schoolmasters, because they must be forct to
mention the names of the heathen Gods; although indeed this they must have done
if they had preached against them; and scarce any makes more frequent mention
of them than himself. I do not propose these as patterns or ensamples for us to
follow; nor do I know any warrant to do it: but only I commend unto you the
reason which made the Fathers so scrupulous; Which was nothing else but the
danger they conceived to be in the very representation of Sin. For it is not
safe to give place to the devil, but to keep him off at such a distance that,
as Ephesians. 4. 27.
far as we can, he may not tempt us; not to retreat, or shun the combat when he
assaults us, but yet not to call for it. Equam parvis veniunt summa mala
principiis! How great a matter does a little fire, a very spark, kindle! What
great evils have been raised from very small beginnings! What danger in a look,
in a glaunce of the eye, in color! Quam alter, alteri est periculo! How
dangerous are we one to another! It is a friend, and factus est gladius, and he
is become a sword to me to wound me to death! It will therefore concern us to
be shy and wary even of the least occasion: for what know we what great evil
may lurk in the least! And, be it never so little, it is too great if the
matter near it be catching. To the Eye of man a Star seems no bigger than it
self: but Reason corrects the error of our Eye, and teaches us that it may be
greater than the Globe of the Earth. So that which at first we do not discern
to be so much as an occasion of sin, at last proves so, and has the more
leisure to work upon our nature, because we perceive not when it entered, is
more operative, because we neglected it, nay, perhaps overprized it, and
esteemed that as a duty of our life and a point of civility which is made an
occasion of sin. Who would think there were any danger in conversing with a
friend? yet it may so fall out, that we may loose by a friend, when we benefit
by an enemy. For his sake we may begin to excuse and pardon that sin which
before we did loath; to make glosses and fair interpretations, and by degrees
love it, and make much of it, and at last swallow it down. Before it was a
great and heavy sin, within a while not so great; paulo post and leve senties;
paulo post nec senties; paulo post and delectabit: Presently thou shall feel it
light; anon thou shall not feel it at all; not long after it shall be thy
delight, and thou shall take pleasure in it as in a friend. We must not then
upon confidence of our own strength be so bold as to walk amongst snares, or be
too familiar with any thing that may prove a tentation: Much less may we desire
or pray for tentations. You see we are here commanded to pray against them;
against that Beauty which may deceive us; against that Poverty which may make
us steal; against those Riches which may make us so full that we shall deny
God; against that Affliction which may swallow us up. For though Tentations
occasion that which is good, yet naturally they tend to that which is evil: and
though without them we cannot be victorious, yet by them we are too often
overthrown. Brethren, says St. James, count it all joy when you fall into
diverse Jam. 1. 2.
tentations: But this upon this supposition, in the next verse, that the trial
of our faith works patience, and patience, when it perfecteth its work,
makes us perfect and entire. Otherwise all this joy were none at all. For the
victory proceeds not from the Tentation as from the efficient, but from the
wisdom of him that is tempted. And if it be desirable because it may be an
occasion of good, then, Sin may be desired also, which occasions that Sorrow
which brings forth repentance not to be repented of; and where it abounds makes
Grace abound much more. It is indeed the glory of a Christian to wrestle
against principalities and powers, and against the rulers of the darkness of
this world; to be near to danger, and avoid it; to parley with a Tentation, and
silence it; to dispute Afflictions out of their smart, and carnal Pleasures out
of their allurement; to touch pitch, and not be defiled: nay, it is his portion
all the days of his life. Agnosco haereditatem meam in cruce Christi, says
Bernard; I acknowledge my inheritance is in the cross of Christ. But when we
see so many shipwrackt before our eyes; him that was constant in torment,
overthrown by pleasure; him that defied the World, overcome by the Flesh (as
Macarius tells us of one that after torment and imprisonment for the truth in
the very prison defiled a virgin) it will concern us not to be too bold to put
forth. Nihil in bello oportet contemni; It is here as in war, nothing must be
esteemed slight and not worth the regarding: nor must we offer our selves to
those tentations which may be too hard for us. Malo cautior esse quam fortior.
Fortis saepe captus est, cautus rarissime; It is better a great deal be
timorous and wary than presumptuously bold and foolhardy. The strong man has
often been led into captivity, but the wary man seldom, but overcomes the enemy
by withdrawing himself from the danger of the fight.

But, in the third place, though we be never so wary, never so abstemious, yet
tentations will offer themselves, and come so near unto us that we shall be
forct to cope with them. We must here learn some wisdom from our adversary the
Serpent; and as he makes use of our members to make them instruments of sin, so
must we of his Tentations, and turn them from that end they are driven to, and
make them occasions of virtue. And this is contundere viperam in theriacam, to
beat and bring these vipers into an antidote, into precious treacle; like a
subtle Logician, to draw the answer out of the very argument; like a skilful
Chemist, to extract gold out of baser metals; or like a wise and experienced
Captain, to turn the enemies ordinance upon the face of the enemy. For as it is
one part of wisdom futura ex praeteritis providere, to see future things in
things that are past, so is it no less to know how to manage things present,
and to make an advantage for good out of that which was placed before us and
intended for evil, to force light out of darkness, and virtue out of that
tentation which was a strong invitation to vice. And therefore since the
Tempter does suggest vice by the show and appearance of some desirable good, by
counterfeit pleasure, and false riches, and imaginary content, by something
which even Reason it self may persuade us is convenient to our nature, let us
not presently abhor all Riches, all Pleasure, all Content, because he miscalls
his tentations by that name; but turn our thoughts, and enquire where these are
to be had. Does he tempt us by Pleasure? Let us seek that which is constant and
everlasting. Does he tempt us by Riches? Let us seek them where no rust can
corrupt them. Does he propose Content? Let us expect it there where we may be
satisfied. Nay, we may make use not only of his tentations but of those sins
they would bring in. Et quid est unde homo commoveri non potest ad virtutes
capescendas, quando de ipsis vitiis potest? says St. Augustine, What is there
that may not be a motive to Virtue, if Vice it self may be one? Curiosity
affects knowledge, and the certainest knowledge is of eternal things, which
never alter, but always keep at the same stay. Pride seeks for power; and the
soul which is perfect and subject to God has a kind of omnipotency, and may do
all things. Pleasure promises the rest and quiet of the body; which cannot be
but there where there is no want, no corruption. Non ex eo quod est fallimur,
sed ex eo quod non est; we are not deceived with that which is and has a
reality and being, but with that which is not but only in show and appearance.
And the curiosity of fools, which catch after shades and apparitions, may put
me in mind of that knowledge which will make me wise to salvation. Their
affectation of power may provoke in me a desire of an everlasting kingdom; and
their love of pleasure, a love of that joy which is spiritual and heavenly. I
may learn skill ab adversario artifice, from my adversary; observe and watch
him, and blow him up in his own mine. And this is not only to resist him, but
to lead him in triumph and show him openly; to show how we have taken his
weapons out of his hands, and made them instruments of righteousness; how his
provocation to lust has helped to beget a greater hunger and thirst after
righteousness; his tentations to covetousness have expelled all covetous
desires, but those of eternity; and his pleasing tentations whet and increase
our appetite to those pleasures which are at the right hand of God for
evermore. This is, not to fight with him in his visible shape, to try it out at
blows with him, as some foolish Monks in St. Hieromes time would boast they had
done, to make themselves a wonder to the people; but to fight against him
invisible, hid and obscured in all his wiles and cunning enterprises; to
discover what is not seen, his craft and malice, and make use of what is seen,
his paint and colors, his glorious shows and presentiments, to kindle our love
to that which is really and substantially good. This is truly to resist and
conquer and tread him under foot.

This is our glory, and this is our duty. For indeed our Duty is our glory; and
that which we call service is the glorious liberty of the sons of God. And we
shall be the more ready and active to perform it, if we duly and exactly enter
into consideration of Our selves, who are to fight; of the temptations, which
assault us; and of God, who is a pure and simple Essence, and therefore cannot
but be sore displeased to see Man, so noble a creature, thus mingle himself
every day with the vanities and trash of this world, and sell himself for that
which is not bread. And first, the Knowledge of Our selves is of great force to
redeem us from the vanities of the World. NOSCE TE IPSUM; Hujus praecepti tanta
vis, tanta sententia est, ut ea non cuiquam homini, sed Delphico Deo
tribueretur, says Tully; KNOW THY SELF, is a praecept in which is contained so
much virtue and high wisdom, that men dare not entitle any man to it, but the
Delphick God Apollo, and make him the author of it. For he that knows himself
shall soon perceive that he has something in himself Divine, that his Will and
Understanding are as an image dedicated and consecrated in him; and he will
always be doing or thinking something which may be worthy of so great a gift
of the Gods. And when he has well viewed and surveyed himself in every part,
he will quickly observe how richly furnished Nature has sent him into the
world, with what helps and instruments to procure that wisdom which must style
and denominate him a Man, which may help him deligere bona, reijcere contraria,
to know and choose that which is good, and to reject the contrary, though it
borrow the same shape and countenance. Quam pro nihilo putabit ea quae vulgo
ducuntur amplissima! How will he slight and look down upon those things which
the vulgar admire and have in high estimation! (...), says Simplicius; KNOW
THY SELF; it is the command of God, that wherein all Philosophy and Goodness
begins and ends. And so it is the beginning of all Divinity, says Basil,
(...); Ask your self the question Who and What you are; and search and know
your nature and composition. Know that thou art (...), Soul and Understanding;
that thou art made after the image of God; that thou art not the Body, but the
Body is thine; and Money and Arts, and all that provision for life, are not in
thee, but about thee; that thy body is mortal, thy soul immortal; that there is
a double life proposed, this life, which is a dying life, and ends sooner than
a tale, and that life which is (...), of some affinity to thy soul, immortal,
and not confined and circumscribed by time. And if thou attain to this
knowledge, thou will not fix thy mind upon these transitory things as if they
were eternal, nor despise those everlasting blessings as if they were fading
and transitory, but give unto thy Flesh that which is due unto thy Flesh, dust
to dust and ashes to ashes; meat to thy belly, and cloth to thy back, both
which shall be destroyed by God; but to thy Soul and immortal part, (...), the
precepts of piety, the exercise of virtue, the moderation of thy unruly
affections; Nor be so over-careful to cloth thy body that the while thou letst
thy soul go naked and bare, nor provide for the one to destroy the other.
Advertamus qui simus ipsi, ut nos quales oportet esse servemus, It concerns us
to remember what we are, that we may still keep our selves the same which we
ought to be. If thou be never so learned, never so wise, yet thou still
want something, nay the greatest point of wisdom, if thou be not wise for
thy self. For what commendation is it to know all things which are in heaven
and earth, to be well seen abroad, and yet be a mere stranger at home? to have
an insight in all things but himself? Certainly nothing lays us more open and
naked to tentations and the vanities of the world than the low esteem we have
of our selves. For we live as if these vanities were made for us, and we for
these vanities; as if our Eye were made to no other end but to behold vanity,
our Ear to hearken after it, and all our Senses were ordained as so many inlets
of Sin, as if we were made for nothing else but Sin, and were all Flesh, and
had no Soul at all. And what a dishonor is this to the dignity of our nature!
How does this irreverence to our selves make us like unto the Beasts that
perish, nay, far worse then they! For proprietas ei nominis, ubi de innocentia
exciderit, aufertur, says Hilary; Man loses the propriety of his name when
he divides himself from innocence: Aut Serpens, aut Equus, aut Mulus ei nomen
est; and you may call him Serpent or Horse or Mule; Quot peccata, tot
personarum similitudines, says Hierom; As many sins as we commit, so many
persons and resemblances we put-on; sometimes of a Fox, sometimes of a Wolf,
sometimes of a Lion. The holy Father lays it as an imputation upon Man, Solum
hoc animal jura naturae transgreditur, Of all the creatures Man alone breaks
those bounds which are set him, that law of Nature which was written in his
heart, and makes Reason, which should fence and secure him from these dangers,
an agent for the Flesh, to promote that which it opposes. And we are so much
worse than the Beasts by how much the better we might have been. No Fox to
Herod, no Wolf to the Oppressor, no Horsleech to the Miser. When Man has thus
renounced his Reason, he is worse than a Beast, that never had any. Tertullian
gives it as a rule in his Book De anima, Naturalium scientia ne in bestiis
quidem deficit; The knowledge of that which is natural to them is never lost in
any creature, no not in Beasts. The Lion, says he, may forget his ferity and
fierceness, and in time be tamed, and brought to that meekness that he may be
made the delight of some Bernice, some wanton Queen, and innocently lick her
cheek with his tongue: Mores bestiam relinquent, scientia naturalium
permanebit; His manners may leave him, but not his apprehension of things
natural to him. Si de piscibus, si de placentis regina ei obtulerit, carnem
desiderabit: si languenti theriacam composuerit, simiam requiret; and si nullum
illi venabulum obfirmabit, gallum tamen formidabit: If the Queen offer him a
fish, or some junket, he will leave it for flesh: if she make an antidote for
him when he is sick, nothing will cure him but an ape: and though he fear not
the dart or hunting-pole, yet he is afraid of the crowing of a Cock. Every
Creature follows on in that way which Nature has chalked out, and does seldom
or never turn aside or look back. The Sun knows his setting, and the Moon her
seasons. Only Man, when he sins, sets where he should rise, and rises
where he should set; begins his time in pleasure, where he should but end; and
ends in sorrow, where he should but begin; rises in the spirit, and sets in
the flesh; forgets his very naturals. For to avoid the infections of the world,
to shake off all these tentations of the flesh, which we Christians call the
effect of Grace, with the Philosophers is nothing else but (...), to live
according to the dictate and prescript of Nature. For even Nature, and the very
structure and composition of Man, teaches us that we are ad majora nati, born
to greater matters then these; born, not to be so familiar with that which
perishes, not to be ready to give every vanity a meeting at a call, to
converse and trade with it; not to complement with Beauty when it smiles, or
bow down to Gold when it shines: no, nor to be afraid of the smart of that
sorrow which does but afflict that part of us which must be turned to dust and
ashes. I cannot but think there is as great an antipathy between Sin and the
nature of Man, especially renewed in Christ, as there is between the Lion and
the crowing of a Cock. If I mistake, St. Basil has deceived me, who in in his
Hexameron tells us that there needs no instructor to teach us, no orator to
persuade us, to hate a loathsome disease. For by the common principles of
Reason we commend Justice and Temperance, and condemn that which is evil.
(...), There is, says he, in the soul of man an aversness from evil, which he
never learnt, but brought with him into the world. Therefore, when we yield to
tentations, we forget from whence we are sprung, that we are made according to
the image of God. For can this image be seen in a Wolf, or a Fox, or a Lion?
Can we say we are made after his image, who have transformed our selves into
the similitude of so many beasts? who have in a manner forgotten our naturals,
and are afraid of that which Reason teaches us to desire, and desire that
which we have reason to fear? who, when Honor is set-up, are upon the wing,
but, when Heaven is proposed, flag and fall down to the ground? who will run to
hear the melody and jollity of the world, and are afraid at the voice of the
living God. Nor can we give any reason why we should thus debase and vilify
our selves, thus bespot and defile our selves, thus put our selves under the
yoke and harrow; sell our selves out to such base and loathsome employments, to
follow and wait upon every tentation that offers it self, to be servants to
sin and slaves to Satan, and help them to destroy us. Oh that we did know our
selves, what we are, and to what end made and created; made, not (...), in diem
vivere, to extend our thoughts no further than the present, to our next food,
the next delight and the next pleasure; not to trade on earth, but to have
(...), as the Apostle speaks Phil. 3. 20. our conversation in heaven; not to be
made like unto the beasts that perish, but (...), like unto the Angels in
heaven; not to converse with those delights which as Scorpions will sting us to
death, but with holy thoughts and divine contemplations, which are the best
companions we can have; not to labor for the meat that perishes, but through
delights and terrors, through good report and ill report; through all the
tentations and retardations of the world strive forward to eternity of bliss!

We may now exalt this consideration a little higher, and out of this commend
unto you the knowledge 1. of your own Strength, 2. of your own Weakness. By
which later I understand that particular inclination which arises from the
temper of every particular man, by which one is more inclinable and obnoxious
to this or that sin than another, by which one man is easily seduced by a
temptation which another does withstand with ease. And first, the reason why we
fall into so many tentations is this, That we know not our own strength, that
we are very willing to entertain a conceit that every tentation is too hard for
us: Nec mirum si vincamur, qui jam victi sumus, No marvel if we fail in the day
of trial, who in our own opinion are already overcome. We lay all the blame
upon Original sin and the weakness of our nature, and attribute our full growth
in sin to that seed of sin which we should have choked. For let us, with
Aquinas admit of that double process and derivation of Original sin, from the
Flesh into the Soul, and from the essence of the Soul into every power of it,
let us take it in the Body, which they call vehiculum, the instrument and
conduit to convey it, and we shall quickly find that we may not only subdue and
overcome it, but turn it to our benefit and behoof; that though with Samsons
Lion it comes with open mouth to devour us, yet we may kill it by degrees, and
find honey and sweetness in the belly of it. This Flesh of ours is much blamed,
as being a prison of the Soul, and a weight to press it down. The Manichee,
observing that war which is betwixt it and the soul, allowed it no better maker
than the Devil; but is solidly confuted by St. Augustine. Gregory Nyssen
calls it (...), a fuliginous ill-savoured shop. But all this will not make
Tentations unavoidable, or bring-in an Impossibility of prevailing against
them. Non enim caro suo nomine infamis, says Tertullian; The Flesh is not
ill-spoken of for it self: Neque enim de proprio sapit aliquid aut sentit; for
it does neither understand nor will; but is of another substance, another
nature added and joined to the Soul as an instrument in the shop of life.
Therefore the Flesh is blamed in Scripture, because the Soul does nothing
without it. Nor was it made to press us down to Hell, but by the power of the
soul to be lifted up into heaven. Animus, Imperator corporis; The Mind has
supreme power over the Body, and is inthroned there; the Body is made to be
obedient and tractable, to be reined and checked and guided by the Mind. Whence
Athanasius compares the Soul to a Musician, and the Body to a Harp or Lute,
which she may tune and touch with that art and skill as that it may yield a
pleasant and delightful harmony, nunc pietatis carmen nunc temperantiae
modulos, as St. Ambrose speaks; now a song of Sion, a Psalm of Piety, a
celestial Hymn; and again, the composed measures of temperance and chastity.
It was made for the Soul as Eve was for Adam, in adjutorium, not to tempt and
seduce it, but to be a helper. What part almost is there of Christianity which
is not performed by the ministry of the Body? Have thou a hand to take thy
brother by the throat? thou have a Hand also to lift him out of the dust. Have
thou an Eye to take in the adulteress? thou have an Eye also to pity the poor.
Have thou a Tongue which is a sword to wound thy brothers reputation? thou
may, if thou will, make it thy glory, and minister a word of comfort in due
season. Domus animae caro est; and inquilinus carnis anima; The Body is the
House of the Soul, and the Soul the tenant and inmate of the Body: Desiderabit
ergo inquilinus ex causa hujus nominis profutura domui, therefore the Soul is
obliged by this very name, as she is an inmate, to watch over the Body, and
carefully to provide those things which may uphold and sustein it, and not to
put it to slavish and servile offices, to let and hire it out to Sin and
Uncleanness, which will bring a fearful ruin both upon the house and the
tenant, cast both Body and Soul into hell. Ne nobis ergo blandiamur quia
Dominus consensit carnem esse infirmam; nam and praedixit spiritum esse
promptum; ut ostenderet quid cui esse debeat subjectum: Let us not therefore,
says Tertullian, flatter our selves in sin because Christ has told us that
the Flesh is weak: for he has told us also that the Spirit is strong, and
thereby made it plain unto us which part should be subject to the other, that
we may not excuse our selves by the infirmity of our Flesh, but uphold and
establish our selves by the strength of the Spirit. For tell me, Why were we
baptized? why were we made Christians? Was it not to mortify our earthly
members and lusts? non exercere quod nati sumus; to be in the body, and out of
the body; to tame the wantonness of the flesh; to make it our greatest care
that the Flesh, which is weak, prevail not against the Spirit, which is strong;
to fight against temptations, and especially against the most dangerous
tentation, which persuade us that we are weaker than we are. For I cannot see
of what use this unseasonable consideration of our own weakness should be, when
the Lord of hosts is with us, when he has girded us with strength and power,
when he has fitted us with all habiliments of war, the Helmet of Salvation,
the Sword of the Spirit, and the Shield of Faith; when they that are with us
are more and stronger than they which are against us. You will say perhaps, To
humble us. Indeed we cannot be too humble under the mighty hand of God; but
that is not Humility, but baseness, which humbles us under tentation. This is
the best use we commonly make of it; We remember our weakness; and that thought
leads us captive, makes us so humble as to crouch and fall at the foot of the
enemy which will devour us. This low conceit of our selves is the cause of all
the errors of our life. Desperatione debilitati experiri id nolunt quod assequi
posse diffidunt, says Tullie. As it is in Arts and Sciences, so is it in our
Christian warfare; Nothing more weakens and disinables us than our Distrust and
Diffidence in our selves; and we never make a proffer or motion to do that
which we presume we cannot do: when as they who affect any great matter must
try every way, break through all opposition, do what they can, nay, do more
than they imagine they can do. And as David went up against Goliath, and asked,
Who is this uncircumcised Philistine that he should defy the armies of the
living God; so should we buckle on our armor, and draw near to the strongest
tentation, and defy it; For what is this Tentation, that it should stand up
against the whole armor of God, against those armies of the living God, his
many Precepts, his many Promises, the Examples of good men, the Prayers of the
Saints? What are these Tentations, that they should gain the victory over our
Faith? Are they principalities or powers, or things present or things to come?
are they life or death? they shall not be able to separate us from the love of
God. Thus may we overthrow them in the name of the Lord. We read in the
Historian of Caligula the Emperor, Nihil tam efficere concupiscebat quam quod
posse effici negaretur, that he was most eager in attempting that which he knew
beforehand could not be done: And this no doubt was a great argument not only
of pride but of folly in him. But certainly it is a far more dangerous folly,
in a matter that so nearly concerns us as our everlasting welfare, to frame to
our selves an impossibility of doing that which we are bound to do, which not
to do is to undo and destroy our selves; to think we are too weak to fight, who
have vowed to overcome. To attempt that which I cannot do is but to lose my
labor; but not to do what I can, is to be unwilling to labor. And in this case
my greatest weakness is that I think I have no strength at all. For indeed this
our cowardice in not opposing our selves proceeds not out of want of strength
but want of will. Therefore as Petrarch tell his Friend, so may we the
diffident Christians: Verba quibus se uti velim, sunt, ut ubi te non posse
dixisti, ultra te nolle fatearis; When you say you cannot wrestle with this or
that tentation, I would have you change your language, and speak the truth,
which is that you will not. Difficultatis patrocinium fegnitiae percepimus;
Ever when we are unwilling to set forward, we complain of some Difficulty, some
strange Impossibility, some Lion in the way; and when we betray our strength,
we lay the fault here, that the difficulty was greater than our strength; and
thus, says St. Hierome, Domino reclamamus, and dicimus nos vel difficultate
mandatorum vel impossibilitate premi: nec sufficit quod jussa non facimus, nisi
etiam jubenter injustum pronunciemus; It is in his Epistle to Celantia. God
calls upon us to resist tentations, and we answer, We cannot; and groan as
under the burden of the hardness and impossibility of the command. Nor are we
content not to do what he commands, but in a manner we pronounce what he
commands to be unjust. And this conceit we have of the command is that which
makes it hard, which makes that yoke heavy which Christ has made light, by his
rich and glorious promises, and by his gracious assistance when we refuse it
not. Totum durum est quicquid imperatur invitis, says Salvian; To an unwilling
mind every command carries with it the amazing show of Impossibility. And a
wicked man had rather condemn the Law than reform his life, rather hate the
precept than his sin. We read that Mynderidos the Sybarite was weary at the
very sight of another man's labor, and when he saw a man a digging wished him to
forbear, as if he had done him an injury. Laboriosa omnia ignavis; All things
are toylsome to the Sluggard: a pain it is to him to pull his hand out of his
bosom. Continence is a hard lesson, but to the Wanton; Temperance, but to the
Glutton; and Liberality, but to a Miser. Omnia haec dura videbuntur ei qui non
amat Christum; All these things are hard to him that loves not Christ. But
where there is a will, there is strength enough. Love and Cheerfulfulness of
mind make all things easy. What was sweeter then the Manna in the wilderness?
what sooner gathered, yet the people of Israel murmured. What more bitter than
Hunger and Imprisonment? yet St. Paul rejoiced in this. Non est opus
peregrinationibus; To conquer a tentation thou needst not go on pilgrimage, or
take any long journey. Thou needst not be at any expense about it: It will not
cost thee thy money, nor engage thee to thy friend. Thou needst not sail for
it, thou needst not plow for it: thou needst not rise up early and lie down
late. (...), says Chrysostom; If thou be willing virtue has its work and
consummation. To conclude; Nothing is more powerful against tentation than the
Knowledge of our selves, and of our strength in Christ. This will make a
Christian like Aristotle's Magnanimous man, (...), to conceive of nothing as
difficult and impossible.

But in the next place, though a Christian has strength enough against all
temptations, yet he is more subduable by some then by others. Some men by their
very temper and constitution with ease withstand Lust, but must struggle and
take pains to keep down their Anger. Some can stand upright in poverty, but
fall in wealth. Some can resist this tentation by slighting, but must beat down
and macerate, must offer a kind of violence to themselves before they can
overcome another, which is more suitable and more correspondent to their
constitution. Therefore, as Quintilian gives it as a rule to Schoolmasters, To
observe the several dispositions of their Scholars, and so accordingly to apply
themselves unto them, so must we observe our own inclination, and be most
instant and diligent against that tentation which it looks toward.
Animadvertenda ea peccata maxim quae difficile praecaventur, as Tully speaks;
We must keep a strict eye and watch over those tentations which we are most
like to fall into, and to which the bent of our complexion swayes us. Let the
Melancholic beware of Envy, the Choleric prepare himself against injuries,
the Glutton set a knife unto his throat, and the wanton beat-down and chastise
his body. The Enemy takes advantage of our complexion and temperature,
tempting the Sanguine to pleasure and lust, the Phlegmatic to idleness and
sloth, the Melancholic to envy and malice, the Choleric to brawls and
contentions, driving us forward to that which our own lusts lead us to, and
changing his tentations as we change our affection. He walks about us, and
finds out where we are most open, and assaults us there were he knows the
Flesh will further him. And though we be Achillean Christians, and have but one
place, but our Heel, vulnerable, he will smite and wound us there. Therefore as
wise Captains plant their greatest forces where the city is weakest, and as it
is the wisdom of Governors iis malis maxim mederi quibus respublica maxim
laborat, to be most diligent to cure those evils with which the Commonwealth is
most molested; so must we take a strict survey of our selves, and set the
strongest guard there where we are most attemptable: And if it be Anger that we
lie most open to; tie it up; if Lust, quench it; if Sloth, chase it away. Non
emendabis te, nisi deprehendas, says the Philosopher; If you do not deprehend
and find out, you can never correct your self. If you do not enter into your
own soul, and commune with your own heart, and find out what passage is most
open to the enemy, you can never block it up and shut him out. Ante omnia
necesse est teipsum aestimare; It is the chief and principal work of a
Christian to weigh and ponder himself. For as it is good to know our own
strength, so is it also to take notice of our own weakness, that we may make
use of our strength to defend us where we are weakest, and to quench the fire
of that dart which is most likely to enter. In a word, By thus looking into our
selves we provide against danger which threatens abroad; and by often ripping
up our hearts we purge and cleanse our leprous souls, as Moses did his hand by
putting it again into his bosom.

Thus we have showed you of what use the Knowledge of Our selves is in this our
spiritual combat. Now for our further advantage we must duly consider the
Tentations themselves. Humanae mentis natura est, says Hilary, ut si
cogitatione aliquid contemplemur, talem se nobis unaquaeque species exhibeat
qualem eam and cogitando formemus; It is natural to the mind of man to put
shapes and forms upon things, which exhibit that species and representation to
it which it self has already made. It may conceive of Gold as of earth; and it
may conceive of it as of a God. It may look upon Beauty as upon a flower that
fades; and it may consider it as a lasting heaven upon earth. It may think of
Honor as of that which makes us Gods; and it may esteem it but as a bubble,
which is lost in the making. And as we transform things, so do they transform
us. For talis quisque est, qualibus delectatur, and inter artificem and
artificium mira cognatio; Our minds are even fashioned like unto those things
which we most delight to converse with: and a great correspondence there is
between the Work and the Artificer. Wheresoever the Workman goes, he carries
about with him the Idea and Representation of his work along with him. Where
St. Peter gives us a character of profane and unclean persons, amongst other
marks he sets this as one, that they have eyes full of adultery; but in the
Greek it is more significant, (...), full of the Adulteress; as if the Wanton
carried her about in his very eyes, and had always her image before him. The
Covetous person converses with his Gold as with a God; he speaks of it, he
dreams of it, he commits Idolatry with it; Si tacet, hoc loquitur, and when he
is silent he talks of it within himself. And in this very shape which we have
given them, in this dress which we have put upon them, they deceive us. But if
we do search into their nature, and study them thoroughly, we shall not be
deceived by their outward appearance: We shall find there is truly and indeed
no content from Riches, no pleasure from Beauty, no horror from Affliction. If
we ask them for themselves, our Savior may well return us that answer which
once he gave to his disciples, Ye know not what you ask. The Beauty of women;
what is it? It is but color and proportion, which a light Agne will soon wipe
out, and which Age will so dissolve that we cannot believe there was ever any.
What is Honor but (...), a sign and signification of man's good esteem, and
many times but a bare sign, and no more; a leg to Haman, when we wish him on
the gallows; a cabinet of air, to which every man, even the worst man, has a
key, to open and shut it as he pleases. What are the Pleasures of the world?
Neither true, nor lasting; and like painted Curtesans, as Hierome speaks, id
solum oftendunt quod placere potest, they only lay that open to the eye which
may please it. We read in St. Hierom of an Heathen who was wont to say to Pope
Damasus, Facito me Romana urbis Episcopum, and protinus ero Christianus, Make
me but Bishop of Rome, and I will presently be a Christian. We may be sure he
knew not well what the Christian was, and saw no more of the Bishop than his
pomp and outside; otherwise, he would rather have given a Bishopric, nay, sold
all that he had, that he might have been a Christian. What do we undergo, what
do we attempt at the sight of a temptation? What Rhetoric is there in a piece
of Gold, or in Beauty, or in Honor? What do they not force us to, because we
will not look neerere unto them, but are so amazed at their first apparition
that we can look no further? But how vast a difference is there between these
things and spiritual and heavenly blessings! What is Beauty to Virtue, Gold to
Grace, Honor to Glory. Spiritual things in the mouth are bitter, but in the
belly as sweet as honey. They are favorable to us and benevolent, and admit at
once satiety and desire: But earthly things, when we have them not, kindle in
us a desire; and being enjoyed, quench that desire with loathsomness: But the
other are never loathed but when we have them not: for when we have them, we
ever desire them more. The more we feed, the more we are hungry; and yet when
we are most hungry, we are full and satisfied. In illis appetitus placet,
experientia displicet: in istis appetitus vilis est, experientia magis placet,
says Gregory: In the one our Appetite pleases us, but Experience is
distastful: They are honey in the desire, but in the taste gravel. But to the
other the Appetite is commonly sick and queasie; but when we have chewed them,
they are sweeter than the honey or the honeycomb: they are Gall to the
appetite, but to the taste Manna. The one brings a show of pleasure, but ends in
grief: the other brings a seeming distaste, but ends, nay never ends, but is
immortal. Et quis tam parvis oblectare animum in vita possit, si vera
cognoverit? And who will ever delight himself in those vain and transitory
things; who has had a full view of those which are real and eternal? Nonne
melius est brevi tempore dimicare, far vallum, arma sumere, and postea
gaudere viotorem, quam impatientia unius horae servire perpetuos says St.
Hierome. Better fight a while and get a glorious victory, than be slaves to sin
and Satan for ever. Did we thus compare the Devils offers with Gods, we should
quickly pull-off the visour from Tentations, and discover their deformity; we
should be full of shame and grief for having so long vouchsafed familiarity to
such loathsome solicitors. Then we should be able to call them all by their
names, and to say, This Beauty is a deceiver, This Wine is a mocker, This
Strumpet is a deep ditch, These Riches have wings, and will fly away. Non obvia
occupant. Videt aurum; scit hoc terrae limum esse: videt gemmas; meminit esse
aut montium aut niaris calculos: videt illicem ad lasciviam vultum; scit
tanquam avibuc coeli ex his sibi laqueis evadendum, says Hilary: A good man is
not taken with obvious and ordinary objects. He sees gold, and know it is but
the slime of the earth: He beholds pearls and diamonds, and knows they are but
stones taken from the rocks or sea: He sees the bewitching countenance of the
wanton, and on chaste desires and resolutions, as on the wings of a Dove, he
flees swiftly away from the snares. And thus, as I said before, Not to yield
to Tentations, is to overcome them, so I say now, To know Tentations, and to
strip them of their disguise and false appearance, is the ready way to victory.

We have prescribed unto you two remedies against Tentations, the Knowledge of
Our selves, and the Knowledge of the Tentation. If we knew our selves, we would
not converse and trade and be so familiar with Tentations as we are. And if we
knew Tentations in intimis essentiae, naked as they are in themselves, not
drest-up and coloured-over and refined by the Senses, we would loath these
smiling enemies, and the more because they smile. Ipsum vocabulum nos admonere
potest; The very word TENTATION may admonish us to be shy and wary of them. For
what is a Tentation but a heave, a trial, an experiment to overthrow us? But so
it is that we are commonly the greatest strangers at home, that we are willing
to believe that we are of the earth earthly, and like the Horse and Mule, which
have no understanding, lower and viler than those Tentations which do but
knock, nay but show themselves, and are welcomed as friends. Rarum est ut satis
se quisque vereatur; It is a very rare thing for men to fear and reverence
themselves, (...) give that honor to themselves which they do to the whip, nay
to the frown, of a Superior. These many times curb and restrain us when we are
making forward to unlawful pleasures: they seal-up our lips, they bind our
hands, they put-in their Veto, and we dare not touch or taste, or handle. But
(...), our Reason which should be as an Emperor, and commander over us, is
slighted and neglected, and esteemed not worth the harkning-to: To which if we
gave that due reverence which we owe, dimittamus licet paedagogum, there were
no need at all of any outward restraint. And as we take no great pains in the
study of Our selves, so do we as little trouble our selves to sift and examine
those Tentations which make toward us, but judge of them by their outside;
look upon them, and are taken with a look. And as the Romans observed of the
barbarous Nations, that being utterly ignorant of the art of Engining, when
they were besieged and shut-up, they would stand still and look upon the enemy
working in the mine, not understanding quo illa pertinerent quae ex longinquo
instruebantur, what it meant, or wherefore those things were prepared which
they saw afar off at distance, till the enemy came so near as to blow them up
and destroy them: So do we behold Tentations with a careless and regardless
eye, as if we knew not what they meant, and so suffer them to work-on, to steal
nearer and nearer upon us, till they enter our souls, and dwell there, and take
full possession of us. That we may therefore be the more ready and skilful to
apply these two Remedies, we will add a third, which we at first also proposed,
the Knowledge and serious Consideration of God himself. For quanto magis
appropinquat Deo cogitatio nostra, tanto praecellentior ejus nobis videtur
majestas, the nearer we draw unto God, and the greater our knowledge is of him,
the more are we taken and amazed with his beauty, and the glorious rays of his
Majesty; in comparison of which all the Beauty in the world is but deformity;
all the Pleasure of the world, loathsomness; all the Glory of the world, but as
vanity, as nothing. Now by the knowledge of God I do not understand that
imperfect and weak apprehension of him which even they may have who understand
his precepts, and give assent unto them that they are just and holy, but yet
through their corrupt and wicked conversation cannot be induced to believe his
promises, and by virtue and force obey his commands: as the Apostle speaks of
the Heathen, that they knew God but did not glorify him as God. For as
Ignorance of God brought-forth Romans 1. 21.
those Lusts of concupiscence in the Heathen, so the like Lusts as greedily
affected by Christians breed not Ignorance only, but also a Denial of God, and
of Holiness, without which no man can ever see God. But a sad and serious
Consideration of Gods Majesty and Goodness may transform the Soul into the
similitude and likeness of God. For true Knowledge is a kind of assimilation of
the mind to that which it apprehends. And as there is imprinted in the organ of
every Sense a likeness of that object which it does receive, so is there also
in the Understanding an impression made which, if it be not wiped out and
defaced by impertinent deviations and wanderings, by the frequent admittance of
contrary objects, will work in us a conformity to the nature and purity of that
God which we behold with wonder; that we may converse here on earth as so many
mortal Gods; that, as God is present every where, and yet receives no
contagion from any place; present with the wicked, yet is Justice it self;
present with the adulterer, yet is Purity it self; tunc maxim magnus, cum
homini pusillus; tunc maxim optimus, cum homini non bonus; tunc maxim unus,
cum homini duo aut plures; then most eminently great, when he seems least unto
man; then especially best, when we least feel him so; then most one, when we
conceive of him as of two or more; in his anger and in his mercy, ^^ his
blessings and in his curses (...), unchangeably one and the same: So we may
learn to be in the world and yet be no more spotted of the world than if we
were out of the world; to hear its music, yet not hearken; to see its
allurements, and not be allured; to walk in the midst of its tentations, yet
remain untoucht; whether it fawn or frown, smile or threaten, amidst all its
changes and varieties, to abide still the same. This is indeed (...), to be
made like unto God. Every article of our faith leads us to some operative
virtue; and by the Knowledge of God we grow-up to be like him. If I believe he
is GOD, I must fall down and worship him; What he commands must be my law, and
I must fulfill it. His Omnipotency both comforts and affrights me. His Justice
drives me from Presumption, and his Mercy from Despair. If I do not make use of
him as far as he is pleased to open and reveal himself, though I fall down
before him and worship him, yet I deny him, or at best mistake him. Alium enim
Deum facit, quem aliter cognoscit, says Tertullian; He makes him another God
who conceives of him otherwise than he is; who calls him Just, yet so live ^s
if he were not so; who acknowledges him to be the Holy one of Israel, and yet
leaves him for Uncleanness; to be the Fountain of all blessings, and yet heweth
to himself broken cisterns, and trusts in the Creature. * * * Certainly the
greater Gods Love, the hotter his Anger. Etiam Amor laesus irasci solet; For
even Love it self, if you chafe and provoke it too much, will wax angry. And he
that is jealous over us for o^^ good, if we offend him and charge him, will be
jealous against us to our destruction.

To conclude then; The consideration of these three, the All Sufficiency and
Providence of God, his Omniscience, and his Jealousy, if it be serious, as it
should, may bring-in universitatem donorum, as Tertullian calls it, that
Academy, that world of spiritual gifts and endowments, which may be as a court
of guard about us, to defend and protect us in all our ways, against the craft
and malice of our enemies; may awake our Security, which arms our Enemy; and
remove our Distrust, which disarms us; ut non metuamus quicquam, and caveamus
omnia, as Tully speaks; that we may not neglect our foe, nor yet be afraid to
meet him; that we may fear nothing, but yet be shy and suspicious of every
thing; not fear the approach of a Tentation, yet be as cautelous and wary as if
it were now at hand. Gods All Sufficiency may take my eye from the World, and
make me lookup upon Him who is the giver of all things: His Omniscience may
make me not to dare to look toward a Tentation, no not in the twilight, nor
when it comes with the advantage of Secrecy: And His Jealousy may make me
jealous over my self with a godly jealousy, that I may present my self as a
chaste virgin unto God. In a word; The Knowledge of Our se^^es, that we are made
according to the image of God; of Tentations, that they are the base^^ and
vilest things in the world, and, like the Painters shop, have very nihil, omnia
falsa, nothing true in them, nothing but color and show; and lastly, of God,
who is an infinite and glorious Essence, who so provides for us that we need
not Tentations; who looks down upon us, that we may not dare to touch them; and
who is jealous over us, and will severely punish us, if we cast Him off, who
only can truly be said TO BE, for Shows, for Promises, for Nothing, for Sin,
which will make us worse than Nothing; These, I say, driven home and fastened in
our hearts by due and frequent meditation, may circle us round about, and so
keep us in on every side, so check and restrain us, that we may not be led into
tentation. We have now done with the first part of this Petition.

The Six and Fourtieth SERMON. PART. VI.
MATTHEW. VI. 13. -- But deliver us from evil.
AS we pray not to be led into tentation, so we further pray to be delivered
from evil. For Tentations, as they are tentations, and no more, are not evil to
those who are tempted, but they are evils inherent and proper to the tempter
himself. Till they prevail, they are the matter and occasion of virtue as well
as of vice, and always work for the best to those who are strong in the Lord
and in the power of his might. Non laetatur Demon cum affligimur, sed cum
succu^^imus; The Enemy takes no delight to see us beat upon by Afflictions, or
wooed by Pleasures, or conversing in the World: for here he stands as one
doubtful of the victory, in a possibility to receive a ^^il as well as to give
one. Then he triumphs, when Afflictions have driven us from our hold; when
Pleasures have detained us in the way which we walk, and are become so gracious
unto us as to command our will and affections; when we love the world and the
things of the world: Then he rejoices as a conqueror does when the day is won.
And this may be the reason why this particle and clause is added, not as
another Petition different from the former, but as an illustration and
explication of it. For to be delivered from evil takes off all fear, and
secures us from the force and violence of Tentations. Indeed Evil is that which
we all naturally shun, and to be delivered from it is a part of every man's
Litany. In the first of Jonah, when the storm was high, the mariners cried
every man unto his God, and awaked Jonah to call upon his. The very Heathen
sacrificed Diis depellentibus, to those Gods whom they thought to have power to
drive away the evil which they feared, and to free them from danger. They had
their Goddess Pellonia, and their Deos Averruncos, therefore so called for
turning away evils from them. Evil has but a sad aspect, and at the first show
and appearance makes us look about us for succor. It is terrible afar off, in
the very story and picture and representation, and moves our affections when it
nothing concerns us. Augustine tells us that he wept at the very reading of the
story of Dido in Virgil. And it is common unto us so to be affected with those
evils which others have long since undergone, as if they were now in the
approach toward us, and we our selves in present danger. But when Evil comes
near us indeed, and is ready to seize upon us, then it shakes the whole course
of our nature, it changes the countenance, it calls-up all the powers of the
soul, and drives us to consultation. When the stormy wind is raised, then we
cry unto the Lord in our trouble, that he may deliver us out of our distress.
For the very fear of Evil is a kind of distress. Satis malum est apud timentes
quicquid timetur; Whatsoever is feared is evil enough to them that fear it. And
in this respect we may admit of St. Basils nice distinction between (...) and
(...), between Saving and Delivering: For we desire not only to be saved and
preserved, as men weak and impotent and obnoxious to a fall; but to be freed
and delivered, as men walking in the midst of snares, as men already in a kind
of captivity. And certainly it will be good for us often to represent Evil unto
our selves, and place it in its full horror before our eyes, that having a
foretast as it were of it, our prayer may be the more hearty and earnest
against it; to consider what a wound and bruise such a one received, how one
has been slain with Luxury, and another with Pride, how Beauty has deceived
one, and Wine mocked another; to behold the Devil in his true shape; that we
may call upon our Father which is in heaven, not only to save us in this
present life, but to deliver us for ever from the Enemy, that he devour not our
souls as a Lion. We have then, you see, two terms in this clause, Evil, and
Deliverance. And if it be evil, what can we more properly pray for then for
deliverance. To draw then the lines by which we are to pass, we must consider.
1. What is here meant by Evil. 2. What it is we desire when we pray for
deliverance.

And, in the first place St. Augustine will tell us that Evil is of no essence
at all; and Nyssen, that it is not (...), by any proper subsistence it has,
that it is nothing else, but a kind of corruption and perversion of that manner
and order which Nature has set down and prescribed. It was the great business
of many years in the times of our forefathers to find-out the original
fountain from whence it springs. The Manichees made some of the creatures,
which in themselves are very good, evil by nature, and therefore were forced to
invent two causes and beginnings of things, the one good, the other evil. With
them it was a kind of murder to pluck up a Plant, and sacrilege to taste of
the Vine. Therefore they called Wine fell potestatum tenebrarum, the very Gall
of the Devil and the powers of Darkness. But the Father makes it plain,
prodesse singula per convenientiam, that every creature is good and useful by a
kind of convenience and to that end to which Nature has ordained it. For if
the Scorpion were in it self evil, it would then certainly soonest kill and
destroy it self. We will not here engage our selves in a needless dispute. What
say we to Diseases, and Calamities, and Destruction of Cities, and War, and
Pestilence, and the like? These indeed are Evils, and we may pray against them.
For the Wise man will tell us, Fortis est perpeti, at non est prudentis optare
periculum; There may be Valor shown in enduring of these evils, but it is no
Wisdom to wish for them. For Virtue is opposed to these, not because she
chooses them, but because through the inevitable Laws of Necessity she cannot
avoid them. And therefore, when the Christians professed a willingness to
suffer persecution, and the Heathen upbraided them, Cur ergo querimini? Why
then do you complain of us for afflicting you? Tertullian replies, Plane pati
volumus, verum eo modo quo and bellum miles, Truly we are willing to suffer,
but with the same mind with which the Soldier does enter the battle, in which
he is glad to overcome, though before he complained that he was forced to
fight. Thief are evil, says Basil, (...), to our sense, sensible evils: And we
may, nay we must, pray against them, because we are uncertain to which hand
they may incline us, whether they may drive us to the right hand or to the
left. And indeed all those deliverances we pray for in our common Litany are
but as so many branches from this root, LIBER A NOS A MALO, Deliver us from
evil. But those Evils which are truly so and in their own nature proceed, as
our Savior speaks, from within us; not Thunder, and Persecution, and War, and
Pestilence, but Injustice, and Wantormess, and Luxury, and Envy, and Malice,
and Deceit, and the rest of those hellish Evils which do pollute the soul and
deface the image of God in us. Haec sunt vere mala quae faciunt malos: Those
evils are truly and really evil which make us evil. Indeed when we speak of
evil, every man straight phansieth to himself that Evil which he is most afraid
of; the Covetous, Poverty; the Ambitious, Disgrace; the Voluptuous, the bitter
cup of Afflictions: although these, as they may be applied, are rather remedies
than evils. For Poverty may teach the Covetous the uncertainty of Riches; and
Disgrace, the Ambitious what a bubble Honor is, and how soon turned into air;
and Misery, the Voluptuous what a sad aspect Pleasure has when it turns its
back and goes from us. (...), says the Father; For those things which we
suffer are not evil, but those things which we do. But we our selves create
evils, draw them out unto our selves in the form of evil things, and then name
them so. So the superstitious Papist brings every rotten stick he meets with to
kindle a fire, and then trembles at it; and, to be freed from this cries out,
Domine, hic ure, hic seca, Lord, let the fire be in this world, let us feel the
lash of temporal affliction, let any evil fall upon us here, so we fall not
into the fire of Purgatory. But the best of it is, that this may be perhaps in
the Trent, but is neither in our Creed nor Pater Noster: and the Cardinal tells
us that, if we believe it not, we shall never feel it: and we are willing to
take the condition; for we neither believe it, nor can we fear or hope to come
there. But every man cries out for deliverance at the sight of that evil which
is a mere creature of the Fancy, and has no being and subsistence but in the
mind, which many times is more busy to make evils than to overcome them: --
nulloque autore malorum,
Quae finxere timent; --
and men fear where no fear is, fear that to which themselves have given both a
being and horror, which themselves have made, and made formidable. But it is no
supposed, no feigned Evil which we here pray against. It is a real and
substantial Evil. And if we can find out the next and immediate cause of Evil
whose work it is to make Prosperity a snare, and Adversity a wind to drive us
from the fountain of Goodness to the waters of bitterness; by whose art and
skill a tempest in the air shall beget another in the mind, and the diseases of
the body the plague of the heart; by whose machinations and subtilty it many
times comes to pass that plenty brings forth Wantonness and Luxury, and Poverty
Repining and Murmuring; that can so work with these things which are not in
their own nature Evil, that they shall make us evil; with these sensible Evils,
that they shall produce those Evils which are so (...), in their own nature,
truly and properly Evils, as Sin and everlasting Death, then we need make no
further search, but conclude that this is it. And indeed, if we look nearer to
the word in the Text, and compare it with other places of Scripture, and with
the former part, Lead us not into tentation, we shall easily be induced to
believe that the word (...) here, which signifies evil, is not of the neuter
but the masculine gender, and rather points out to some evil Person then some
evil Thing. For so we find it taken in the chapter before, v. 37. Let your
communication be Yea, Yea; Nay, Nay: for whatsoever is more then these is
(...), of evil. And chapter 13. (...), the wicked One, is twice mentioned. And,
as our Savior, so the Apostles after use it. St. Paul Ephesians. 6. 16. Take the
shield of faith, that you may be able to quench all the fiery darts (...), of
the Wicked One. And 1 John 2. 13, 14. I have written unto you, young men,
because ye have overcome (...), the Wicked one. And chap. 5. he tells us of him
who is born of God, that (...), that Wicked one touches him not: Which is no
other than the Devil, who is MALUS per antonomasiam, so evil, that his name is
so: so that as Evil is placed for the Devil, so is the Devil for evil: The Evil
one touches him not, that is, the Devil. Est unus ex vobis Diabolus, says our
Savior to his Disciples; One of you is a Devil, that is, in the highest degree
evil. For he is the first and principal cause of evil, totius erroris artifex,
multiformis lues mentis humanae, salutis pariter animaeque vastator, totius
seculi interpolator, says Tertullian, the great Artificer and forger of all
error, the very Plague and Bane of the mind of man, the Destroyer of both our
health and our souls, and the great Fashioner of this present world, which he
does so dress up and paint that it may the sooner deceive us. These testimonies
are so many and so clear that it may almost seem a wonder that there have been,
and still are, found those who profess Christian Religion, and yet are of
opinion that what is delivered of Satan and the Devil, of his wiles and
enterprises and snares, is not so to be understood as if there were any such
spiritual substance to which we may truly attribute these, but that it is a
figurative kind of speech fitted to that which the vulgar and common people
believe; that there is nothing which solicits us to sin but our own Lust and
Concupiscence, as St. James teaches us, chapter 1. 14. where laying down the
manner how we are tempted, he makes no mention of any person, but attributes
all to our Lust and Concupiscence, which with them by a wonderful Prosopopaeia
or Feigning of a person, is called Satan, or the Devil, or the Adversary which
accuses us before God; that Sin alone is the Serpent which deceives us, and
the Lion which roars against us, and the Dragon which devours us; that only Sin
is that Destroyer. And this St. Bernard seems to lay to the charge of Petrus
Abailardus, Epist. 190. But we may truly say that this is but commentum humani
ingenii, an invention and fiction of phansiful men, and may well be entitled on
the Devil himself the Father of lies. For by the same art and skill they may,
if they please, make the whole Scripture an allegory, since we find nothing
more historically and plainly delivered there then this of the craft and
subtilty and malice of the Devil. Indeed we do not make the Devil the author of
every sin; nor can we think that whenever we do that which is evil, we do it
by the instigation of the Devil. For many times we are the only devils to our
selves, and have no tempter but within us, besides the outward object. And
Chrysostom, considering the careless and negligent behavior of our first
parents in Paradise, concludes that they would have fallen though there had
been no Devil, no Serpent to tempt them. Sometimes the Devil provokes us; and
sometimes we provoke the Devil: We may sin without the help of the Devil; and
most times we help the Devil in his work. We begin of our selves; and this is a
time of invitation to the Devil to step in and drive us forward when we are
fairly running on of our selves in those ways which lead to death. But that
any should deny that there is any such person which at any time makes any such
attempt upon us, or studieth to hurt and destroy us, proceeds from no other
cause than a strong illusion of that Devil which they conceived to be nothing
but like Aesops Fox and Lion and Wolf, which carry their Moral with them, and
till that be made are but tales and idle Fables. And we may say of these
Mythologists, who think there is no such person as the Devil who seeks to
devour us, Daemonium habent, that they have a Devil. For who would ever deny it
who is in his right mind, and has read the writings of the Old and New
Testament, or but the beginning of the history of Job, which plainly show that
the Devil is a person which studies the molestation of mankind, and especially
of those who truly serve God; and that he is a spiritual substance, which upon
Gods permission has power and force to bring-in upon us great and manifold
evils, as plagues and famine and inundations; and is therefore styled the
author of all those grievous evils which Job suffered, and is said to have
smitten Job with sore biles from the sole of his foot unto his crown. We Job 2.
7.
cannot say that all these his touches and his blows, his perambulations; his
instigations, his cribrations and winnowings, his wiles, his roaring, his
calumniations and accusations are all performed in an allegory. We may say with
Tertullian, De conscientia hominum notus; That there is such an enemy, we have
domestic and familiar testimony from our own consciences: For we see that even
the rude and unlearned multitude make use of his name to make up a curse. But
we will rather take that of Martin Luther, That we must believe the Scriptures,
licet totus mundus and omnes Angeli vel perirent, vel aliter docerent, although
the whole world and all the Angels should perish, or teach the contrary. Or
indeed rather, with the same Father, Revocandae quaestiones ad Dei literas;
This question, if it were worth the proposing, is to be resolved by the word of
God. And if there we find the Devil painted and charactered-out in his full
horror, if there we find him deciphered as a person crafty and malicious to
mankind, seeking whom he may devour, we need not make a stand, or doubt but
that he is that Evil, that Wicked one, from whom if we be delivered, we may
promise to our selves victory, walk securely, and serve God without fear of
being lead into tentation. And therefore Christ did not without cause place
this among those things which we must request at the hand of our heavenly
Father, that we may not yield to tentations, but be delivered from evil, from
Satan, who is Evil (...), in the most eminent and highest degree, and the first
original and immediate cause of all those temptations which either by flattery
or terror are ready to overwhelm us. This our Savior reserves, as a matter of
greatest consequence, to the last place; as skilful Orators use to set open the
very floodgates of eloquence, to spread their sayls to the furthest, and
double their files, and bring argument upon argument, and those arguments which
are most persuasive, when they draw toward a conclusion. Tunc commovendum est
theatrum cum ventum est ad illud quo veteres comaediae tragoediaeque
clauduntur, PLAUDITE, as Quintilian. In the ast place commonly they bring that
which is most remarkable, (and which should strike and make a deeper impression
into the minds of the auditory. If we be delivered (...), from the Evil one, we
shall hallow Gods Name, and advance his Kingdom, and fulfill his Will, and be
content with Food and Raiment, have our Pardon sealed, and with the Temptation,
whatsoever it be, make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it. So that
we may take this interpretation as most probable and pertinent; Although the
others (as that of Cyprian, who by Evil understands Sin it self, or whatsoever
may be disadvantageous unto us; or that of St. Augustine, who, forgetting that
he had made seven Petitions in his second Book upon the Sermon on the Mount,
makes this clause the same with the former) bring nothing contrary to truth, or
indeed to this interpretation. Having therefore shut-up and concluded all evil
in him who is the Father of Evil, we will 1. consider him first as an enemy to
Mankind; 2. lay-down reasons why he is so, and why we should make preparation
against him; and 3. discover some Stratagems which he uses to bring his
enterprises to pass.

And first, that the Devil is our enemy, we need not doubt. For the Apostle
has openly proclaimed him so; We wrestle not with flesh and Ephesians. 6. 12.
blood, against Men as weak and mortal as our selves, but against
principalities, against powers, against the rulers of the darkness of this
world, that is, against the Devil and his Angels, against spiritual wickedness
in high places, that is, as himself speaks in the second Chapter, against those
spirits which rule in the air. And therefore St. Basil gives us 1. his Name,
which is SATANAS, an adversary, and DIABOLUS, a Devil, because he is both
(...), a fellow-worker with us in sin, and, when it is committed, an accuser:
2. his Nature; He is (...), incorporeal: 3. his Dignity; It is, (...), a
principality: 4. the Place of his principality; He is (...), in the air; and is
therefore called the Prince of this world. His Anger is implacable, (...), as
immortal as himself: not as Man's, who is never angry but with particulars,
(...), as with Cleon and Socrates, but not with man. Satan's Anger and Hatred is
bent against the whole nature of Man. Cum sit ipse poenalis, quaerit ad poenam
comites; Being even a punishment unto himself, he would have all men with him
come under the same lash. And if he cannot win a Soul by invasion, he attempts
it by stratagem. To this end, as he makes use of Pleasure and Content, so he
does of Affliction and Sorrow. Operatio ejus est hominum eversio; His very
working and operation is nothing else but for the eversion and ruin of
mankind: Nec definit perditus perdere; being fallen himself he would draw all
men after him. The bodies of men he plagueth with diseases, and their souls
with sudden and unusual distractions; being able through the subtility and
spirituality of his nature to work-upon both; invisibilis in actu, in effectu
apparens, invisible and insensible in the act, but manifestly seen in the
effect. He cheated men with oracles, struck them with diseases, and pretended a
cure; desinens laedere, curasse credebatur, when he did not hurt them, he was
thought to have healed them. By these arts he insinuated him self into the
minds of ignorant men, and at last was honored with Temples and Altars and
Sacrifices, and gained a Principality and kind of Godhead in the world. But now
his Oracles are stilled, his Altars beat down, and he is driven out of his
Temples. But yet he is a Devil still, and an Enemy, and rules in the air, and
upon permission may make use of one creature to destroy another. And his Power
is just, though his Will be malicious. Quod ipse facere inique appetit, hoc
Deus fieri non nisi just permittit. What he wickedly desires to do, that God
may suffer justly to be done. We will not not say that the evil Spirits visibly
fight against us, and try it out with fists, as those foolish Monks in St.
Hierom boasted of themselves that they had often tried this kind of hardiment
with them, to make themselves a miracle to the ignorant rout, who are more
taken with lies than with truth. We are not apt to believe that story, or
rather fable, in St. Hierome, of Paul the Hermit, who met the Devil first as a
Hippocentaur, next as a Satyr, and last of all as a Sheewolf; or that of
Hilarion, to whom were presented many fearful things, the roaring of Lions, the
noise of an Army, and a chariot of fire coming upon him, and Wolves, and Foxes,
and Sword-players, and wicked Women, and I cannot tell what. For it is scarce
expressable what a creating faculty Melancholy and Solitariness and Fancy
have, ut non videant quae sunt, and videre se putent quae non sunt, that when
we do not see those things which are, yet they make us believe we see those
things which are not. We will not speak of Spirits possessing the bodies of
men; Which power we cannot deny but they have. Yet I am persuaded these
after-ages have not frequently seen any such dismal effects. The world has
been too much troubled with lies, and many counterfeits have been discovered
even in our times. And for us Protestants, we see no such signs, no such
wonders. But these Devils are as common as Flies in Summer amongst them who
boast of an art and skill they have in casting them out. You would think they
enterd men on purpose that these men might show their activity in driving them
away, and so confirm and make good their Religion, make themselves equal to
those primitive Christians, quorum verbis tanquam flagris verberati nomina
aedebant, who with their very words would make them roar as if they had been
beaten with whips, till they confessed they were devils, and did tell their
names. We may say of these in our days as he does of superstitious Dreams,
Ipsa jam facilitate auctoritatem perdiderunt, They are too common to be true.
And because so many of these strange relations have been manifestly false, we
may be pardoned if we detrect a little, and believe not those few which are
true. For the mixture of fictions in many a good history has many times made
even Truth it self seem fabulous. But yet though we suspend our belief, and do
not suddenly and hand over head subscribe unto these, we are not like those
Philosophers in Tully qui omnia ad sensus referebant, who referred all to their
senses, and would believe no more than what they did see. For these evil
Spirits may be near us, and we see them not; they may be about our paths, and
we discern them not. Many effects of theirs no doubt we may see, and yet can
have no assurance that they were theirs. For that light of their intellectual
nature is not put-out, but they know how to apply active qualities to passive,
and diversely upon occasion to temper natural causes, being well seen and versed
in the book of Nature. And this knowledge of theirs is enlarged and advanced by
the experience of so many thousand years, and their experience promoted and
confirmed by an indefatigable and uncessant survey of the things of this world;
which is not stayed and held back by any pause or interval, nor needs any
repair or help by rest and sleep, as ours, quasi per quasdam ferias, as the
Father speaks, as by so many days of vocation and rest; but every moment they
observe things, and every moment draw new conclusions, and every moment collect
and infer one thing out of another. Besides, as Tertullian tells us, momento
ubique sunt, their motion and apprehension is swift and sudden. Totus mundus
illis locus unus est; The whole world is to them but as one place; and what is
done in every place, they soon know in any place. We do not meet them as
Hippocentaurs, but we meet them as Tyrants: We cannot say we have seen the
Devil in the shape of a Fox, but yet we are not ignorant of his wiles and
crafty enterprises. And though his hand be invisible when he smites us (for he
is (...), an incorporeal hangman, as Chrysostom calls him) yet we may feel him
in our impatience and falling from God. What speak we of the possession of our
body, when it is too manifest that he possesses our soul? For do we see a man
with a mouth like a sepulcher, and a tongue like a rasor, with a talking eye,
and a restless hand, starting at the motion of every leaf, drooping at the
least breath of affliction, amazed at the sight of white and red color,
stooping at every clod of earth, transported at every turn of his eye, afraid
where no fear is, mourning for the absence of that which will hurt him, and
rejoicing at that stolen bread which will be as gravel between his teeth? Do we
see him sometimes fall into the water and sometimes into the fire, sometimes
cold and stupid, and anon active and furious? we may well conclude and account
him as one (...), of those who are possessed with a Devil. That he insinuates
himself into the Soul of Man; that being of so subtle an essence, he works
upon the Spirits, by inflaming or cooling; upon the Fancy, by strange
representations making it a wanton; and on the Understanding by presenting of
false light, and sending-in strong illusions; it is plain and evident, and we
need not doubt: But the manner how he works is even as invisible as himself;
and therefore it were a great vanity to enquire after it. Stultum est calumniam
in eo inquisitionis intendere, in quo comprehendi quod quaeritur per naturam
suam non potest, says Hilary; It is a great folly to run-on in the pursuit of
the knowledge of that which before we set forth we know we cannot attain. And
therefore says the Father, Nemo ex me scire quaerat quod me nescire scio, nisi
forte ut nescire discat quod sciri non posse sciendum est; Let no man desire to
know of me that which I know I cannot know, unless peradventure he would learn
to be ignorant of that which he must know he cannot but be ignorant. Let others
define and determine and set-down what manner they please; we may rest upon
that of St. Augustine, Facilius est in alterius definitione videre quod non
probem, quam quicquam been definiendo explicare; In this point it is easier to
refute another opinion than to establish our own; and to show that the Devil
does not work thus, than plainly to set-down and say, Thus he works. It is
enough for us to know that as God is a friend, so the Devil is an enemy; as God
inspires good thoughts, so the Devil inspireth evil; that he can both smite the
body, and wound the soul; that he has (...), as Basil speaks, diverse and
various operations, and can alter with the occasion; that he knows in what
breast to kindle Lust, into what heart to pour the venom of Envy, whom to
cast-down with Sorrow, and whom to deceive with Joy; that his snares are (...),
of many shapes and forms, which he uses to draw-on that sin to which he sees
man (...), most inclinable and prone; and gives every man poison in that which
he best loves, as Agrippina did to Claudius her husband in Mushromes.

Now to proceed; The Reasons why the Devil thus greedily thirsts after the
ruin and destruction of Mankind, are derived from his Hatred to God and his
Envy to Man. His first wish, which threw him down from heaven, was, To be a
God; and being fallen, he wished in the next place that there should be no God
at all, willing to abolish that Majesty which he could not attain. Odium timor
spirat, says Tertullian, Hatred is the very breath of Fear. We never begin to
hate God till we have committed something for which we have reason to fear him.
And the Devil being now in chains of everlasting darkness; does hate that Light
which he cannot see. And because God himself is at that infinite distance from
him that his Malice cannot reach him, he is at enmity with whatsoever has
being and essence and conservation from God, or is answerable and agreeable to
his will; but especially with Man, because God has past a gracious decree to
save him, and put him in a fair possibility of the inheri^^nce of that heaven
from whence he was thrown down. He manifests his h^^^ed to God in hating his
Image, which he does labor to deface, now blurring it with Luxury, anon with
Pride, and every day bespotting it with the world, striving to destroy that
new creature which Christ has purchased with his blood; just as some Traitors
have used to stab their Prince in his picture; or as the poor man in
Quintilian, who not able to wreak his anger on the person of his rich and
powerful enemy did solace himself in whipping his statue. And as the Devils
Hatred to God, so his Envy to Man enrageth him. For through envy of the Devil
came sin into the world. It is Bernards opinion that Man was created to supply
the defect of Angels in heaven, and to repair that breach which their fall had
made in the celestial Jerusalem. But most probable, nay without question it is,
that the Devil with his hellish troop are therefore so fiery and hot against
us, because they see and are verily persuaded, that those men whom they cannot
withdraw from obedience to God, shall by the power of Christ be raised to that
height of glory from which he and his Angels were cast-down, and shall in a
manner supply their place in heaven, whilst they lay bound in chains of
everlasting darkness. And therefore though he gave Man a fall in Paradise, yet
he still envieth his hope, as Timagenes was grieved when he saw Rome on fire,
because he knew it would be built-up fairer than it was before it was burnt.
Quoniam emulari non licet, nunc invidet, as he speaks in Plautus; Because he
cannot emulate us in our rise, he envies us; and that happiness which he cannot
make the object of his Hope, he makes the object of his Malice: as they who are
tumbled from some high place, catch at all they meet by the way, not for help,
but to pull it after them. For that is true which the Orator has observed,
Naturali quodam deploratae mentis affectu monentibus gratissimum est commori,
It is incident to men of deplored and desperate minds, if they see they must
perish, to desire to fall with company. This makes the Devil so raging an
enemy, and is not more his sin than his punishment: Invidia enim magis
ac^^nditur quam Gehenna, says Cyprian; For he is more tormented with this envy
than with the fire of Hell. For Envy and Malice, though their eye be outward,
yet their sting is inward. And as it was said of Tarquine in Livy, That it was
no wonder, si qualis in cives, qualis in socios, talis in ultimum in liberos
esset: In seipsum postremo saeviturum, si alia desint, that that cruelty he
showed to his citizens, and to his allies and confederates, he did at last
exercise upon his own children: For where matter should be wanting for his
Malice to work upon, he would be cruel to himself. So though the Malice of the
Devil sets it self against God first, and then against his creature, though
he wish there were no God, and would destroy Mankind; though his Malice walk
along with him, and compass the whole earth, yet it rests in himself, and is
a great part of that torment which he endures. St. Jude v. 6. tells us that
the Angels which kept not their first estate, but left their own habitation,
were reserved in everlasting chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the
great day. Which Angels are no other than those which are afterward called the
devil and his Angels: Who, though they have a Kind of principality of power in
the air, and do abide there (for so we must understand those celestial high
places) yet Ephesians. 6.
notwithstanding are reserved under darkness, if we compare it with that light
from which they are fallen. And although they run to and from in this inferior
and sublunary world, yet they may be said to be reserved in chains, because
they can never be admitted to that highest heaven from whence they were driven.
St. Bernard conceives that the Devil hangs in the air, and to his grief and
torture observes the Angels descending and ascending by him, and seeing what
gifts descend from above from the Father of lights on ^^e children of men, and
what incense smoaks upwards, what prayers every day beat at the gates of
heaven, is torn and tormented with envy and malice, which make him fierce and
cruel against us. For that of the Stoic is most true, Omnis ex infirmitate
feritas est, All malice and cruelty, and all violent proceedings proceed from
want and infirmity, from fear, or some such low passion in us. Non jam Lucifer,
sed Tenebrifer, says Bernard; He is not now a son of light, but of darkness.
The Angels which fell not are loving, ready to minister and do many good
offices to us: but he that is fallen into the lake of Brimstone goes about
seeking to devour us: and quorum obtinere non potest mortes, impetit mores,
says Leo; and if he cannot kill our bodies, he makes it his study to destroy
our souls. Est insita malevolentia quaedam and facultas nocendi istis malis
spiritibus: Gaudent de malo hominum; and de fallacia nostra, si nos
sefellerint, pascuntur, says Augustine; There is a kind of inbred malevolence
and activity in hurting in these evil Spirits. They rejoice when men suffer;
and if they can put a cheat upon us, they are fed as at a feast. From hence
those (...), cogitations of Satan, those treble doors, those inventions and
engines of his, those wiles and crafty enterprises. For ingenium de malitia
sumit, says Tertullian; his malice makes him witty and subtle. For without
Malice his Subtlety were not hurtful, and without Subtlety his Malice would
have no edge. For Malice is an active and consultative thing, busy and
industrious to compass its end. It looks about the object, it searches out
means, it knows both quid faciat, and quando faciat; it knows the thing to be
done, and the opportunity of doing. Daily experience may teach us what mighty
things it brings to pass, and how often it frustrates the greatest providence.
A malicious enemy is the more dangerous, and makes his way with more ease,
because he uses to gild it over and commend it with a show of love, and is
like fire coverd over with ashes, which is not seen till it burns us. The
Devil, like Caligula in the story, could wish that all Mankind had but one
neck, that he might cut it off at a blow. But being not able to destroy all at
once, he steals the victory by degrees, as men covetous of other men's
possessions, and not able to gain them by open violence, are fain to call their
wits to counsel, and forced to use tricks of legerdemain. And these qualities
of the Devil, his Malice, and Envy, and Subtlety, we have plainly expressed in
those names which are given him by the holy Ghost in Scripture; Where he is
styled an Adversary, always resisting the will of the Lord; an Accuser,
leading us to those Sins which will cry aloud against us; a Serpent, because he
is (...), full of turnings and windings, various and manifold in his
operations, and full of deceit; a Lion, because as a hungry Lion he walks up
and down to find out his prey which he may devour, and roars against us, to
fright us from that course of sanctity which leads unto happiness: In a word,
that we may invert St. Paul's words, he is made all unto all, that he may
destroy all. Nomina mill, mill nocendi arts; He has a thousand names, and a
thousand ways to hurt us: and to express these many ways, he has his
diversity of names; and all this for our sakes, that we may make due
preparation against so cunning and potent an enemy; that, though he accuse us,
we may stand upright; though he be an Adversary, he may not prevail; though he
roar like a Lion, he may not be heard; though he flatter as the Serpent, he may
not deceive. But then these are but expressions, and cannot character him out
in his full horror. Semper citra veritatem est similitudo, says Tertullian;
The image and representation always comes short of the truth. The Devil may be
an Adversary, but in the highest degree; an Accuser, but one who is instant and
urgent and will not be answered; like a Serpent, but more crafty than the
Serpent; like a Lion, but more fierce a great deal and devouring than the
beast. In omnibus veritas imaginem antecedit; The Truth is always before and
beyond the image which shows it. All which may teach us to stand upon our
guard, to look about us, as the Father speaks, mill oculis, with a thousand
eyes; to be strong in the faith, that we may contemn this Adversary; to keep
the innocence of the Dove; to shut-up the mouth of this Calumniator; and to
have the wisdom of the Serpent, that we may be wise unto salvation, and defeat
all his plots and enterprises; and to put-on that Christian fortitude and
resolution which may deliver us out of the mouth of this Lion: that though he
be a Serpent, he may but flatter; and though he be a Lion, he may but roar;
that so at last we may triumph over this Evil, this Wicked one, this malicious
Enemy, and tread him under our feet.

We shave shut up and concluded all evil in him who is the Father of Evil. We
have considered him as an Enemy to mankind, and Why he is so. We descend now to
discover some Stratagems of his, which he uses to bring his enterprises to
pass, by which he leads us through the ways of Truth into error, and by Virtue
it self to those vices which will make us like unto him. And here we have a
large field to walk in: And should we follow those who have gone before us in
this way we might run our selves out of breath. Gerson has writ a Tract of
purpose De diversis Diaboli Tentationibus, Of diverse Tentations of the Devil,
by which he instills his poison into our hearts. Many he has numbred-up to our
hands; and he might have brought us twice as many more. We shall make choice of
those which most commonly abuse us, because they are less observable. For what
the Orator speaks of Tempests may be truly said of the Devils Tentations; Saepe
certo aliquo coeli signo; saepe ex improviso, nulla ex certa ratione, obscura
aliqua causa commoventur; Sometimes we have some certain indications of them
from certain signs in the heavens, sometimes they are raised on a sudden from
some obscure and hidden cause, nor can we give any reason of them. So some
tentations are gross and palpable, some more secret and invisible. But as the
Magicians, when they saw the Lice, presently cried out, This is the finger of
God: so when we see the effects of Exodus 8. 19.
these Tentations, that swarm of sins which they produce, we cannot be so blind
as not to discover and confess that the finger, or rather the claw, of the
Devil is in them. For let him put-on what shape he please, let him begin how he
will, (...), says Nazianzene, he always ends in evil. Two evils he strives to
sow in the heart of Man, Error and Sin; and being (...), as Basil calls him,
that great and invisible Sophister of the world, he makes use of those means to
bring them in which are in their own nature preservatives against them, turns
our antidote into poison, and our very light into darkness, and so cunningly
leads us on in the way to destruction as withal to persuade us that we are
making haste to meet with Truth and Happiness. Nor can we think that this
proceeds merely from the corruption of our nature or from some predominant
humor in us, which may sway and bow us down from the check and command of
Reason. For to a reasonable man it is a kind of tentation not to believe that
any should be forced thus far from themselves, as to forget their Reason. But
admiscet se malitiae Angelus, and totius erroris artifex; that evil and
malicious Angel, that forger of all error, joins and mingleth himself with our
temper and inclination. Fallitur, and fallit, and depravatus errorem pravitatis
infundit. His Pride deceived him, and his Malice makes him the father of lies,
and so he transforms himself into an Angel of light, to make us like unto
himself, the children of darkness and error. St. Paul calls these his
tentations (...), Which St. Ambrose interprets ASTUTIAS, deceits; Sedulius,
VERSUTIAS, wiles and shiftings; Tertullian, INJECTIONES, injections, or casting
of snares; and Erasmus, COGITATIONES, crafty thoughts, by which he pretends one
thing, and intends another: as we commonly say of a subtle and deceitful man
that he is full of thoughts, thinking to please, and thinking to hurt; and
studying so to please that he may hurt. You may take St. Paul's instance, 2 Cor.
2.
where the Corinthians, to uphold the severity of their Discipline, had almost
forgot their Christianity, Charity, and Compassion; and to defend one good
duty, had endangered another; and were so severe to the incestuous
excommunicate person that they had almost swallowed him up, the Apostle tells
them that, if they thus proceeded, Satan would gain an advantage over them. For
most plain it was that this was one of his devices. Tertullian will tell us,
Invenit quomodo nos boni sectationibus perdat; and nihil apud eum refert alios
luxuria, alios continentia occidere; The Devil knows how to throw us on the
ground even in our hottest pursuit of that which is good: He destroys some with
luxury and wantonness, others with continence; some with too much remissness
and flackness in discipline, others with too much severity: And when we follow
close and run after one virtue, he so works it many times that we leave another
behind us as saving and necessary as that. Thus does he (...), come about us,
hunt and search-out the occasions and opportunities to draw us to evil from
goodness it self. Omnia obumbrat lenociniis; He shadows over evil with some
colorable good. When he sells his wares and commodities, he does not disclose
what vice and imperfection they have: he does not proclaim, as there was a law
in Rome, Pestilentem domum vendo, I sell an infectious house. He does not let
us know that this our Thrift is Covetousness; this our irregular Zeal, Madness;
this our Assurance, Presumption; but with the beauty of the one covers over the
deformity of the other, and makes Thrift a provocation to covetousness; Zeal,
an abettor and patron of faction; and our duty to make our election sure, a
kind of motive and inducement to persuade us it is so. And this his art and
method is observable both in the errors of our Understanding and in those of
our Will, both in our Doctrine and Conversation. And first, what monstrous
errors have been embraced in the Christian Church? what ground have they got?
how many ages have they passed as current coin, which, if you look nearer upon
them, have no other image nor superscription but his who is the Father of lies?
who is well skilled veritatem veritate concutere, to shake and abolish one
truth with another. I will not urge the proposing doubtful things as certain,
and building up those opinions for articles of Faith which have no basis or
foundation in Scripture. I will not speak of adding to the rule either by way
of gloss or supply. I will not complain with the Father, Late quaeruntur
incarta, latius disputantur obscura, that those things which are uncertain are
with great curiosity searched into, and those which are dark and obscure, for
any light we have past finding out, are the subject of every discourse, and
have set men's pens and tongues a working: Although even this Curiosity is from
the Evil one, which is always as far from Knowledge as it is eager to enquire,
and seeks for that which cannot be sound, and so passes by those certa in
paucis, as Tertullian says, that which lies naked and open in our way; seeks
for many things, and so neglects those few which are necessary. For the Devil
in this is like the Lapwing, which flutters and is most busy and hovers over
that place which is most remote from its nest. He cries, Here is Christ, and,
there is Christ; Here the truth is to be found, and, There it is to be found,
where no sign of footstep, not the least shadow of it appears. I will not
mention these. That which has made Error a God, to reign and rule amongst men,
by the Devils chemistry has been attracted and wrought out of the Truth it
self. That worship is due unto God is not only a fundamental truth in Divinity,
but a principle in Nature: and here it should rest. But by the policy of Satan
it has been drawn to his Saints, to Pictures, to Statues, to the Cross of
Christ, nay, to the very Representation of it: And men have learnt sub nomine
religionis famulari errori, as the Fathers in the third Council of Toledo speak
of the people of Spain, to submit and wait upon Error under the habit of
Religion and the name of Catholic and Orthodox. Again, if we look into the
world, we shall find that nothing deceives men more, nothing does more mischief
amongst men then the thought that those things must needs please God which we
do with a good mind, and with an ardent affection and zeal and love to
Religion. This guilds over Murder and Covertousness and Idolatry and Sedition,
and all those evils which rent and wound the Church of Christ, and many times
pull Commonwealths in pieces. Murder has no voice, Covetousness is no sin,
Faction is zeal for the Lord of Hosts. If we can comfort our selves that we
mean well, and have set up the glory of God in our fancy only as a mark, and
when we cast an eye upon that, with Jehu we drive on furiously. We steal an ox
to make a sacrifice; we grind the face of the poor, that we may afterward
build an Hospital; and are very wicked all the days of our life, that we may
leave some sign of our good meaning when we are dead. And this is but a
sophisme, a cheat put upon us by the Deceiver. For though an evil intention
will make an action evil, yet a good one will not make an evil action good.
(...). Bonum ex causa integra. There must be a concurrence of all requisites to
render an action or a person good, but the absence of any one serves to
denominate them evil. A bad action then and a good intention cannot well be
joined together. And as ill will the Profession of Christ and a profane life;
the Christian and the Knave, sort together; the one commanding as a Law and
prohibition against the other, and the Christian being as a judge to condemn
the Knave: And yet the Devils art it is to make them friends, and bring them
together. Though we do those things which strike at the very life and soul of
Christianity, yet we persuade our selves we are good Christians. Though we
thirst after blood, and suck-in the world; though we cheat our neighbor as
cunningly as the Devil does us; though we breath nothing but revenge, and speak
nothing but swords; though we know no language but that of the Horsleach, Give,
Give; though, as Tertullian spoke of the heathen Gods, there be many honester
men in hell than our selves; yet we are Saints, and we alone. We have made
Grace, not the helper, but the abolisher of Nature, and placed it not above
Reason, but against it; we are so full of Grace that we have lost our Honesty;
our tongues are set on fire by hell; and yet Anathema to that Angel who shall
speak against us. And this is our composition and medley; as if you should bind
a Sermon and a Play-book together.

There is another fallacy of Satan yet, fallacia Divisionis, by which we
divide and separate those things which should be joined together, as Faith and
Good works, Hearing and Doing, Knowledge and Practice. And these two, though
they seem to stand at distance, and be opposite one to the other, yet they
always meet. For he that is ready to join those things which he should
separate and keep asunder, will be as active to separate those things which God
has put together. We are hearers of the word, but hearers only; the only, that
makes a division. We have faith, that we have, by which we are able to remove
mountains, even all our sins, out of our way: but where is that Meekness, that
Humility, that Piety, which should demonstrate our Faith, and conclude that we
are Christians? Certainty of salvation we all challenge, but we give little
diligence to make our election sure. Faith may seem to be as easy a duty as
Hearing, which begets it; and to apply the merits of our Savior and the
promises of the Gospel, as easy as a Thought, the work of the brain and
fancy: for who may not conceive and say to himself that Christ is his God and
his Lord? Even this is one of Satan's tentations, to bring in the Application of
Christ's merits before Repentance from dead works. By this craft and subtilty it
is that we thus hover aloft on the wing of contemplation, that we so lose our
selves in one duty that we do not appear in the other, not descend to work-out
our salvation, and busy our selves in those actions upon the performance of
which the Promises will apply themselves, and Christ present himself unto us in
his full beauty, that we may taste how gracious he is, and with comfort feel
him to be our Lord and our God. And therefore, to resolve this fallacy, we must
be solicitous to preserve these duties in integrita^e tota and solida, solid
and entire. For he that has one without the other has in effect neither.
Valde singula virtus destituitur, si non una alii virtus virtuti suffragetur;
Every virtue is naked and desolate, if it have not the company and aid of all.
What is my Hearing, if I be dead to Good works? What is my Faith, if Malice
make me worse then an Infidel? What is my Assurance, if Unrepentance cancel it?
Therefore those things which God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

I will but mention one Stratagem more, and so conclude. It is the Devils
policy, when he cannot throw us into Hell at once, to bring us on by degrees,
and by lesser sins to make way and passage for those of the greatest magnitude.
This is a fallacy, says Aristotle in his Politics, to think that, if the
particulars be small, the sum will be so: (...), Great is not small, because it
consists of many littles. The Philosopher tells us, Small expenses, if
frequent, overthrow a family. And Demosthenes, in his fourth Philippick, says
that that neglect which endangers a Commonwealth is not seen in particular
actions and miscarriages, but (...), in the conclusion and event at last. Qui
legem in minimis contemserit, quomodo in magnis tenebit? He that contemns the
Law in matters of less, how will he observe it in matters of greater moment and
difficulty? He that cannot check a thought, how will he bridle his tongue? He
that will transgress for a morsel of bread, what a villain would he be to
purchase a Lordship? It will be good wisdom therefore, as we behold the finger
of God and his Omnipotency not only in the heavens, the Sun and the Moon and
the Stars, but in the lesser creatures, in the Emmet, and in the Plants of the
earth, so also to discover the Devils craft and policy not only in Murder and
Adultery, and the like, but in an idle Word and a wandering Thought; (...), to
punish the very beginnings of Sin, and to be afraid of the cloud when it is no
bigger than a man's hand. These are (...), the Devils machinations, his treble
false doors, by which he may slip-out and return again unseen. These are
devises by which that great Architect of fraud and deceit does ensnare our
souls and lead us captive under Sin. These we have made choice of and culled
out of his quiver, not but that he has many more darts, but because these are
they which he casts every day against the professors of Christianity, and which
in these later times have wounded thousands of souls to death. And if we can
take the whole armor of God, and be strong against these, we need not fear his
other artillery. If these snares hold us not, it will be easy to keep our feet
out of the rest.

The Seven and Fourtieth SERMON. PART. VII.
MATTHEW. VI. 13. -- But deliver us from evil.
EVIL our very nature startles at, which is of its self inclinable to that
which is good, and tends to it as to its center and place of rest. Therefore
these two words Evil and Deliver, look mutually one upon the other. The glory
of our Deliverance lays open to the view the terror of Evil, and the smart of
Evil makes Deliverance pleasant and delightful. Malum nihil aliud est quam Boni
interpretatio, says Lactantius; Evil is nothing else but a fair interpretation
and a kind of commentary on that which is Good. The very words speak as much.
For EVIL is a word quod cum ictu audimus, which we hear with a kind of smart;
but DELIVERANCE we hear as good news. The voice of joy and deliverance are
Psalm. 118.
joined together, and are the same. This Petition then for Deliverance is
legatio ad supernum Regem, as the Father speaks, a kind of embassage sent to
the high and mighty King of heaven from weak and frail and impotent Man, who is
to live on the earth as in a strange land, in the midst of many enemies, which
will be as pricks in his eyes and thorns in his sides; who must converse as a
companion with them, and every day meet and cope with that which may every day
overthrow him; to desire aid and succor from Him that is mightier than they,
that he will send-in his auxiliary troops and forces, his Angels, to pitch
their tents round about him, and his Mercies, to compass him in on every side;
that he will abate their forces, and arm him with strength, that he may stand
up against them, and not fall, or, if he fall, he may rise again, and so
through many afflictions, through many temptations, pass to the Land of
Promise, and to that City whose maker and builder is God.

We have spoken at large of Evil, which is the object of our Fear: We pass now
to show you what is meant by Deliverance, which is the object of our Faith. For
this Prayer, or Deprecation, is clamor mentis; the cry of our Mind trembling at
the apprehension of evil; and clamor fidei, the language of our Faith, nothing
wavering, but confident of His power and wisdom to whom we pray for
Deliverance. We look-down upon the evil, and are afraid: we look-up upon God,
and are comforted. The cup of Affliction is bitter; but God can sweeten it, and
make it a cup of Salvation. The Devil is strong; but there is a stronger than
he, who can bind him. And as it was sung to Maximinus the Tyrant, ELEPHAS
GRANDIS EST, ET OCCIDITUR; LEO FORTIS EST, ET OCCIDITUR; The Elephant is a
great beast, yet he is slain; the Lion a stout beast, yet he is slain too. So
be the Evil what it will, God can and will deliver us. And these two, Fear of
the Evil, and Confidence in God, do make it orationem alatam, add wings to our
prayer: and by it we place our selves in the presence, nay under the wing of
God, and fly from the evil to come. Every prayer is so, ascensus mentis ad
Deum, an ascent of the mind unto God, to contemplate his Majesty and those
glorious attributes which he is; His Wisdom, which runs swiftly throughout
the earth, and sees things that are not as if they were, beholds Evils present,
and in their approach; sees not only in longum, afar off, but in finem, to the
very end of every action, of every intent; and at once considers not only the
parts, but the whole course of our life: His Power, to which nothing is
difficult, by which he does what he will in heaven and in earth; which can
raise the poor out of the dust, and make the dunghill better than a throne: and
His Mercy, which is over all his works, but especially over Man the
Masterpiece of his works, ready at all times to shelter him when he complains.
In this Petition we make an acknowledgment of these three Divine Attributes
especially; We profess that we are assured God sees all our paths; such is his
Wisdom: that he orders all our goings; such is his power: and that he will
deliver us from our cruel enemy; such is his infinite Mercy. We shall pass then
by these steps and degrees: We will show 1. What it is to be delivered from
evil; 2. That it is the work of God alone; and 3. That being delivered we must
offer-up the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving JOVI LIBERATORI, to God our
Deliverer, and give all the glory of the victory to him alone.

When we hear of Deliverance from evil, we may conceive perhaps such a
Deliverance as may set us at such a distance from it that it may not come near
us. And of such a torpid and tender constitution many of us are that we wish it
were so. (...), We would neither have it rain upon us, nor would we feel the
heat of the Sun. To struggle with Affliction, and to stand the snock of a
Temptation is a thing tedious and irksome to our nature. NE NOCEAT, That it may
not hurt us, is not enough; NE TANGAT is our prayer, we desire it shall not
touch us. What Antony imputed to Augustus may pass as a just censure upon us in
this our warfare, Rectis oculis ne aspicere potuisse rectam aciem: We cannot
look upon these armies of sorrows and temptations with a steadfast and settled
eye. When they appear before us in their full show and march, we are ready to
hide our selves; as it was said of him. We only look up unto heaven, vota solum
Diis fundentes, pouring forth our fears and desires before God; praying not for
victory, but for the removal of these sad spectacles; not to be delivered in
battle, but not to fight. The reason of this is from hence, That we do judicium
tradere affectibus, submit our judgments to our Affections, nay to our Sense,
so that the same horror which the Sense apprehends affects the Rational part,
and a stripe on the Body leaves a mark on the Understanding. We are ignorant
of the nature and quality, or rather of the operation and end of these things
which we call evil; we make not a true and just estimate of them; but, like bad
artificers, we look upon the matter so much that we quite forget what it may
make. To us a knotty piece of wood is so, and no more; a viper is a viper; and
the Devil a Serpent and a Lion, and no more: But a skilful artificer out of
this piece of wood will make a God; the Apothecary can find treacle in this
viper: And if we stand upon our guard, the Devil, says Chrysostom, would be
evil to himself, and not to us. But this is not the true meaning. To be
delivered from evils, is not so to be delivered as by a kind of privilege to
be quite exempt from the least touch of them. This were too high a pitch for
our mortal nature to reach unto. This were not to be delivered, but to be as
God. To be delivered here supposes a possibility, nay a necessity of
sufferance. For necesse est ut veniant, it is necessary, that some of these
evils should befall us, or else we cannot properly be said to be delivered from
evil. Huic nimis boni est cui nihil est mali; He has too much good who was
never acquainted with evil. Indeed Tertullian renders it, EVEHE NOS A MALO,
Lift and carry us up out of the sight of evil; But then he seems in the word
evil to allude to a snare: And then it is no more then this, Lift us aloft
above evil, that it prove not a snare unto us: If we be poor and miserable, let
not our poverty or misery ensnare us. In Acts 2. 24. Christ is said to have
loosed the sorrows of hell: And St. Augustine gives this gloss, Non illos
quibus nexus est, sed ne necteretur; Not those sorrows wherewith he was bound,
but that he might not be bound at all with them. But such a Deliverance as
this, from all kind of evil, cannot be looked for on earth. For Man is born to
labor and sorrow as the sparks fly upwards, says Eliphas. And these may seem
to proceed from his Job 5. 7.
very nature, as the Sparks do from Fire. Now as soon as any Evils seize on us,
we are in chains, and as willing to shake them off as any prisoner his gieves.
Here is the difference: No prisoner can be said to be at liberty till his
fetters be off; but we may be delivered when these evils hang on us, and these
chains be made ornaments of Grace. The Civilians will tell us, Auxilium venit
cum cessat periculum, that we may then be said to have received aid, when the
danger is past: So may we be said to have deliverance, when the noxious quality
of the evil is spent; when God has placed us over it, as he did Moses over
Pharaoh, to rule and govern it; given us a divine power over it, that though it
rise up against us again and again, and will not let us go, yet we shall at
last overthrow it. So then we shall lie-down in sorrow and misery, as Christ
did in his grave; and yet, as he was free amongst the dead; though dead yet to
rise again, and triumph over Death; so shall we be free even in this our
bondage; as weak, and yet strong; as dying, and behold we live; as sorrowful,
yet always rejoicing; as chastized, and yet not killed. And as He by dying
overcame Death, so we by suffering evil shall gain a conquest over Evil; that
we may now rejoice and sing, Where is thy sting? The sting of these sensible
Evils is Sin; But thanks be to God, who has given us the victory through Jesus
Christ our Lord. And thus are we delivered from Evil, NE NOCEAT, that it do not
hurt us. But there is a further Deliverance, UT PROSIT, that it may help us,
that out of this Eater may come meat, even sweeter than honey or the honeycomb.
Indeed these two are never asunder: If it do not hurt us, it will help us: If
it do not weary our Patience, it confirms it: If our Faith fall not, it
strengthens it. There is no medium here; but this operation or that it will
have; either it will make us better, or it will make us worse. In a word; Every
Evil that befalls us is either our physic or our poison; either the savor of
life unto life, or the savor of death unto death. Now God is said to deliver
us from evil when he drives it home to that end which he intends, when he deads
that operation which the Devil has put in it, and makes it workon in a
contrary course. For as it is the work of the Devil to raise evil out of good,
so is it the very nature and property of God to force good out of evil; nay,
many times out of Sin it self. The Devil thrusts hard against us that we may
fall: not a dart he throws but with a full intent to wound us unto death: But
God shortens his strength in the way, that many times it falls short, and
reaches not home; or if it do reach home and stick in our sides, our faith
shall quench it; and the wound he gives us shall cure us, and make us more
healthful. He makes Affliction more bitter than it is, that we may murmr and
complain, and run from our station; and he makes Riches and Pleasures far more
sweet than they are, that we may taste them often, and surfeit on them, and for
love of them loath the water of life: But God changes the complexion of Evil;
and, though it be gall in the mouth, he makes it become a cordial in the
stomach; that so we may say with David, It is good for me that I have been
afflicted. And he puts gall and wormwood on Pleasure, that we may seek it where
it is, in his Law and Testimonies; that neither Sorrow dismay, nor Pleasure
deceive us. We may truly say, The very finger of God is here. For it is the
work of God to create Good out of Evil, and Light out of Darkness, which are
heterogeneous and of a quite contrary nature. For, as the Apostle tells us that
every creature of God is good, being sanctified by the word of God, so when God
speaks the word, even the worst Evil is Good, and not to be refused, because by
this word it is sanctified, and set apart and consecrated as a holy thing to
holy uses. The word of God is as the words of consecration: And when he speaks
the word, then the things of this world receive another nature and new names,
and have their denomination not from what they appear, but from what they do;
not from their smart, but from their end. Then that which I call Poverty shall
make me rich, and that which I esteem Disgrace shall style me honorable. Then
the reproach of Christ is greater riches than all the treasures of Egypt. Then
this Affliction, this light and momentany affliction shall bring with it an
eternal weight of glory. And therefore we may behold the blessed Saints of God
triumphing in their misery, and counting those blows which the wicked roar
under as favors and expressions of Gods love. John and Peter esteemed it an
honor and high preferment, and rejoiced as they who are raised from the
dunghill to the throne, that they were thought worthy to suffer shame. And so
does Paul: For after he had Act. 5. 41.
besought the Lord thrice to be freed from that buffeting of Satan, and had 2
Cor. 12.
recoverd that answer, My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is
perfected, is made open and manifest, in weakness, he presently breaksforth
into these high triumphant expressions, Most gladly will I glory in my
infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me; So rest upon me that no
evil may rest upon me to hurt me, that I may have a feeling and a comfortable
experimental knowledge of it. For this I take pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake:
for when I am weak, then am I strong. My opinion is alterd, my thoughts are not
the same, my judgment is diverse from what it was. That which was terrible to my
Sense is pleasing to my Reason. That which was Persecution is a Blessing. That
which was a Serpent is a Rod, to work wonders and forward my deliverance. Nova
rerum facies; There appears a new face and shape of things, as there does to a
man who is removed out of a dungeon into the light. And as Plato tells us that
when the Soul is delivered from the Body (for we may call even Death it self a
deliverance) it does find a strange alteration, and things in the next world
diverse from what they were in this; so when the Soul is delivered from Sin,
every thing appears to us in another shape; Pleasure without its paint, and
Sorrow without its smart. The Devil is not an Angel of light, but a Devil, a
Lion, a Serpent, a Destroyer, in what shape soever he puts-on. Oppidum mihi
carcer, and solitudo paradisus, says St. Hierom; A City is a prison, and the
Wilderness a paradise. The waters of Affliction break-in; but the blood of
Christ is mingled with them: Here is the gall of bitterness, but the power of
Christ works with it, and it is sweeter than honey or the honycomb. For this
cause I am well pleased in infirmities; I am, says St. Paul, so far from
desiring to be freed from them, that I take Christ's word as a kiss, and think
it best with me when it is worst. Let him handle me how he will, so he fling me
not out of his hands. For if I be in his hands, though the World frown, and the
Devil rage, yet his hand will be exalted, and his mighty power will be eminent
in my weakness. If God be with us, no Evil can be against us. Therefore the
Apostle calls Affliction a gift: To you, says he, it is given not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his Phil. 1. 29.
sake; not forced upon you as a punishment, but vouchsafed you as a gift. We
mistake when we call it evil. It is a donative and a largess from a royal
Prince to his Soldiers who have stood it out manfully, and quit themselves
well in the day of battle. When men have been careful in their ways, and have
been upright and sincere toward God in all their conversation, then God does
grace and honor them by making them champions for his truth, and putting them
upon the brunt. He does not lend or sell them to calamities, but appoints it to
them as an office, as a high place of dignity, as a Captains place, a Witnesses
place, a Helpers place. And how great an honor is it to fight and die for the
Truth? How great an honor is it to be a Witness for God, and to help the Lord?
First God crowns us with his grace and favor; and then by the Grace of God
we are what we are, holy and just and innocent before him: and then he crowns
our Innocence with another crown, the crown of Martyrdom. -- Quarta perennis
erit. And at last he crowns us with that everlasting crown of Glory. This is
truly to be delivered from all evil, to be delivered that it may not hurt us,
and to be delivered that it may help us. But we have run too long in
generalities; we must be more particular. For I fear we do not thus understand
it, nor pray to be delivered in this manner; or, if we do, quod voto volumus,
affectu nolumus, our affections do not follow our prayers. When we think of
Smart and Sorrow, we are all for Gods Preventing grace, to step in between us
and the Evil, that it come not near us; not for his Assisting grace, by which
we may change its nature, and make it good unto us: for his Effective
providence, which may remove it out of sight; not for his Permissive, by which
he suffers it to approach near unto us, to set upon us, and fight against us,
and put us to the trial of our strength: But, beloved, we must join them both
together, or else we do not put up our petitions aright. We must desire Health
for it self, but be content with Physic for Healths sake. We must look upon
Evil, and present it before our eyes as our Savior in that fearful hour did
Gods Wrath toward mankind not yet appeased, and Death in its full strength,
and Hell not yet mastered by any; and then, on the other side, a World to be
saved, and a Conquest to be gotten; troubled at the one, and yet upon the sight
of the other concluding, Not my will, but thine be done: And though the powers
of our soul be shaken at the sight of these dreadful objects, yet submit we our
Desires and Fears to Gods most holy Will; that, as Christ, so we may have some
Angel, some message of joy, to comfort us in this our Agony.

But to descend to particulars; First, when we pray to be delivered from evil,
we acknowledge that God has jus pleni dominii, such a full power over us, that
he may, if he please, without any injustice deliver us up unto Satan, as he did
Job, to be smitten from the sole of the foot unto the crown; that he may
withdraw his blessings, and make us smart under the cross. Peradventure we
cannot see any thing in our selves to raise this storm. For Affliction is not
always poena criminis, a punishment for sin, but sometimes examen virtutis, a
trial of our virtue and patience. I must not take every Calamity that comes
toward me as a Sergeant to arrest me, or as an Executioner to torment me; but
sometimes as a Schoolmaster to teach me, as a Friend to admonish me; as an
Adversary indeed, but sent only to me to try my skill. Therefore, as St.
Augustine tells us, that we do not pray NE TENTEMUR, That we may not be
tempted, but NE INDUCAMUR, that we be not led into tentation, so led that we be
shut up in it, and swallowed up in victory; so neither do we pray that no evil
may befall us, but that nothing may befall us which may make us evil; which
being evil to our Sense, may be evil to our Souls; that God would deliver us
from them that they prove not unto us occasions of our destruction. We are all
to pray to God that he would take from us the occasion of Sin, whether it be
convenient or repugnant to our nature and constitution, whether it be that
which our Sense esteems good or evil. For the Devil lurketh in both; and he
works upon us according to our tempers and complexions. Some he overthrows with
Sickness, others with Health; some with Liberty, others with Imprisonment; some
with Honor, others with Disgrace; some with Pleasure, others with Grief. And
that may be poison to one which is physic to another. That may distract the
Melancholic man which may instruct the Wanton; that Music may bring an evil
spirit on the one, which may make it depart from the other. He that is the
worse for Health, may be the better for Sickness. For the Devil makes all of
these occasions of sin, and sends them forth as the Historian says your
Mariners do their Scaphae or ship-boats, to view the strength of the enemy, or
as Moses did the Spies into the land of Canaan; and where he finds us weakest,
there he goes-up at once to possess and overcome it. In us are the seeds of
Good and Evil: and he strives to choke-up the one, that they shoot not up into
the blade and ear; and he waters the other with these occasions; that they may
grow-up and multiply. He presents sad and loathsome objects to the Melancholic,
to make him mad; and every day he renews his pleasures to the Wanton, to make
him licentious. Miserable men that we are! who shall deliver us from this body
of death? Certainly the best means of deliverance is to be restrained from that
which will hurt us, to be placed in such a station and state of life as is best
for us, to have those objects presented oftnest unto our eyes which are
contrary not so much to our disease as to the cause of it. That the Wanton may
be delivered, he must have his Eye put-out: And to scatter that darkness which
has clouded the Melancholic person, there must be light. The Licentious
person must be put in chains, and the Covetous person must be robbed of his
wealth. Turn away my eyes, says the Prophet Psalm. 119. 37.
David, that they behold not vanity. And why from beholding it? Does the very
sight of Vanity make us guilty of it? Or am I strait an adulterer but for a
sight of a strumpet? or an Achan, if I but see a wedge of Gold? Not so; but yet
turn away mine eyes, for Vanity may pass from the Eye into the Heart: I may
look, and like, and at last be in love with Vanity. For the Eye is as a
burning-glass: and if you hold it stedy betwixt the splendour of Beauty, or any
other shining temptation, and the combustible matter of your Heart, the rays
will unite and grow strong, and a fire will be struck into your soul which will
not so easily be quenched as it might have been avoided. The same operation has
every occasion to that Sense it works upon. An evil Word is first heard, and
then clothed, and warmed in our thoughts, and then it spreads its poison, and
corrupts our manners. The lip of the Harlot pleases at first, but being tasted
bites like a cockatrice. Nay, further yet, the frequent presentment of objects
may work upon those natures which are not as yet inclinable to them. Tully
tells us that the many spectacles of cruelty which every day showed themselves
did work upon the dispositions of the meekest men, and made them cruel. So
increase of Riches may make a prodigal man covetous. Too much Sorrow may
distract a Philosopher. The sight of Pleasure may corrupt a Saint. Liberty may
undo us, and a power to do what we list may make us do what otherwise we had
never thought on. When Locusta at the command of Nero had tempered poison, and
it had not wrought so suddenly as he expected upon Britannicus, the Emperor
beat her with his own hand. And when she told him it was her art to conceal it,
and take off the envy from the fact, he scornfully replies, SANE LEGEM JULIAM
TIMEO; What do you think I am afraid of the Julian Law against murderers?
Certainly Nero had not been such a miscreant had he feared that Law, and would
have been a better Subject than he was a King. How happy had it been for the
rich man in the Gospel had he been a beggar! How many might have been beholding
to a Fever, to Poverty, to Disgrace, who lost themselves in their health, in
plenty, in honor? Therefore St. Augustine commends that saying of Tully
concerning Cinna, O miserum, cui peccare licebat! Unhappy man, who had a
protection from punishment, and a license to do what he list! Here then there
is need of Gods Restraining Grace: and we have reason to pray that God would
remove from us whatsoever may prove an occasion of evil, whether it flatter in
a pleasant, or threaten in a dreadful object.

But in the next place, because we are Men, not Angels, and converse on earth,
where is officina tentationum, a shop where the Devil forgeth his terrors and
his allurements, his fearful and his pleasing tentations, we send out prayers
as in an humble embassage to crave Gods aid and auxiliary forces. For as God
has his army to fight against his enemies, his Locust, his Caterpillar, and
his Palmer-worme, so has he his army to defend those Joel 2.
who are under his protection, his Angels and Archangels, who are all
ministering spirits sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of
salvation. Hebr. 1. 14.
Nor can we think but that this army is stronger than all the troops of the
Prince of darkness, and that God by these is able to curb and restrain the
violence and fury of Satan. Nor could we hope to resist our spiritual Enemy
sine naturae potioris auxilio, but by the aid and assistance of those creatures
which are of a more excellent being. Therefore Justin Martyr tells us that God
has given the Angels (...), a care and providence over us. Tertullian, that
they do universam paraturam hominis modulari, elegantly and aptly and
harmoniously order and govern the whole course of our life. And no question,
though we perceive it not, they do many good offices for mankind, they rowse up
the Melancholic, comfort the Poor, chide the Wanton, moderate the Chollerick.
They are very ready to defend us there where we are the weakest, and to dull
the force of every dart which is thrown at us. We will not now question,
Whether every man has his Angel-keeper: Which Basil so often, and other of the
Fathers affirm; or, Whether children in age have their tutelary Angels, which
our Savior seems to intimate; or children in understanding, men of weaker
capacities, in this (...), this doubtful and uncertain combat, where there is
so little light and so much danger, have their Angels to defend them from the
sleights and enterprises of Satan; or, How the blessed Angels minister for us:
We are sure they pitch their tents about us, and do many offices for us, though
we perceive it not. We have an author who writes of the Meteors; it is Garcaeus
I mean; who was of opinion that whereas many times before great tempests there
is wont to be heard in the air above us a great noise and rushing, the cause of
this was the bandying of good and evil angels, the one striving to annoy us
with tempests, the other to preserve us from danger. The truth of this I know
not. But as about Moses 's body, so about every faithful person, these do
contend, the one to hazard, the other to deliver. Therefore we may well pray
that, as the Devil inspires us with evil thoughts, so the good Angels may
inspire us with good; and that if Hell open her mouth to devour us, Heaven
would open its gate that from thence there may descend the influence of Grace
to save us. And nemo officiosior Deo, there is none more officious than God;
Who is not afar off from our tears, but listens when we call, is with us in all
our ways, waits on us, ponders our steps and our goings, and when we are ready
to fall, nay, inter pontem and fontem, in our fall, is ready to help and save
us. And officiocissima res est gratia, his Grace is the most diligent and
officious thing in the world, quasi in nostram jurata salutem, as if it were
our sworn friend, and were bound by solemn oath to attend and guard us. When
does the Devil roar, and we hear not a kind of watchword within us, NO LITE
TIMERE, Fear it not; all this is but noise? And when does he flatter, and we
hear not a voice behind us, NO LITE PRAESUMERE, Be not too bold; it is the
Devil, it is thy utter Enemy? And in all time of tribulation, in all time of
our wealth this Grace is sufficient for us.

But further yet, in the last place, we beg Gods immediate Assistance, his
Efficacious and Saving Grace, that he will not only send his Angels, but make
us Angels to our selves. For no man can be delivered from evil, nisi in quantum
angelus esse coepit, but so far forth as he is become an Angel, yea, nisi in
quantum Deus esse coepit, but so far forth as he is become a God, partaker,
says St. Peter, of the divine nature, and endued with wisdom from above.
Therefore we must pray with Solomon for an understanding heart, for the spirit
of wisdom and the spirit of counsel, for the assistance of Gods holy Spirit,
which is Christ's Vicar here on earth; for that (...), spiritual wisdom, which
may make us wise unto salvation; that we may have eyesight and foresight and
oversight, that we may see and foresee and over-see that evil which is near
at hand and about us in all our paths; that we be not (...), as St. Peter
speaks, purblind, stricken with gross darkness, like the Sodomites, to stumble
at the threshold, nay, in montes impingere, as St. Augustine speaks, run upon
evils never so palpable, visible, mountainous evils, and see them not; enter
the gates of our enemies as friends, and think our selves at Dothan when we are
in the midst of Samaria. We read that the men of the first age knew not what
Death meant, or what it was to dye; but fell to the ground as men ly-down upon
their beds when they are weary, or rather fell to the ground like Beasts, not
thinking of Death, or what might follow. And indeed the reason why we fall so
often into Evil, is because we see it not, know not what it is, not what it
means, as if to sin were nothing else but to lie down and rest, nothing else
but to satisfy the Sense and to please the Appetite, as if Sin were as natural
as to eat. Therefore we pray, Lord, open our eyes, that we may see it, and so
fly away and escape. And as we pray for Sight, so we do for Foresight. For
(...), says Clemens Alexandrinus; The Understanding is the Eye and the Far;
the Eye, to see afar off; and the Ear, to listen, and give notice of danger yet
at some distance; to know the signs of Sin, as we do of the heavens; to say,
This Bread may ^e gravel, this Beauty deceitful, and this Wine a mocker; This
rage of Satan may praise the Lord, and this his fawning may make me dishonor
him; This his war may work my peace, and his truce may be but a borrowed space
of time to undermine me. Magna tentatio est tentatione carere; It may be a
great tentation to be without one, and a great evil, not sometimes to taste of
evil. (...), Understanding and a good mind and much forecast lead us to a
paradise of bliss. Scelera consilia non habent: It is easy to rush upon evil,
but we cannot avoid it without forecast and counsel. And therefore, in the
third place, we desire not only an Eye which may see and foresee, but (...), as
Basil speaks, an episcopal, an overseeing Eye, an Eye watchful and careful to
keep evil at a distance, or else to order and master it, to summon a Synod in
our soul, to raise up all the forces and faculties we have to make canons and
constitutions against it, and to say unto it as God does to the Sea, Thus far
shall thou go, and no further: to say unto Poverty coming toward us like an
armed man; It may strip us naked, but it shall not make us desolate; It may
thrust us into prison, but it shall not shut us in hell: It may drive us about
the world, but it shall not banish us from God: This Beauty which flourishes
in my eye, shall wither in my heart, and for flattering my Sense shall be
disgraced by my Reason. These Riches shall buy me but food and raiment: They
shall not be employed by my Fancy to attend upon Gluttony or Wantonness or
Revenge. Nor will I lay them out upon that purchase whose appurtenance is
Damnation. And this is our humane Providence, which in some degree is
proportioned to the Providence of God; Which consists of these two parts, his
Wisdom, and his Power. His Wisdom runs very swiftly through the world, and
sees what is to be done; and his Power at his word is ready to do it. Thus is
our spiritual Providence made up of these two, Wisdom to see and foresee evil,
and a firm resolution to avoid it. If you ask me, What is the light of the
body? It is the Eye. What is the Eye of the Soul? It is this Wisdom. And if you
ask me, Wherein our great strength lies; I cannot shape you a fairer answer
then to tell you, In Resolution. Quicquid volui, illico potui; What I will do,
what I resolve to do, is done already. These two, our Wisdom to discern, and
our Resolution to choose or reject, make us wise as Serpents, and bold as Lions;
as Serpents, against the old Serpent the Devil; and as Lions, against that
roaring Lion that seeks to devour us. By our Wisdom we defeat his craft; by our
Resolution we abate his strength. And greater is he that is in us then he that
is in the world. But now because our Eyesight is dim, and our Foresight not
great, and our Oversight slender and imperfect, and all our strength but
Resolution, and our Resolutions many times but faint, we look-up unto him who
dwells with Wisdom, who is Wisdom it self, and knows all things; and to
that God of Hosts who does whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth; who
tells the number of the stars, and calls them all by their names; who
tells the number of our hairs, so that not one of them can fall without his
will; who tells the number of our tears, and lets not one fall beside his
bottle; who calls things that are not as if they were; who when there is
plenty, bringeth-in a famine, and when famine has broken the staff of bread,
as he goes drops fatness; who sees every thing in its causes, operations,
effects, ends, what it is, what it may be, what it does, what it may do; the
works of all flesh, says the Son of Sirach, the intents of all men, the
thoughts of all hearts, the motions and inclinations of all creatures, nay,
that which we call Chance and Fortune, is before him. He can deliver us with
means, and he can deliver us without means. Our trust only is in him. For
without him alas our Knowledge is full of ignorance. We cannot tell what will
be the next day, the next hour, the next moment. We know not how to propose any
thing to our selves, and when we have proposed it, we are to seek how to
execute it; because there are many impediments, diverse changes and chances of
this mortal life, the knowledge and disposing of which comes not within the
reach of humane Providence. And as men in the bottom of a Well are able to see
no greater space of the heavens then the compass of the well, so neither can we
see more then the bounds which are set us will give leave. The Eye sees to such
a distance, but then it fails: And we see no further then our humane frailty
will permit; we see something near us, something about us, yet many times we
stumble even at noonday at that which was visible enough. I am but Man, not
God, and have not the perfect knowledge of Good and Evil. And my Power is not
great. The largest power that is, is sub regno, under a greater power. For have
I an arm like God? or can I thunder with a voice like him? And then my
Patience, which is the best fense I have against evil, is but froward. For is
my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass? And therefore we
look-up unto the hills, from whence comes our salvation, upon God himself, who
sees all actions, all casualties, all events; to whom things past and things to
come are present, who sees all things ad nudum, as the Schools speak, naked,
as they are; and can set-up this, to pull-down that; cross this intent, that it
never come into action, or cross the intent in the action, by driving it to a
contrary end to that which was proposed: Who, when we offend, can hiss for the
fly, for foreign encumbrances; and when we repent, can make our very enemies
our friends: Who is wonderful in all his works, and whose ways are exalted
above ours as far as the heaven is above the earth. But this does not
sufficiently express it: Isa. 55.
For they are infinitely exalted, farther then the Heaven is above the Earth.
But the Prophet could not better express it then by such a distance then which
we know no greater: That we may not rob God of his honor, nor sacrifice to our
own nets, or clap our hands, and applaud our selves in our imaginations, and
say, Is not this Babel, which I have built? It is my right hand that has done
it. That I was not taken in a snare, it was my Will. That I beat my enemies as
small as the dust before the wind, it was my Valor. That every sensible evil
made me not truly evil, it was my Free Will. This is a greater evil, and more
dangerous then all those which we avoided. This is a glance of the Devils dart
in his flight, to overthrow us with our victory. Therefore as we confess our
selves to be under Gods Dominion, and commit our selves to his Protection, so
must we attribute all JOVI LIBERATORI, to Him who is the great Deliverer from
evil; not give him part, but all; not make him our Partner, but our Lord. Nemo,
says the Father, a Deo se adjuvari vult, sed salvum fieri; We do not desire
help only at Gods hand, but we desire to be saved by him. That which is the
subject of our Prayer must be the burden of our Song. If we pray for Salvation,
we must imitate those who stood before the Throne, who though they had Palms in
their hands in token of victory, yet cried with Rev. 7.
a loud voice, saying, Salvation to our God who sits on the Throne, and to
the Lamb. I have now passed through all the Petitions, and brought you to the
Conclusion of your PATER NOSTER, For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and
the glory for ever. Amen.

But here at present let us conclude, and beseech God graciously to hear us,
that those evils which the craft and subtlety of the Devil or Man works
against us be brought to naught, and by the Providence of his goodness they may
be dispersed; that we his servants being hurt by no persecutions may evermore
give thanks unto him in his holy Church through Jesus Christ our Lord.

The Eight and Fourtieth SERMON.
MATTHEW. VI. 13. For thine is the kingdom, and the power, and the glory for
ever. Amen.
THIS is the Conclusion of the whole matter, even of these six Petitions. In
which we looked 1. upon the principal end of our life and actions, the Glory of
Gods great and glorious Name; 2. upon the secondary and subordinate end, which
is our Salvation, Which we have under God being our King to govern, and our
King to command, and our King to crown us; 3. upon those things which lead unto
both these ends, both to the Hallowing of Gods Name, and the Saving of our
Souls, to wit first, the procurement and use of these means, as principally
Piety, by which we fulfill Gods Will; and secondly, our corporal Sustentation,
by which we are more cheerful and active in the duties of piety; and lastly,
the Removing of those lets and impediments which may keep us from these ends,
to wit, our Sins; Which are either past already, or may be; which we have
already run into, or to which we are obnoxious. For the one we beg Forgiveness,
from the other Protection; that God would remit the one, and not lead us into
tentation, that we may be delivered from the other. And these six make up this
legitimate and ordinary and fundamental Prayer, as Tertullian calls it: Upon
which we must build whatsoever we desire. For whatsoever is not proportioned in
reference to one of these is but the dross of our own invention, but hay and
stubble, fit for the fire. Now as we level our petitions to these ends, so
there must be some forcible motive to raise our hope, and settle and establish
such a confidence as may drive them home, and may feather our Devotion, that it
wax not saint and feeble, and fall to the ground. Therefore to these Petitions
this Clause or Conclusion is added, For thine is the kingdom, and the power,
and the glory for ever. Amen. Amen. As if we should say, We therefore beg these
blessings at thy hands, because thou alone reignest and governest and
dispensest all things according to thy will, and do what thou will in heaven
and in earth: and thou have power to supply us: and from hence all glory shall,
as it ought, return unto thee. This clause indeed is not in the Vulgar edition,
nor in St. Luke in any edition, either Greek, or Latin, or Syriack. And
therefore those of the Church of Rome, attributing more to the Vulgar edition
than to the Greek copies themselves, commonly count it as an addition, and a
Gloss crept into the Text, because it was a custom, especially with the
Greeks, to conclude their Prayers to God with some Doxologie; as also thinking
it very improbable that there should be such a remarkable difference between
the two Evangelists Matthew and Luke. But these probabilities cannot carry it;
because it is as probable that Christ did at two several times deliver this
form of prayer, and that Matthew wrote of one, and Luke of another. Nor does
there any absurdity follow that they vary in this, when whatsoever is contained
in this clause comes not within the compass of the six Petitions, nor pertains
to the substance of this prayer. And, for ought we find, the Greek Fathers
might as well borrow it from the Text as thrust it in. And, if it were added
here, we may suspect it was added also in diverse places of St. Paul, and one of
St. Peter. Sure I am, we find it in all the Greek copies, and in the Syriack,
which otherwise agrees very often with the Vulgar, even there where it differs
from the Greek: Only, in the Greek it is IN SECULA, for ever, and in the
Syriack IN SECULA SECULORUM, for ever and ever: and in the Syriack the word
Amen is not, which the Greek copies have. We may add to this, that the Hebrew
edition of the Gospel of Matthew set out by Munster, and revised by
Quinquarboreus, although it very much accords with the Vulgar, as he tells us
in his Preface, yet retains this Clause. And therefore we must not too rashly
yield and subscribe to the conjecture of the Pontificians, though perhaps it
has some probability to countenance it, but read it as we find it in those
Copies which with joint consent we do allow. For that of St. Hierom also is
true, Periculosae sunt multae quaestiones; and nihil tutius quam tacere; It is
dangerous to multiply questions about that which is so generally received: and
it is safer to be silent then to frame scruples for the unlearned and unstable,
who, if one Text be called into question, will be soon induced to doubt of all.
Especially, since we find it taken-up by the Apostles, and so necessarily
employed in the very essence of Prayer, that if we found it not in terminis, in
the very words, yet we must understand it. And we may truly say, Nihil nobis
magis deest quam de quo contendimus, Nothing is more necessary for us when we
put-up our petitions then that which we so much contend about whether it be or
no. I called it the Conclusion. And indeed, as a Conclusion in an Oration, it
gathers together and presents all those motives and arguments why we should
obtain what we desire: Or indeed rather these Attributes of God are the
Premises, or so many several Reasons, and our Prayer the Conclusion. The
kingdom is the Lords, and therefore shall all nations worship before him, says
Psalm. 22. 28.
David. And Thou savest by thy right hand: therefore show thy wonderful Psalm.
17. 7.
loving kindness. Thou art our King, O God: The Conclusion follows, Send help
unto Jacob. And whatsoever we desire, we desire for his own sake, for his Dan 9.
names sake, for his glories sake. Thus it is when we call upon God; and thus
it is when God calls upon us to call upon him. Thus we conclude; and thus God
teaches us to conclude. Look unto me, and be ye saved: For Isa. 45. 22.
I am a Savior; and there is none besides me: I am God; and there is none
else. And this the particle (...), FOR, does intimate; Which has this force,
that it renders a reason why we put-up our petitions. For although many times,
even in the New Nestament, it is placed only for the elegancy of the speech,
yet it will be better in this place not to recede from the proper signification
of the word, since there can no inconvenience follow. And from thence we may
gather a useful conclusion which would not so naturally follow if we took these
words for a plain and naked Doxologie, which will be better fitted to that
which we receive then that which we expect, and make up a close to a Song of
thanksgiving rather than to a Prayer. We will retain therefore the primary and
native signification of the word; and then we find an excellent reason why we
should fall down at Gods feet to beg so many and so great blessings as are
comprised and comprehended in this absolute form of prayer: 1. Because the
Kingdom is his, and so he has dominion and power over all things: And 2.
because all power is his; and so nothing so hard which he cannot bring to pass:
and therefore, there is good cause not only why we are bold, but why we ought
to seek the supply of all our wants at his hands. For the Pronoun Thine has
the force of an exclusive; Thine is the kingdom, and thine alone: And this
does improve and exalt the reason, because we acknowledge that there is none
besides him, who either de jure or de facto, either ought or can grant us these
things, and give us what we would have. 3. The last motive is the Glory of God:
For even of this there is mention as of a reason of our petitions. For he that
calls upon God honors him; and whatsoever we desire or obtain must end in
his glory. So that the Glory of God may seem to be mentioned here both as a
cause to move us to pray, and as a motive to make God to grant. Take it either
as a plain Doxologie, or as a Conclusion containing these arguments or motives
that we put up our petitions in his Court of Requests, Christ no question did
leave us this lesson, That, when we make our prayer to God, we must not forget
to land and magnify his Name. We shall bound our discourse at this time within
these three considerations: 1. That we stand in need of these helps to devotion
which God is pleased to afford us de proprio, even from his very nature and
essence. 2. That these are (...), the greatest and most proper motives. 3. That
God is glorified in our prayers, and glorified in granting the request of our
lips, that the kingdom and the power and the glory may be his.

The consideration of the Kingdom and Power of God is the nurse of all
Devotion, to foment and cherish it; which would otherwise grow chill and cold,
and dye, and in ipso conatu elabi, be of such lubricity as to slip away from
that which it seems to makes haste to lay hold on. Diffidence is a great enemy
to Prayer, takes off its edge, abates it heat, plucks off its wings, that it
cannot strive forward, and fly to the presence of God. He that doubts and
wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea driven of the wind, and tossed up and down,
from what he desires, to what he fears; James 1. 6.
from his wants, to a desire of a supply; and from a desire of a supply, back
again to his wants; nor can he find rest. He knows not how to pray; He seeks to
God for help, but then doubts of his Providence and Power, and so denies him to
be God; which is to deny his own request. And, as one said of Tully, habet quem
fugiat, quem sequatur non habet. In other things Doubting may be very useful
and advantageous. Recte dubitare viam aperit sapientiae; To be able to propose
our doubt aright is the next way to knowledge. For he that doubts is like a man
who has life in him, though the operation of it be staid and hindered by some
stoppage and obstruction; which being purged away and removed, he is full of
cheerfulness and activity. Or we may say he woes the Truth, and for a while
stands at some distance; but anon, after some attempts and some denyals, meets
and embraces, and grows familiar with her. Therefore Plutarch notes it as a
great sign of towardliness in young Cato, that he doubted of many things, and
of every thing would ask a reason of his Master. And Plato requires of his
ingenuous Scholar that he should be (...), full of doubting and ever asking
questions. But the Philosopher will tell us that every thing is and has its
being for the work it has to do; which is not one and the same in every thing,
but has its diverse and several effects according to the different qualities
of those actions to which it is applied. In one this may be the savor of life
unto life, and in another the savor of death unto death. In the way to
Knowledge it is a key to open a door to let us in; But when we tender our
petitions to God, it is a bar to keep them out. To Doubt and Obtain cannot
consist. Unum arbustum non alit duos erithacos; They are birds too quarrelsome
to live in one bush. If any man lack any thing, let him ask it of God: but let
him ask in faith, nothing wavering, says St. James. For let not him that
doubts think that he shall receive any thing of the Lord. And he gives the
reason: Because such a one is (...), a man of a double mind, halting between
two opinions, inconstant in all his actions; praying to God, but not trusting
in him; breathing-out his petition, O Lord, help, O Lord, consider, and at the
same time exhaling-out a loathsome doubt from his heart whether God can help or
consider: Which mixed and blended together make-up a dangerous contradiction,
whereas God requires Simplicity and Constancy at our hands, which is virtus
sine varietate, a virtue looking always one way; by which the petitioner in
some degree resembles that God to whom he prays, and is made one in himself, as
God is one. Now there may be a double doubting in us, either of the Will of
God, or of his Power. Of his Will; when looking upon our own unworthiness, and
the incomprehensible Purity and Majesty of God, we begin to doubt whether such
a pure God will hear the prayers of such a loathsome creature. Which thought
many times may be nothing else but the issue of our Modesty and Fear of God,
and may well consist with this Confidence, That, if he will, our request is
granted. Or we doubt of Gods Power, whether, if he will, he can help us. Which
we may do, though we acknowledge his Omnipotency, by seeking other means
without him, or such means as he forbids; by going to the witch of Endor, with
Saul; by seeking not to the Lord, but the Physicians, with Asa; or by seeking
to the Gods of Damascus, with Ahaz, who said Because the Gods of the Kings of
Syria help them, 2 Chr. 28. 23.
therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me, by setting-up other
Gods, other helps, and saying, These be our Gods. And this last is of so
malignant an aspect that it makes the heavens of brass, and that God to turn
away his ears who is always ready to hear, and that which we call a prayer to
be registered for a sin. For by this we violate that Majesty before which we
fall down; we mock God, and beseech him to do that which we are not persuaded
he can do. Which is to make him no better than an Idol, which has ears, but
hears not; eyes, but sees not; hands, but can do nothing. And this is not to
pray to God, but to libel him; to make him like unto our selves, that there can
be no trusting in him. So that that of the Historian is here true, Plura
peccamus dum demoremur, quam dum offendimus, Our Prayers are turned into sin;
and we never wrong God more then when we thus worship him. Majestas injurias
gravius intelligit; Kings are never more angry then when their Majesty is
touched: then their wrath is as the roaring of a Lion. Nor do we offend God so
much, when we doubt of his Will as when we distrust his Providence and his
Power, which are the parts of his Royalty. And in this respect it is most true,
Magna est praesumptio, de Deo quam non presumere; It is a great presumption,
not to presume upon his Power, and non putare illum posse quod non putamus, and
not to think he can do what we cannot think. And therefore that our prayers may
ascend to that pitch we level them to, even to the Throne of God: We must
consider him seated there as a King, and as Omnipotent. Which consists not in a
bare apprehension or sense of the mind that there is a Divine Power greater and
mightier than all, nor in those common senses and notions, as Tertullian
calls them; which even the Heathen had. They could say, Deus videt omnia; Deo
me commendo; God sees all things; and I commend my self to his protection.
Nay, the Devils believe, says St. James, and tremble. They have a kind of
belief, and therefore have knowledge. But here is requisite a full consent,
(...), as Clemens Alexandrinus speaks, a settled and full persuasion of
heart, touching the Providence and Power of God. Upon this foundation we may
build and settle our Devotion, and raise it as high as heaven. This makes our
Prayer a Sacrifice: this sets it on fire, that the flame goes upward from off
the altar of our hearts; nay, the Angel of the Lord ascends up with this flame,
and commonly returns back and descends with a message of comfort. And although
there may come upon us a fit of trembling when we look upon our selves, yet if
our prayer be formed according to Gods will, we may draw near unto the throne
of Grace in full assurance of faith that he will hear our prayers, even then
when he grants not our requests; and that he can do more for us than we can
know how to desire. Amongst other properties of Place the Philosopher requires
Immobility: If it be a Place, it must be immovable. For if the body on which
you place your self flit and glide away from under you, you can never well rest
and move upon it. And certainly to go about to rest or settle our confidence on
any other grounds but these, is as if we should attempt (...), to walk on the
air, or tread the waters, or build without foundation. Put not your trust in
Princes, nor in the son of man: for their breath goes from them. There the
ground glideth away from under us. Trust not on your own Wisdom and Power. Your
turning of devices shall be as the potters clay, and shall break and crumble
between your fingers: There it flits away. How can he help who has no power?
how can he save who has no arm or strength? Nay, we can find no stability in
the Angels. They are ministering spirits; and their Elogium is, They do Gods
will. But if he command not, they have no sword to strike, no buckler to
defend. And in Men we find less. Vain is the help of Man. Stas and non stas,
cum in teipso stas. For one man to put confidence in another, is as if one
beggar should ask an alms of another, or one cripple should carry another, or
the blind lead the blind. It is very incident unto men in want not only to
desire help, but to doubt of the means which should help them. A disease rising
from their very want. For it is natural to Desire to beget Fear and Doubting,
whilst the Fancy sets up morinos to fright us. In us there is (...), a
flitting and unsatiable humor. We cannot endure the deferring of our hopes. But
when God answers us not neither by Urim nor by Prophets, brings not in that
aid we beg of him, we presently droop and let go our confidence. And if we
speed not according to our desires, we set-up some golden Calf straight. Nor
can we settle our Devotion till we have built and established our Confidence
upon these two, the Kingdom and the Power of God. These are munimenta humanae
imbecillitatis inexpugnabilia, as Tertullian speaks, impregnable fortresses of
our humane weakness, to keep us from that which we cannot withstand. If God be
with us, who can be against us? What is it we can desire which we may not find
in the Fountain of Goodness? What is there to be done which God cannot do?
There is no word, no thing, which shall be impossible unto him. What thing
soever we would have is but his Word. If he speak the word, it is done. Art
thou in darkness? If he say, Let there be light, there shall be light. Art thou
in poverty? If he say thy poverty shall be riches, it shall be wealth. Are thy
sins more than the hairs of thy head? If he say, Thy sins are forgiven thee,
they are forgiven. Here is the Power of God, no sooner to speak but it is done.
His Power flows from his very Essence; and whatsoever is done in heaven or in
earth, is done by his voice. The voice of the Lord is upon the waters: The
voice of the Lord is powerful: The voice of the Lord breaks the cedars; yea,
the Lord breaks the cedars Psalm. 29.
of Lebanon.

I will not now speak any thing in particular of Gods Providence and Power, by
which he reigns as King, and governs the world and every thing therein, and
does whatsoever he will in heaven and in earth: for of these I have spoken
heretofore at large. We will only at this time, to remove our diffidence and
distrust, dig at the very root and cause of it, and that is no less than a vile
branch of Atheism, by which we doubt of Gods approach, because we cannot
find-out his ways; and rely not upon his Power, because we see not how it
works, but is many times as invisible as himself; because this omnipotent and
wise King never presents himself to the eye of mortal men, nor does so
evidently manifest his power as to leave no place for doubting; because he
suffers fools to ride on horsback, and wisemen to lacquey it by their sides,
because he thunders not upon the wicked, but lets them rain-down hailstones and
coals of fire upon the just. And these are the complaints of weak and ignorant
men, who, though they see miracles every day, will not believe, nor are content
with those evident marks and impressions of Gods Power which are as legible in
his works as if they had been written with the Sunbeams, but must have him in
a manner condescend to be incarnate again, to become like unto themselves, and
perform his actions as a Man. Now to these men, qui contra se ingenio suo
utuntur, who use their wit and reason against themselves, to destroy in
themselves that Confidence without which they are worse than the beasts that
perish, we need say no more than this, That in this dispute they do betray
their ignorance of the nature of Faith, upon which true Religion is builded.
For the force and efficacy of Faith is seen where there be sufficient reasons
to move us to believe, but not such which will leave no room for doubting, if
men of a wicked and stiff-neck do violently oppose the truth. For that is true
Religion which is freely and willingly enterteined by us; not that which is
forced upon us, or extorted from us. Therefore God does not make himself visible
to man: For Majesty is no fit object for a mortal eye. Nor does he always
follow the wicked with his rod, that every man may see him strike; nor fills he
the righteous with good things before the Sun and the people. For thus to take
away all occasion of doubting were in effect to take away Faith it self, quae
non nisi difficultate constat, whose merit it is to believe more then can be
seen or known by evidence of demonstration; and by leaving no place for
Infidelity, leave no matter for our Faith. Since God has taught us more then
the beasts of the field; since that which may be known of God is manifest in
the Creature; since he has made the World a book and each Creature a leaf,
wherein are written the lively characters of a Deity; since he has even shapen
himself unto us as a God of mercy in his manifold blessings; since many times
he comes with a tempest and a fire before him, that we may even see him in that
tempest and that fire; since he has shown himself in those effects of which we
can give no reason, but must cry out, DIGITUS DEI EST HIC, the finger of God is
here; since he has given us so many strange deliverances from sins which we
might have committed, and from punishments which we might have suffered, that
we cannot but say, MANUS DEI EST HIC, the hand of God is here; his right hand,
his powerful hand; since he inspires us with so many good thoughts that enter
into our souls invisibly, insensibly, that we must needs confess, EST DEUS IN
NOBIS, God is even in us; let us not make it a reason to doubt of his Power,
when our Reason is at a stand and cannot resolve every doubt; or conceive he is
not a powerful King, because we do not touch and feel and handle him. He is
near unto us, though we see him not; he is about our paths when we perceive it
not; when we rove about the world, he is our King; and when we are in the dust,
he is as powerful as when he lifts us up into a throne. It concerns not us to
know how his Providence works: It is enough for us to know that he is our
King, and our powerful God. Which, if we weigh it as we should, will work in us
that Assurance which is the stay and prop of our devotions. Here we may rest,
and need seek no further. This knowledge is sufficient for me, when I know not
the manner how he works, to know that he works all in all; and that
wheresoever I am, I am still under the protection of that King who governs the
world (...), by the law of his Providence, and of that God who is omnipotent.
Hence we may conclude with the Prophet, Whatsoever we desire or request, if it
be mavelous in the eyes Zech. 8. 6.
of the people, yet there is no reason it should be mavelous in the eyes of
the Lord of hosts. And if those cursed Heretics which Epiphanius calls the
Satanicans, who were almost the same with the Massalians, were forward to
worship the Devil upon no other motive than this, (...), because they conceived
he was great and powerful; and the Romans did worship their Goddess Febris, ut
minus noceret, because they thought she had power to hurt them; then much
rather let us make our address to the God of heaven, who has the Devil in a
chain, and has beat down his temples, and destroyed his altars, and laid his
honor in the dust; and let us commence our suits unto him who is able to do
exceeding abundantly Ephesians. 3. 20.
above all we can ask or think, and in full assurance present our wants unto
him who is our King and powerful God; that as the kingdom and power is his, so
he may have the glory.

And having thus acknowledged the Kingdom and Power to be his, we cannot but
end in GLORIA ALTISSIMO, Glory be to God on high, and take them all three
together, and make up the-Doxologie: Thus we must conclude. But I told you that
this Conclusion was but the collection of so many reasons or motives to make
Prayer it self a conclusion. The Glory of God is Alpha and Omega, the Beginning
and the End. This is it which makes us cry, ABBA Father. And when He hears us
and grants us our requests, this is the end; this is the first wheel, and this
is the last. So that take the whole subsistence of a Christian, in the state of
Grace, and the state of Glory, and it is but one continued and constant motion
of Glorifying God. GLORIA DEO: Glory, and God, these two, you cannot separate
them, because He is our King and our Lord. If we take Glory to our selves, we
loose it, and our glory is our shame. And this is a lesson which we learn from
God himself, and the first lesson that ever he taught. For no sooner had he
made the Creatures, but he says of them that they were good, that is, he saw
his own glory in them. And if we pray as he commands, our Prayers are his
creatures, and he will say of them that they are good, and behold his glory in
them. For we must not think that all is done in a Gloria Deo; or that there is
(...), a kind of spell in the very words. For what is more easy than a song of
praise? what is sooner said then a Doxologie? If to draw near to God with the
mouth and the lips be to honor him, we are Angels all. No: as St. Paul tells us
that the Woman is the glory of the Man when she is subject to him; so are we
the glory of God, when we are obedient to his will. And if our Prayers and our
Praises flow from a grateful heart, which is truly his, fashioned and prepared
as he would have it, then are they sacrifices of a sweet smelling favor unto
God. Not that from hence there accrues to him any thing by way of access or
addition: For no quire of Angels can improve, no roaring Devil can diminish his
glory. Ille quod est, semper est; and sicut est, ita est; What he is, he
always is; and as he is, so he is, in the midst of the noise of Seraphim and
Cherubim, of Men or Devils: But because it cannot but be well pleasing unto him
to see his creature answer to that pattern which himself has set, to be what
it should be and what he intended. For as every Artificer is delighted in his
work when he sees it finished according to the rule he wrought by, and as we
use to look upon the works of our hands or wits with favor and complacencie,
as we do upon our children when they are like us; so does God look upon his
creature, especially upon Man, when he appears in that shape and form of
obedience which he prescribed, when he is what God would have him be; when he
does not change the glory of God into an image made like unto corruptible man,
and to birds, and four-footed beasts, and creeping things; when he does not
take the member of Christ, and make it the member of an harlot; not prostitute
that Understanding to folly which should know him; nor that Will to vanity,
which should seek him; nor fasten those Affections to the earth, which should
seek the things which are above; when he falls not from his state and
condition, but is holy as God is holy; merciful as he is merciful; perfect, as
he is perfect: Then God does rejoice over him, as over the work of his hands,
as over his image and likeness not corrupted nor defaced: Then is the Man
nothing else but the glory and praise of his Maker: Then the bowing of his Knee
is worship, the lifting up of his hands is prayer, and his prayers and his
praises are music in the ears of God, like unto that which the Angels and
Archangels, the Cherubim and Seraphim do make. And to this end God has done
these great things for us to the praise of his glory, as St. Paul repeats it
again and again; and that we may show forth Ephesians. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 9.
his praises, that the Soul, as Athanasius gives the resemblance, may be as a
skilful Musician, and the Body as a Harp or Lute, which she may tune and touch
till it yield a celestial harmony; that the whole man may be (...), and make up
a GLORIA DEO, in a complete and perfect harmony; that the love of Gods Glory
may be so intensive and hot within us, ut emanet in habitum, and eructet a
conscientia in superficiem, ut and foris inspiciat quasi supellectilem suam;
that the Soul may not be able to contein her self within the compass of the
heart, but evaporate from the mind into the outward gesture, and break forth
out of the conscience into the voice, open her shop and wares, and behold her
own provision and furniture abroad; that so she may make-up that circular
motion which the Father speaks of, first look upon God, then draw back into her
self, then after some reverent pause collect her self, then call all her
faculties together, and at last take-in and command all the members of the
body, and make her Doxologie perfect and complete: This must be our constant
practice here on earth, that our praise may continually ascend for us into
heaven. If we leave-out Gods Glory, we lose the benefit of assurance we might
have of the other two. God will be our King indeed, but not protect us; and we
shall feel his power, but to our destruction. We deceive our selves if we think
there is no Anthem to be sung but in heaven, nor Hallelu-jah to be chanted-out
but by the Angels, or that we cannot glorify God till he has glorified us. It
is indeed the Angels work: But candidati Angelorum nos ediscimus canticum
laudis; when we learn and study this, we stand in competition for an Angels
place. And our Glorifying God here in our earthly members is (...), a prologue
and preface to that which we shall be and act hereafter. It was a fancy which
possessed many of the Heathen, That men after death should much desire and
often handle those things which did most take and affect them in their
lifetime. So Lucian brings in Priams young son in heaven calling for milk and
cheese and such countrycates as he most delighted in on earth. Even now, says
Maximus Tyrius, Aesculapius ministers Physic, Hercules tryes the strength of
his arm, Castor and Pollux are under sail, Minos is on the bench, and Achilles
in arms. And this indeed is but a fancy: for when our breath departs, these
our thoughts perish, and all things shall end with the world, War, and
Navigation, and Physic. Yet it is a fair resemblance of a Christian in this
respect, whose life is Grace, and eternity Glory; Which is nothing else, says
Gerson, but gratia consummata, nullatenus impedita, Grace made perfect and
consummate, finding no opposition, no temptation to fight with. For though
there will be no place for Alms, where there is no poverty; no use of Prayers,
where there is no want; no need of Meekness, where there can be no injury; yet
to Praise and Glorify and Worship God are everlasting offices, to be performed
here by us on earth, and to be continued by us in heaven, when we shall be made
equal to the Angels. This is a duty without which Prayer cannot subsist, but
breaths it self into the air and vanishes, or rather ascends to pull-down a
curse for a blessing. Therefore it is fitted to all sorts of men: As indeed the
best and most excellent parts of Religion are common to all, without exception
of Quality, Age, Time, Place, or Sex, as a Hymn set to every voice. The Jews
were wont to give out the books of holy Scripture to be read respectively to
the abilities of men. Some were permitted to the Vulgar; the rest were
lockt-up, and permitted only to be read by the Learned. This Doxologie admits
no such restraint. Arator ad stivam, The plowman at the plow may sing
Hallelujah as well as the greatest Clerk and profoundest Doctor. Again, when
the Athenians met together in their Senate, it was not lawful for men of all
ages to speak; therefore it was proclaimed by a public crier, (...); Is there
any above fity years of age? let him speak. But here it is, Young men and
maids, old men and children; all must praise the name of the Lord. Young, or
old; it skils not in our sacred Senate and holy Assemblies. Yea, children adhuc
dimidiata verba tentantes, as yet scarsly able to apply their tongue to the
roof of their mouth, must practice this duty. For as earthly Fathers think
loquelam liberorum ipso offensantis linguae fragmine dulciorem, as Minutius
speaks, their little childrens first broken and imperfect prattle pleasantest,
so to our heavenly Father, who opens the mouths of babes and sucklings, it is a
thing very pleasant to hear parvulorum adhuc linguas balbutientes Christo
Hallelujah resonare, as St. Hierom speaks, to hear even children in their
imperfect language sing his praise. Thirdly, amongst the superstitious
ceremonies of the Heathen there were many things which might not be said or
done but in their Temples and at solemn Meetings, and therefore Alcibiades was
called in question at Athens for no less then his life because he did (...),
utter amongst his companions such things as he had seen in their sacred
mysteries falsely so called. But this duty is not restrained to any place. The
Church, or our private house, or whatsoever place else, are all alike. Ecce
Rhodus, ecce saltus. Every place we stand in is holy ground. Again, some
Nations have showed themselves so superstitious that, as if Words were like
Garments, some peculiar to Men, some to Women, they ordained that some things
ought not to be spoken by Men, some by Women. So amongst the Romans it was not
lawful for Men to swear by their Goddess Ceres, nor for Women by their God
Hercules. But as this Doxologie admits of no difference of Place or Person, so
neither of Sex, but is a duty which concerns all Kings of the earth and all
people, young and old, rich and poor. And it is very meet, right, and our
bounden duty, that we should at all times and in all places give thanks unto
thee, O Lord, holy Father, eternal King, almighty and everlasting; that thy
praise should be in our mouth continually, even IN SECULA SECULORUM, for ever
and ever. AMEN. And with this we end and shut-up all our Meditations upon this
excellent Form of Prayer, ascribing to this our King, even to the King of
Kings, God the Father, God the Son, and God the holy Ghost, all honor and
majesty and power and dominion and glory now and for evermore.

Errata of the two Sermons.
PAge 3. l. 3. r. and. l. 9. r. natural obliquity. l. 50. add with Reverence.
p. 4. l. 46. r. when. p. 7. l. 21. r. self-love. p. 15. l. 43. add to. p. 16.
l. 1. r. Rome. l. 2. r. before there was a law to punish paricide. ib. l. 55.
r. which. p. 18. l. 8. r. Then. p. 23. l. 51. r. Give Alms of such things as
you have; and behold all things are clean unto you. p. 25. l. 26. dele again.

FINIS.

