The False-hearted GLOVER; OR Fool and Knave well Fitted.
To the Tune of, Lilli Burlero.
Licensed according to Order.



PRay now attend and listen a while,
to a right new and Iocular Song;
Which I declare, will cause you to smile,
if that I am not much in the wrong:
It is of a bonny Glover,
I, and his Name I tell ye is John;
He Courted young Mary, who was brisk and airy,
but Married at length with Foggy-ars'd Nan.
While he did Court his amorous Love,
what Protestations then did he make!
Dowing his mind should never remove,
no, he could freely Oye for her sake;
Thus alas! she was ^^^^ed,
I, and he proved a perfect Trappan,
When leaving young Mary, who was brisk and airy,
to Marry at length with Foggy-ars'd Nan.
Morning and Night to Mary he would go;
swearing he loved he^ ^^^rer than life;
Thus he the height (...) did show,
as if he meant to (...) his Wife:
Till at length he did (...) her,
like a deceitful false (...) Man;
Yet faith he is fitted, and (...) to be pitty'd,
because he has taken ^oggy-ars'd Nan.
Mary she said, it would be his Lot,
to Marry Nan, in Love to combine;
But he declared an Earthen Piss-pot,
he would despise for Silver more fine:
Thus he often did compare her,
like a deceitful flattering Man;
Good faith he is fitted, and not to be pitty'd,
because he has taken Foggy-ars'd Nan.
Forty good pounds in Silver and Gold,
with his Love Mary he might have had,
Which was a pleasant sight to behold,
was he not then Distracted and Mad?
Thus to leave her for another,
who is in Debt as much as she can;
The Glover is fitted, and not to be pitty'd,
now let him make much of Foggy-ars'd Nan.
Now she has got him fast in a Nooze,
where he till Death a Slave must remain,
He for the world now cannot get loose,
but must endure the torture and pain:
Some says that she will Cornute him,
though he does watch as much as he can:
E'fai^h he is fitted, and not to be pitty'd,
he knows that it is the Humors of Nan.
Upon a day it happened so,
that a right brisk young Gallant was there,
Into the Room Pill-Garlick did go,
but to Affront them he did not dare:
For a while he did stand peeping,
like to a poor disconsolate Man:
E'faith he is fitted, and not to be pitty'd,
as knowing it is the Humors of Nan.
What if we find the Fates have decreed,
that he should be a Cuckold by course;
And Mary she would not do the Deed,
then ^us^y Nan she must upon force,
Give the honest Spark his Fortune,
for she alone is able, and can;
E'faith he is fitted, and not to be pitty'd,
as knowing it is the Humor of Nan.
FINIS.
Printed for P. Brooksby, J.D^^^^^, J. Blare, J. Back,


