THE Irish Hudibras.

LICENSED, May the 25th. 1689. And Entered According to Order.

THE Irish Hudibras, OR Fingallian Prince, Taken from the SIXTH BOOK of
VIRGIL's Aenaeids, AND Adapted to the PRESENT TIMES.

Nimium Vobis Romana Propago. VIRG. LONDON, Printed, and are to be Sold by
Richard Baldwin, near the Black Bull in the Old Bailey, MDCLXXXIX.

TO THE READER.
FOR the better understanding of the English Reader, it will be necessary to
explain some Terms and Notions in the following Poem. And, first, for the Title
Fingallian.

Fingaul, i. e. Finis Galliae, viz. the Confines, Bounds and Limits of the
Gauls in Ireland: It extends from the County of Dublin, and part of Westmeath,
by the Seacoast; and is called the Englist Pale, the Ancient Habitation of the
Gauls. Not Those supposed by Josephus, the Gomerians or Cimbri,* nor Those who
were Repressed by Caius Marius, mentioned by Cicero, and Appian Alexandrinus;
nor Those Gauls, who spoiled Delphos under Brennus. But the Old English, called
Gauls, now Fingallians, to distinguish them from the Native Irish; Fer Gault,
or Sessony, a Gaul or Saxon, being the Name or Character of an Englishman unto
this Day.

This harmless Spot (not Ireland) is Chosen for the Scene of the Comedy, to
avoid a National Reflection. Nor will an ingenious Disposition find any
occasion of Affront; it being not only Encouraged, but carried on by the best
sort of Gentlemen-Natives of the place, when the Foundation of this
Shallow-work was first laid; at whose Houses the Author was often entertained,
to find out their Language, Sports, and Customs.

For Nees, Shela, Father Corin, Macshane, etc. it is but the natural
Transversion of the Latin Aenaeas, Sybilla, Corinaeus, Misaenus, into
Fingallian.

That the young Princes Aenaeas, and Priamides, i. e. Nees, and Bryan oge,
should gabble such downright Fingallian; Shela, and the Father, such tolerable
English, (besides for the Ease of the Reader,) there are other Reasons to be
offered; as, that Shela being a Nun, and Anchyses a Low Country Soldier, had
both their Education at the English Court, which something Refined their
Gibberish; yet not so much, but that there is still a Brogue discernable on
their Tongue; Words and Bulls droping out so naturally, as very often betray
their Country and Extraction. For O Ca-roon, Guddi Dido, and my Gossop
Palinure, they never traveled, and therefore spoke their own Country-Jargon
naturally.

For Nees, it was perfect Pride and Contempt of the English-Nation, that made
him despise the Language; who was a most intolerable Vapor, till the
Bear-skins and Finlanders drove him before Them, and made him skip the Bogs
like a Will in the Wisp. Yet for all this, could they not prevent him from
making his bitter Invectives; who, besides his Brogue, had, like Pliny's Fish,
Teeth in his Tongue; wherever it fell, he bit so hard, there was no Armor
against the Artiliery of his Wit; as you will find him all along, in his
Bogland-Witticisms, and sharp Repartees, alias, Bulls and Blunders.

The Story is That of Aeneas his going down into Purgatory, to see his Father;
where you have a Description of the several Limbo's there, the Friends and
Acquaintance he met with in his Passage; his Complements, and learned
Discourses with his Father, Palinure, Paris, and Dido his old Paragon; How,
while he was Consulting the Oracle, Macshane, his P^per was killed: Where you
have a Description of an Irish-Cabbin, Cry, Wake, Burial, etc. The Ancient
Nobility, Hero's, and Warriers. The Succession of the Kings, even to the Late
Abdication, and the present Accession of His Majesty, King William the Third,
to the Imperial Crown of these Kingdoms. And here it is worth observation, to
see the Coherence of the Story; which is as exact in the Original, as if Virgil
had Calculated it for That Meridian.

In order to this Adventure, he goes first to Cume, where he picks up Shela for
his Guide.

Cumarum illabitur oris. Which is rendered Inche-Chume, or Inche-Colm, St.
Colom's Island, near Lough-Erin; where was a Church erected by St. Patrick,
through which they descended into St. Patrick's Purgatory.

In Purgatorio Divi Patricii multorum hominum annimas ob peccata cruciari
Compertum est, unde quam impius sit eorum error qui Purgatorium negant hoc
satis est Argumentum. O Sullevani, Tom. 1. Lib. 2.

Notwithstanding these Concurrences, some things will still seem a little
Difficult to the English Reader; which, to him that understands the Dialect,
will be read with more Ease and Satisfaction; yet, by the help of the Comment,
and Marginal Notes, it is rendered Intelligible to every Capacity.

Besides the Marginal Notes, it would add a great Satisfaction to the Curious
Reader, to cast his Eye now and then upon the Latin, at the end of every Page,
marked with Alphabetical Letters all along, to direct him from the Translation
to the Original.

For Example, the first Line; Sic fatur lachrymans.
O hone! O hone!
This is best understood by him, who knows that word to be an Interjection of
Grief.

Finem dedit ore Loquendi.
-- And so he brought about
An end of praying vid his Mout.
-- -- Et tala fata --
Conticuit -- -- --
And so when she had once begun
To end her Speech, she held her Tongue.
To pass by the Names of the Kings and Hero's, the Title of AUGUSTUS, which is
an high Encomium, appropriated to his present Majesty KING WILLIAM THE THIRD,
is as natural and exact a Character, as if Virgil had designed it for this
present Monarch, England's timely Redeemer, whom Heaven long preserve.

THE Irish Hudibras.
Sic fatur lachrymans Classique immittit habenas.

O Hone! O Hone! And so the Bore
Weighed Anchor to Infernal Shore;
For on the Earth there was no space,
T'allow the Prince a Baiting-place.
The trembling Bogs shook with the weight,
The murmuring Floods bewailed his flight;
Until pursuing fatal doom,
He struck on Coast of -- Cumarum illabitur oris.

Inche-Cume: Inche-Colm in Lough Erin, the Passage to St. Patrick 's Purgatory!

Where having escaped another Rattle,
He Tum dente tenaci
Anchor a fundabat Naves* --

bound his Fleet with Twists of Wattle:
Obsequious Gad A With.
, that serves instead
Of Cables, Cords, Hemp, Flax, and Thread.
-- Et littora Curvae
^raetexunt puppes. --

And Nees no readier way could think on,
To tie their Noses The Anchor was a Quern, or Millstone, tied with a Gad.
to the Grinston:
For Nees's Fleet in Ocean wavy,
Were like his Men, a scampering Navy.
That Navy which no Coast can match, Nees's Fleet.

Built without charge of Deck or Hatch;
Where each whole chested Man of War,
Scorned the Adjuncts of Pitch or Tarr:
Nor did a Plank or Bolt appear,
Or Rudder had wherewith to steer;
No Tackling, Rigging, Mast or Sail,
To take the advantage of a Gale;
Nor Ballast had below the Hold,
But what was pumpt with wooden Bowl:
No Cannons, nor wide-mouthed Grenades,
Nees's Fireballs were boiled Pottados:
Pottados still did serve, instead
Of Peash and Bacon, Beef and Bread: His Magazine.

'Twas all their stock; for they no more,
Or Ammunition had, or Store.
This was that famous Fleet which Nees,
Like Meddars formed of the whole piece:
Meddar, which is a pretty Knack,
A deep round foursquare wooden Jack;
An ill-shap'd Trunk of carved Tree,
An uniform Deformity.
The Root their Stools, the Bark their Tables,
The Stock was Ship, and Boughs were Cables;
Dug up with Chissels undermining,
Such as Westphalians feed their Swine in: A Trunk of a Tree cut hollow.

A drowsy Fleet of sluggish Cots,
Proper to bear such active Sots.
And Nees was glad when he had got 'em
Each Tubb to sit on its own bottom.
No Bark, no Boat was to be found,
Should Nees have given a thousand pound; The Scotch had burnt them.

Which is the cause old Story tells,
They were a Fleet of Cockle-shells,
Sent from the Lady of Lorett,
To waft him over in spite of Fate.
-- Juvenum manus emicat ardens
Tecta rapit Silvas.

The Dear-Joys rockt in Cot, like Cradle,
Some on an Oar, some on a Paddle,
Leapt to the shore a Crew of Swingers,
Ready almost to eat their Fingers,
For very hunger post away,
Tag-Rag and Long-Tail for his prey;
Some to the Bogs, some run a madding,
And some unto the Woods a gadding;
Some with the Flint and Steel assayl,
To fire the Funk upon his Nail;
Some Houses burn, some burn Tobac.
Some of their Deeds, some Vermin crack;
Some to the Alehouse run, and throng
To Chanuska.
water Head with Buy oge. To fetch Water in a wooden Can.
yellow Young;
And after long and tedious ranging,
By help of Mathematick Engine,
A Setting-pole the cunning Rogues
Brought from the Fleet to leap the Bogs:
Inventaque flumina monstrat

Springs, happy Springs, adorned with Sallets,
Which Nature purposed for their Palats;
Three-leav'd-grass.
Shamrogs and Watergrass he shows,
Which was both Meat, and Drink, and Close.
At pius Aenaeas arces quibus altus Apollo
Praesidet, horrendaeque procul secreta Sybillae
Antrum Immane petit. --

But Nees, more Zealous than the rest, A Church erected by St. Patrick, in
Lough E^^n, through which they descended in^o St Patrick 's Purgatory. Annals
of Ireland.

Was of St. Patrick's Church in quest;
Which, if you credit ancient Story,
Is the high Road to Purgatory.
Scarce had he sneez'd, when he begun
To scrape Acquaintance with a Nun:
Shela, for that is the Name they give her,
For a close Bawd, and wicked Liver,
Tho some did call her Sara.
Sau, some Ann.
Aina,
Most for her Beauty called her Ugly.
Graina.
So sly and exquisit a Witch she,
Nature nere formed so true a Gypsy:
For she was skilled in all their Wisdom,
Could unto any Man read His Doom;
Or hanged by Sea, or drowned by Land
Could do the business to your hand;
And by her skill in Palmestry,
Would tell you what should never be:
In Peace or War, when Ruins threaten,
Guess by the Victor, who was beaten:
And tell by the parting of the Fray,
Who Kept the Field, who ran away.
This Flibber-gib Nees did importune,
That he, forsooth, might know his Fortune;
Who for a Bribe to bring her Grist,
Crammed a whole handful in her fist: Lanedurne.

She willing to attend his Grace,
Mander'd not long, but in a space
Tuck't up her Drab, through Marshes slabby,
Both posting to St. Patrick's Abbey.
Jam subeunt Triviae lucas atque aurea tecta.

Now enter they the Boggs, and go
Through golden Roofs of yellow Straw:
From Bog to Wood, each Shrub they pass,
Dropping an Ave, and a Mass. Ave-Maria.

Ventum erat ad Limen. --

But when they had approached the Door;
Says Shela, Nees, Be sure, be sure,
Thou have thy Beads in readiness, Prayers.

And all thy Roguery confess;
Prepare thy Paternoster.
Padreen, and thy Ryme,
For we are come in Pudding-time.
With that to'th' Gate his Grace adventured,
Which Shela, without knocking, entered;
And though they were in Limbo pent,
Without a word of Complement,
They raise the Hub-bub-boo, Irish Cry.
and cry,
-- Deus ecce Deus. Cui talia fanti
Ante fores subito, non vultus, non color unus
Non Comptae mansere comae.

Saint Patrick, Patrick, my Dear Joy!
When strait the Abbess changed her hue:
And all her Carrets turned to blue;
Her Hair, like finer Hempen-thread,
Stood all an end upon her Head:
So Mad she grew, and so Uncivil,
You Would think her turned into a Devil.
But when the Spirit was more strong
Within the Carcas of the Nun;
She fell on Nees like Butter-Whore,
Because poor Nees could pray no more.
-- Cessas in Vota precesque?
Tros ait Aenea? Cessas?

Do thou leave off thy Prayers and Beading?
* Culleen, the Devil take thy Breeding.
Ill chance upon it, have thou no shame?
Go say thy Beads a Devils name.
Well, Nees, if thou will not give over
Thy Irish Tricks. I Will say no more.
-- Et talia fata Conticuit.

And so when she had once begun
To end her Speech, she held her Tongue.
-- Gelidus Teucris per dura cucurrit
Ossa tremor. --

The Dear Joys strait began to quake,
Stinking for, fear did Buttons make;
But Nees did -- Fuditque preces Rex pectore ab imo.

pour out his Prayers
From the very bottom of his --
Dear Joy, Nees 's Prayer.
Phoebe graves Trojoe semper miserate labores.

St. Patrick, vil dou hear
Dee own Cheeld Nees make his Pray-ere,
Dat never did, or I Am a Teef,
So much before in all me Leef.
Dear Joy, who sees our woeful Case,
Will dou sit still upon dee Ars,
And see dese Dutch and English Rogues
Strip off our Breeches.
Trouses, and our Shoes.
Brogues:
Possess our Cabin, or Irish Hut.
Crates, and die poor Cheeld Nees,
And Bore.
Culleens flee, like flocks of Wild-gees.
De Devil take me, now I swear
(Dear Gossop) by me own Mak-keer
Nees vill ( if Hac Trojana tenus fuerit fortuna secuta.

he no better speed*)
Make hang upon himself indeed.
What though of Money.
Ready nere a plack,
Yet many a plugg of good Toback
It cost me to come Et tandem Italliae fugientis prendimus oras*

to dis Port;
And not a Turd de better for it:
Ycome like fool, ygo vidout
My skeal, vid finger in my mout;
Since I have seen die own sweet Face,
I know doul't never be so base.
Derefore God bless it, Oh! Patrick.
Padeen.
Vill dou take a little for de Queen?
My Dear, my Joy, my Dear Heart.
Cram-ma-cree,
I Will make much* Prayer upon dee;
Vos quoque dardaniae jam fasest parcere g^nti
Diique deaeque omnes.

And all de rest Lodge.
ycoshere here
It Is now full teem to give Quar-teer.
Tuque O sanctissima Vates
Prescia Venturi da, non Indebita posco
Regna meis fatis.

And also dee, my prescious Nun,
Yknows what never is to come;
Grant dat I may but live at home,
And (fate) is Nees but ask his own;
To be my stay in my own Nation,
Without Exile or Transplantation:
To be restord without Reprisal,
Or Court of Court of Claims.
Clamper to try Title;
Lest Innocence being questioned,
Poor Nees should chance to be postpond;
Or come in Rere of Dutch Debenturers,
Or be kicked out by French Adventurers.
If we ben't mortgaged for a Sum,
And there is for Nees in Ireland room;
In peace to hold my few A-ceers, Acres.

And Images of my Fa-deers:
And had I but one Cow, I tell dee,
In all the World, vidout my Belly,
I Would give is fait, vid all my heart,
T'njoy my Land, or any part;
My Butter-milk.
Banniclabber and Pottados,
Without these French and Dutch Granados.
-- Festosque dies de nomine Phoebi.

And by my Gossops hand, I fate,
I will an Abbey Dedicate
To my Dear Joy, vidout no words,
As big as Monastry of Town of Swords in Fingaul.
Swords;
And to die name make St. Patrick 's Day, the 17th of March, the Patron Day of
Ireland.
Holy Day,
When all de Monaghans shall play:
Ordain a Statute to be Drunk,
And burn Tobacco free as Tinder.
Spunk;
And (fat shall never be forgot)
In Vsquebah, St. Patrick' s Pot;
To last for never in our Nation,
On pain of Excommunication:
Te quoque magna manent Regnis penetralia nostris.

And unto dee, my precious Whore,
A place to hang up die Pic-ture.
Much Grace upon dee ugly fash,
Where every one shall say a Mass;
Where die Mi-ra-cles shall be sung,
By very ting dat has no tongue.
Only I pray dee now, my Dear,
Let not die Ars make a Noise.
Clam-peer;
Lest vid a Fart dou blow it from me,
And put de great Moccage upon me.
Nor let de Vind die Notes profane,
But sing dyself de sweet Song.
Cro-naan.
-- Finem dedit ore Loquendi.

And so at length he brought about*
An end of praying with his Mout.
At Phoebi nondum patiens immanis in antro
Baccatur Vates. --

This while the Nun to the Vsquebagh.
Coge did fall,
And there she drank the Devil and all;
Spewing and pissing as she stood,
To throw him out in height of Flood:
The more she strove to thrust him out,
The more he firk't her Hide about:
So hard he pressed, and did so toss her,
That she had hardly time to cross her;
Till in these words the Fiend at once
Did open her hundred-folded Sconce:
O tandom magnis pelagi defuncte periclis,
Sed terra graviora Manent, Bella! horrida Bella!

Oh Nees! poor Nees! tho it is not untrue,
That thou have many Gantlets run through
By Water; there are still on Land
Far greater Perils, by this hand.
Wars! Wars! ah, bloody Wars I find it;
-- Mitte hanc de pectore curam.

But hang it (Brother) never mind it.
Thou will (but wish thou would never) come
To thy own Country, House, and Home.
The The River runs through Dublin.
Liffy shall be changed to Blood,
Besmeared With Gore, instead of Mud:
So shall the Brackney, and the Shanon,
Nor shall great Scomberg's Tents want Cannon. Two Rivers.

Thy flying Hosts Dutch-Troops shall rack 'em,
With Thousand English Braves to back 'em:
-- Cum tu supplex in rebus egenis.

Till thou disarmed, and brought so poor,
Art forced to beg from Door to Door.
Causa mali tanti conjux. --

And all this mischief, on my Life,
Again through an Imperious Wife;
And foreign Priests, a Pox take Them.
'ame,
For which poor Nees must bear the blame.
Tune cede malis sed contra audentior ito,
Qua tua te fortuna sinet. --

But since you are custom'd to be beat*
Be'nt basely Cowed for one Defeat;
Nor turn, like Coward, Tail upon it,
But march up bolder to the Front.
Humble the Whiggs in Londonderry,
The Forlet Scot beyond the Ferry:
From Edinburrow cross the Tweed,
And make the Heart of Europe bleed;
As long as Fortune does not frown;
And Great Nassaw (who guards the Crown)
With Scomberg, let our Troops alone;
Nees may be sure the Day's his own.
But one thing more I must declare,
Thou little dreams of, in this War:
The first Relief that is hither blown,
Shall come from Breast, or Dunkirk-Town,
With an Armado, which shall bring
With them an Abdicated King;
Who to retrieve his sudden Fall,
In hopes of Winning, shall Lose all;
Three Kingdoms quit, to set up Mass,
And Cronicle himself an --
Shall Monsieur above Nees advance,
And Ireland Intail to France.
-- Non ulla Laborum
O Virgo nova mi facies inopinave surgit
Omnia percepi. --

Brauler a Skeal.
Pox on die Tail (says Nees) I tro;
Vell vas die vont for doing so;
Despair.
Spereen, and an ill Chance upon it,
I tought no better voud come on it;
Too vell I knew, by what is not past,
'Twould come unto dis pass at last.
But since no Balsom for this Wound
Is left for Nees above de ground,
Vnum oro --
Ire ad conspectum Chari genitoris.

One Courtesy I must demand,
Since here is de Passage to dat Land;
And here is Nees beg die Par-doon,
Dat I choos dee for my Gar-soon;
Dat I may pass de black Va-teer,
Once more to see my old Fa-deer;
God.
Good rest his Shoul, and Body too,
Is ly vidin de ground below.
O Hone! fait many a time, I swear,
Illum ego per flammas and mill sequ^ntia Tela
Aripui his humeris. --

Vas carry it on dis Shoul-deer.
If dou believe me, fat I say,
My Bones yfeel it to dis day;
And fate, when he was after dee,
Vas give it charge to come to see:
And I meeself Deulmore Iricism, Great Eye, great desire.
great Eye have still,
To make performsh upon his Will.
-- Natique, Patrisque
Alma precor* Miserere.

Now for de Son, and de Fa-deer,
Conduct me to de black Va-teer.
-- Potes namque omnia, nec te
Nequicquam Lucis Heccate praefecit Avernis.

For dou can do it, for fait dou would not
Be a right Nun, if dou understood not
De next and ready way to Hell,
You Women know dat way too vell:
For I would try, if dat dear be
In Hell for Nees a Vacancy;
Since Soldering vill do no grace,
To try to get an Evidaunsh-Place:
And I deserve dat favor sure,
As vell as Dermot o Con-noor.
If Roger.
Rory, to his Nations praise,
Out-swore de Devil to his face;
Si Fratrem Pollux. --

If Teague and Shone Pollure could Swear,
Each in his turn, for his Bro-deer;
Why should not I set up a School,
As well as any other Fool?
For I can Swear with Bryan Hains,
O Farrell, or a Brace of Pains.
What should I talk of -- Quid Thesea magnum.

O Theseen,
O Sheil, or Eustace o Com-meen:
Et mi genus ab Jove summo.

And fait, I tink, I am as good
A Man, as none of all dat Brood.
Tunc sic orsa loqui Vates.

Thus said; the Abbess thus begun,
Sat sanguine Divum.

Nees, thou art thy own Father's Son;
Teague Mac Lany, his Grandfather a Butcher, yet descended from the Family of
the Kings; whose Genealogy is as follows. Nees or Enees, Mac Anchees, Mac Cova,
Mac Conigal, Mac Mureartagh, Mac Loughlin, Mac Rory, Mac Dermot, Mac Turlogh,
Mac Tool, Mac Deul.
I knew thy Father well, that bore thee,
And thy own Son And Heir before thee:
Thy Father was a good Man, true;
And, faith, so was thy Mother too.
But hear a little what I say,
-- Facilis Descensus Averni.

The Gate lies open night and day:
To go's, as plain as A, B, C;
But Back's all the Concavity.
The Way thou easily may find,
But thou wilt return when the Devil's blind.
Vbboo! (says Nees) if dat be all,
I Will go, or it shall cost a fall:
It Is de Deel's Luck, and if it prove
Worse dear dan it has done above:
For a long Journey he must strain
Too far, vho never returns again.
Never Venture, never Vin; vell, vell,
Shela, I am resolved for Hell.
Nay, Vench, it is decreed, I must,
And let the Devil do his worst.
If ever dou catch me (which I scorn)
IN the Pound, den put me in de Corn.
Quod si tantus amor menti. Latet arbore opaca
Aureus and foliis and lent^ Vimine Ramus.

Nay, Bird, if thou art so hot set,
To throw thy self into the Net;
So mad (said she) to visit Hell,
And cannot see when thou art well:
If thou would be damned before thy day,
Take a Fool's Counsel first, I say.
Within a Wood, near to this place,
There grows a Bunch of Three-leav'd-grass,
Called by the Clowns.
Boglanders, Shamrogues,
A Present for the Queen of Spirits.
Shoges;
Which thou must first be after-fetching;
But all the Cunning's in the Catching.
For if it please the Gods thy Journey,
'Twill come with ease, and not stubborn be;
Else all the World will not be able
To pull it up with a Rope-Cable.
Praeteria jacet exanimum tibi corpus amici --
Sedib^s hunc refer ante suis, and conde sepulchro.
Duc nigras pecudes.

But Nees, while thou art mitching here,
Thou little dreams of thy Pi-peer.
One of thy Crew is gone before thee,
To sound a Charge in Purgatory.
Go Bury him, the Mourners Feast,
And give a Spologue.
Black Sheep to the Priest;
While thou art Feasting with thy Men,
Thou may come hither back again.
Thus said, the Prince pulled off his Shoes.
Brogues
And trudged along with his Comrogues;
Sore troubled, thinking whose was his Chance
To fall to this unlucky Mischance.
Multa inter sese vario sermon ferebat.

Many a strange Conjecture they
Do harbor, while they are on the Way;
One thinking one thing, and the other
Feeding his Maggot with another.
Last, in great Rage (says Nees,) My Friend,
Vill our Trou-bles never have an end?
Fait dis is a sad Skeal! Joy.
Arroon!
Saint Patrick Joy! fat's de rea-soon.
Some Devil sure is in the Weend,
Or else indeed Saint Patrick' s bleend:
Or is a Gossiping*
Coshering, I dare bet;
Ill Chance upon it, more Anger yet!
Thus discontented marched poor Nees,
Still blaming unkind Destinies:
Then cries, A Pox upon the Queen,
Who, who the Devil she should mean.
At length, within a Mile or two,
They heard the Irish Hub bub-boo;
Did tear the Woods, and rend the Skies,
With doleful Echo's of their Cries. Macshane killed.

-- Atque illi Misenum in littore sicco,
Vt venere vident.

But when unto the Strand they came,
Who should they find, but poor Mac-shane;
-- Indigna morte peremptum.

Killed basely by a sneezing Harper,
Because his Pipes were shrill and sharper.
Tho some, were present at his parting,
Affirm it rather was for Farting.
When with O Triton he would compare,
To Sound as good a Point-of-War.
Who for his Ave's and his Beads,
When he was dead, did leave three Heads
Of Cattle unto Father Roger.
Rory,
To pray him out of Purgatory.
Then put they up the Vlster-Shout,
When poor Macshane was stretched out;
Misenum Aeoliden, quo non praestantior alter,
Aere ciere viros, martemque accendere cantu.

Macshane, as dead as any Sheep,
The best that ever blowed in Peep:
A great Comrogue he was to Hector,
And top't off many a Coge of Nectar:
That used to go about for Masters,
Sometimes for Drink, sometimes for Plasters:
Of Musick-errant, it is the fate
Sometimes, to have a broken Pate.
Had he but lived that Life till now,
He had been dead seven years ago.
He dead, struck up with General Nees,
As good a Fellow, by this Cheese,
In all his Bouts of Aale and Peer,
And served in place of his Pi-peer,
At Gossiping.
Coushers, Wakes; could play Margery.
Mageen,
Whip off Gossiping.
Dunboyn, and Dance a Myeen;
And Danc Towns in Fingaul.
Balruddery. I that he
Could play Towns in Fingaul.
Portlaughrin, and Towns in Fingaul.
Bunratty;
And Song.
Macklemone, so sweet, O dear, it
Would do a dead Cat good to hear it.
Until this whiffling Farter.
Tuffo-geer
Must Challeng lofty Trumpit-teer;
And did before O Triton Fart,
For which he run him through the Heart,
That fatal unexpected Stab,
For poor Macshane did do his Job.
As soon as Mac his Blood did spy,
He could not for his Life but die.
(x) Sed dum forte cava, dum personat aequora concha,
Demens, and cantu vocat in Certamina Triton.
Inter saxa virum spumosa immerfit in unda.

Ergo omnes magno cir^um clamore fremebant,
Praecipue pius Aeneas. --

And therefore every one did weep,
To see poor Mac so fast a-sleep.
But chiefly Nees: Ho! Hub-bub-boo!
Poor Nees, and all his Men may rue
De day dat dou vas die! Joy.
Arroon!
Fat made it go away so soon,
And leave die Lands behind? I tro,
Ill vas die vont for doing so;
To make a die, and leave die Plains,
Die Cows, die Sheep, and die Horses.
Garrains.
O Hone! Dear-Joy! Is poor Macshane
Vill never blow de Peep again.
O Hone! Macshane! Hub-bub-bub-boo!
Il-lil-lil-lil-lil-lil-lil-loo!
Itur in antiquam Silvam. --

But seeing such a mighty throng
Of Trees, bethought him of the Nun.
Dear-Joy, if this Three-leav'd-grass.
Shamrogue should prove
By chance to grow in this same Grove;
Should Nees so luckily succeed,
'I would be Luck in a Bag indeed.
And fait, fie may not it prove so too?
All is not false dat she says true.
Vix ea fatus erat geminae cum forte Columbae
Ipsa sub ore viri. --

Scarce had he spoke these words, when strait
A Brace of Ducks appeard in sight.
The Prince, as soon as he beheld
His Mothers Brood, he quickly smel'd
A Rat, by the Feather in the Nose,
And knew them by their Scarlet Hose:
Which was a piece of Yellow Woollen,
To know them from their Neighbors Pullen;
Stitched with an artificial Peg,
Like blue Sassoons about the Leg.
-- Tum maximus Heroes
Maternas agnoscit aves. --

Nees, joyful at the sight, did pray
His Mother's Ducks to lead the way;
In Grove so pestered, that poor Nees
Could not see Wood for throng of Trees;
So waddled after them as close
As he could follow for his Nose.
Thus hotly they pursued the Scent,
Crambing their Gorges as they went;
Until they cropped the very Weed,
Where every day they used to feed.
Nees, when the Shamrog he did spy,
Cries out, I have it in my Eye,
Corripit extemplo Aeneas --
-- Et vatis portat subtecta Sybillae.

Is vid me fait. And so he run
To bring the Present to the Nun.
Nec minus interea Misenum in Littore Teuchri
Flebant. --

Mean while the Rout to work do fall, Form of an Irish Funeral.

To Celebrate the Funeral.
And first with Turff from Bog, and Blocks,
They made a Fire would roast an Ox.
Some lay the Pipkins on, and some
With Holy Water bathe his Bum.
There was the Priest forgiving Sins,
Busy as Hen with two Chick-eens,
'Nointing his Forehead, and his Nose,
And downwards to his Pettitoes;
After the Method of his Function,
With Holy Oil of Extreme Unction.
Which Office decently performed,
The Guests, with Usquebagh well warmed,
Fit Gemitus. Tum membra Toro defleta reponunt.

They raise the Cry. And so they fout him
Unto a Crate, Description of an Irish Cabin.
to howl about him;
Built without either Brick or Stone,
Or Couples to lay Roof upon:
With Wattlets unto Wattles tied,
(Fixed in the ground on either side)
Did like a shaded Arbor show,
With Seats of Sods, and Roof of Straw.
The Floor beneath with Rushes laid, stead
of Tapestry; no Bed nor Bedstead;
No Posts, nor Bolts, nor Hinges in door,
No Chimney, Kitchen, Hall, or Windor;
But narrow Dormants stopped with Hay
All night, and open in the day.
On either side there was a door
Extent from Roof unto the floor,
Which they, like Hedg-hogs, stop with straw,
Or open, as the Wind does blow:
And tho they reach from top to floor,
His Grace crept in upon all-four.
Betwixt the door there was a spot
IN the middle, to hang over the pot;
And had an Engine in the nick,
For pair of Tongues, a Maddabrist.
broken stick.
IN the presence was no stool, but one
Old Creel, for Nees to sit upon:
For all the rest, as they did come,
Made Stools and Cushions of their Bum.
More Parentum.

In this so rich and stately Cabin,
To lie in state came this Sea-Crab in,
Died for the nonce in liquid Sable,
And laid him underneath the Table;
Where in one end the parted Brother
Was laid to rest, the Cows in to other,
With all his Followers and Kin,
Who far and near came crowding in,
With Hub-bub boos, besides what Cryers
For greater state his Highness hires;
Who all come crowding in; and in comes
Monk Corin too, with all his Trinkums;
Who when he had his Office paid,
And for the Dead a while had prayed,
To their own Sports, (the Masses ended,)
The Mourners now are recommended.
Some for their pastime count their Beads, An Irish Wake.

Some scratch their Breech, some louse their Heads;
Some sit and chat, some laugh, some weep;
Some sing Cronans Songs.
, and some do sleep;
Some pray, and with their prayers mix curses;
Some Vermin pick, and some pick Purses;
Some court, some scold, some blow, some puff,
Some take Tobacco, some take Snuff;
Some play the Trump, some trot the Hay,
Some at Macham A Game at Cards.
, some Noddy play;
With all the Games they can devise;
And (when occasion serves 'em) Cries.
Thus did they mix their grief and sorrow,
Yesterday buried, killed to morrow;
And Pars ingenti subiere Pharetro.

mounted him upon a Beer;
Through which the Wattles did appear;
Like Ribbs on either side made fast,
With a Blanket.
White Velvet over-cast:
So poor Macshane, Good roast his Shoul,
Was after put him in a hole;
In which, with many sighs and scrietches,
They throw his Trouses and his Breeches;
And tattar'd Brogue was after throw,
With a new heel-piece on the toe;
And Stockins Fine as Friez to feel,
Worn out with praying at the heel;
And in his mouth, against he took Wherry,
Dropped a Bun-guol.
white Groat to pay the Ferry.
Thus did they make this last hard shift,
To furnish him for a dead lift.
Last having done his Ave Mary's,
And all his Drollans Fopperies and Trumperies.
and Boldaries,
The Priest, Father Ossaque lecta cado texit Corineus abeno.
Idem ter socios pura circuntulit unda.

O Corin, gi's'em
His Blessing too; calls for the Besom,
Which dipped in Salt and Holy Water,
He does their Coxcombs all bespatter;
And while they for the Blessing stickle,
Did leave them all in sacred pickle.
At pius Aenaeas ingenti mole sepulcrum
Imposuit, suaque arma viro --

The Prince, as yet not half content,
Did build a larger Monument;
Over which he carved about the middle
The Bagpipes Rampant on a Fiddle.
So fare thee well, since thou art gone;
Sloo Skeal donna no Dees.
The loss of Two is less than One.
His actis proprie exequitur secreta Sybillae.

And so unto the Nun he packs on,
To put in suit his former Action.
Here first the Prince, who loved good cheer,
And Shela make a sad mur-deer
On Pigs, A Fingallian, or Ulster Feast.
and Geese, and Hogs, and Styes,
To offer up a Sacrifice.
Quatuor hic primum nigrantes terga Juvencos
Constitit --
.
Four milk black Sheep, ta'n from the Fold,
And Yearlings three or four year old,
With Hide and Horns, and Guts and all,
Thrust on a Tree, and roasted whole;
Which, with their Durgins and Madoges Skeins. or Knives.
,
They cut upon their greasy Brogues
For Trenchers, and did wipe their Brushes
With Napkins wove of Shags and Rushes.
Betwixt this Cosher, Gossiping.
and the Nun,
The night was spent, and day begun:
As when a Turf does blaze and burn,
So sprightly did the morning turn,
From a successive Black to White,
Like a new burnt Tobacco-pipe.
Where scarce had they their Mattins don,
When an Enchantment struck the Nun
With sudden Meagrim; and Nees feigns
H' had got a Gamshoge Game or Sport.
in his Brains;
-- Visaeque Canes ululare per umbram.

Where all the Wolves, and Barking Crew
Of Dogs, put up the Hub-bub-boo;
Which scared the Prince, until the Nun,
More valiant, made them hold their tongue.
-- Procul, O procul este profani.

Get out, I say, of this same Lake, you,
You wicked wretches, or I Will make you:
Out, out, you Cuckold's Currs; what, Pox!
Are we a Company for Shocks?
Tuque invade viam, vaginaque erripe ferrum.

Now Nees, if thou to brave thy Fate,
Has but the Soul of a dead Cat,
Now, now look big, and cock thy Beard:
St. Colom! Is the Prince afear'd?
Draw, draw thy Madog, says the Elf,
And now or never show thy self:
Now is the word, Nees, Now or Never;
And do it Now, it is done for Ever.
Now prove thy self a Man or Mouse,
Or all our Does not worth a Louse.
Tantum effata furens antro se immisit aperto.
Ille ducem timidis vadentem passibus aequat,

So, mad to go they knew not whither,
They shot the Stygian Gulf together;
She first, and Nees did overtake her
Before his Highness could come at her.
But here the Nun, before she leads
Him further, falls unto her Beads;
For she had still (the subtle Fiend,)
Her Prayers upon her fingers end,
Or hanging round her Waste, like Locket,
Which now at last returned to pocket.
And so when she had done her Graces, The Ceremonies in entering St. Patrick's
Purgatory. Gerraldus Cambrensis, and Hollingshed's Description of Ireland.

Her Cosras, Oras, and her Masses,
Her Aves, Beads, and all the CeRemonies
of the Tenebrae;
Dii quibus Imperium est animarum, umbraeq, silentes,
Et Chaos, and Phlegiton --

And invocated every Spirit,
That in those Regions did inherit;
And all the Saints from great The Patron of Ireland.
St. Patrick,
Founder of Kilkenny.
Kenny, and Q^aeran of Clonviencis.
Queran, and St. Finnia Beatrick of Clonard.
Beatrick,
Cowgal of Beanor
Cowgal, and St C^lm of Lough Erin,
Colom, Bohineoge, Cousin German to Colm-Kid.
Bohineoge,
Of L^smore.
Mauchey, and Sancta Maula.
Maule, and Of L^thmore.
Mauchevoge,
Of Killachy.
Shincheal, and St. Shinkan, Son of great St. Colm.
Shinkan, and Sancta Suana.
O Suan,
Brandon of Byrr, in the County of Tipperary, a very Eminent Saint; He was
taken up into Heaven in a fiery Charior. Eusebius apud Osulievan.
Brandon of Byrr, and Colm O Crowan.
Colm O Crowan,
And Colm O Kill, who was Cousin to Colm O Crowan, both Eminent Saints.
Colomkill, and An ancient Saint, whose Life is written by M^ulin O Malconry
Phelimback,
And Gillarnoo, M^^ C^^embocht, a Saint* and great Hi^^^^ion, much recorded in
the Irish Legends.
Gillarnoo, and all the pack;
She ceased: Nor was there to be found,
Either above or under ground,
In all the Registry, not one
That she forgot to call upon,
To guide her, and her pretty Page,
In Subterranean Pilgrimage.
And thus equipt, they take their Flight,
Without a Link, in a dark Night;
Both fumbling in the dark together,
Tho neither knew which way, nor whither;
Groaping the Air with Staff.
Bat, and paws,
So dark, they could not feel their Nose.
Now He, now sometimes She did follow;
And sometimes they were forced to hollow.
Vestibulum ante ipsum primisque in faucibus orci
Luctus and ultrices posuere cubilia Curae.

But when they had approached the door, Hic primus Campus est Cruciatuum.
Osullevan de Purgatorio Divi Patricii.

They Are in worse pickle than before:
There was the Hub-bub-boo, and rack
Of Dear Joys, a disbanded pack:
Sorrow and Tears, Hunger and Cold, Nihilominus non parvi manes in aulla
manserunt qui me inde Rapuerunt. Vici Comes apud Osullevanum.

And Sleep and Death, beneath the Hold;
Discord and Priest-Adultery,
And Fear, and Care, and Jealousy;
And every Cheater and Impostor,
With Thief and Tory there did foster.
In medio Ramos, etc. --

About the middle grew a Tree,
A Nest of Lies and Forgery:
Romances and Old Woman's Story
Filled the first Page of Purgatory; Secundus Campus Cruciatuum.

And Miracles of Priest and Monk
Do in this Pound lie all defunct.
Quem sedem somnia vulgo
Vana Tenere ferunt. --
Gorgones, Harpiaeque

Legends and Relics, Simonies,
False Witnesses and Perjuries;
Vain Promises of Catholics,
Obliged to break with Heretics.
All Arbitrary close Intrigues
Of Monarch, and illegal Leagues.
Indulgence and Equivocation,
Penance, and Mental Reservation.
And here was cramb'd, among the Skulls,
Infallibility and Bulls.
With other Wonders here did Nees
Spy; Entities, Heccieties,
Rationis Ens; and there did lie
Universal a part Rei.
Teague over-reached by the Monsieur,
With Vout tres humble Serviteur.
-- Mortiferumque adverso in limine Bellum.

And bloody War will never have its end,
Enough to put them to their Wits end.
Here Nees, poor Nees, half scared to death,
Forced Bilbo from unwilling sheath;
And with a sort of Desperation,
(The Courage of that Warlike Nation,)
Corripit hic subito tepidus formidine ferrum,
Et ni docta comes --

Fell foul upon the Shades, and dashes
Their Brains with unresisted slashes.
Here had not Shela held the Squire,
Warning the Spirits to retire,
And made 'em vanish great and small,
No doubt he would have killed 'em all:
For he did curse and damn, he would
Be Beating.
frapping of 'em while he stood.
Hinc via Tartarea --

A Hut there was, fenced with a Wood, Poenarum fluvius.

Trench'd with a Mote, and paved with Mud;
Where lodged in State the Ferry-Groom,
Mac-Murreartagh Terribili squalore Charon.

O Cha-roon;
Like Woodkern dressed in Yellow Stuff, An Irish Kern.

And Trouses made of Blanket proof;
A Satyr's Beard; and on his Head
He wore a Scollopt read Cap.
Burrede;
His Hair.
Glibbs hung down like Tails of Rats,
His Eyes.
Goggles flamed like Eyes of Cats:
-- Stant lumina flammae.

Where there was neither Crisped Bushes of Hair, worn by the Wild Irish over
their Foreheads, to deface them. Spencer of the State of Ireland.
Crisp nor Curl,
The very But-end of a Churl*
Sordidus ex humeris nodo dependit amictus.

His Mantle made of Blew Scar-leet,
Which reached almost unto his Feet,
He with a Wattle Twist had tied,
With Knot from Shoulder unto Side:
About his well-set Legs he drew
Stockins, a pair of Mazareen-Blue,
Turned inside out, a shift in need,
To stop the Holes on to other Side.
sheed;
A Dish-clout round his Neck was hung,
And wore his Brogue upon his Tongue:
For Tongue a Brogue supplied the Strain;
And yet he had more Tongue than Brain.
Ipse ratem conto subigit --

And in this manner he transported
All Customers that there resorted;
Both Rogues, and Thieves, and Whores, and Jades;
All sort of Devils, except Trades. Teague a Trade! Vb-bub-bub-boo.

Quam multae glomerantur aves.

Where you might see the Spirits fly
As swift as Atoms in the Sky:
Others, to gain the Banks do strive,
In Swarms, like Bees about an Hive;
As thick as Hops they crowd and hover,
Expecting who shall first get over.
But he, the Churlish Cur, to ease
Their hearts, will do but what he please:
Some he takes in, and some he knocks
With his Pole.
Goadeen from off the Rocks.
What struggling there was there? O Lord, Sir!
What work was there to be a-Boord Sir?
Aenaeas miratus enim motusque tumultu
Dic (ait O Virgo) quid vult concursus ad amnem,
Quidve petunt animae? --

Nees at the Clatter making wonder,
Was mad the Business to stand under;
And catching her by the Plac-kete,
Says, (My Dear Joy) fat's de Rac-kete,
Or fat a Devil here ado's?
Is Hell indeed ybroke it loos?
How comes it thus, says he, about,
Some are took in, and some thrust out?
Some hop upon de Water, and
Some swim on Ditches, and dry Land?
Olli sic breviter. Portitor ille Charon
Hi quos volvit unda sepulti --

Nees (she replies), my Duck and Dearing,
Cast a Sheeps Eye upon Lough Erin and Lough Neagh, Two Loughs in Vlster, so
famous for converting Wood into Stone. Hollingshed de ^acu Vlto^iae.
Lough Erin,
Whose Floods to a Whetstone turn a Blockhead:
And judge hereby if I do mock it.
Those Souls you see, are dead; Car-roon,
That owns the Ferry, is the Loon;
Those that to be transported strive,
Have buried been dead or alive:
But for the rest, that want a Burial, Dolorum Campus.

May wander here till they are weary all,
And fast a Thousand Lents, before he
Can have the Grace of Purgatory.
While he was gazing round about,
Wh' a Pox should drop into his Mout,
But old Sir Loughlin Lucas, who ran
From Portsmouth-Bay, with Derby Oram,
When the sad storm did fall upon 'em,
And one of the two both did drown 'em.
Forty gay Officers beside,
Lost with the Ship for want of Guide.
Here Nees was in a horrid pain,
To know Sir Loughlin's*Christen'd Name;
And whispered Shela in the Ee,
Who swore she knew no more than he.
Ecce Gubernator sese Palinurus agebat.
-- Quis te Palinure Deorum
Eripuit nobis? --

With these was Palinure, the Swabber,
Drowned in a Sea of Bannae-clabber.
Nees, in a maze, cried, Palinure,
Dear Joy; and art thou dead for sure?
Fat Devil vast took dee from me?
Had I no Rogue to loose but dee?
And be dis is a sorry Skeal.
Not so, Nees, but de Blind.
bleend Namque Gubernaculum multa vi forte Revulsum
Praecipitans traxi mecum. --

Rudder.
Pad-dele,
On sudden vas be overbore me,
And made me throw my Face before me.
But by dis Flood, and Fate and Trote,
And by de pleasant Hill of The Hill of Hoth in Fingaul.
Hot,
My Care when dou vas on dat shelf,
Vas more for dee, den for my self;
Left all alone to guide de Cot,
For fear die self should go to pot.
Three Irish Nights in Cold and Frost,
Upon de Water-Weeds.
Curtlaughs I vas tossed,
Till making to a little flash,
Expecting there a Landing Plaace,
A Crew of English, Dutchland Knaves,
Vas break my Face in two three halves,
And vid a Monmouth Sithe.
Symi-teer,
Vas cut my Head from my Shouldeer:
Which I indeed of Death in speet,
Bore through de vater in my Teet.
Riding full post when I was dead,
To Dublin Bay from In Fingaul.
Malaheed.
And now de Head and Carcass bleed,
Ten times killed over since indeed.
Derefore (Dear Joy) to have no Grave,
Is all de favor dat I crave;
To do so much for a poor Soul,
Eripe me his invicte malis, aut tu mihi Terram
Injice --

To throw my Carcass in a hole;
For Nees (say he), if thou vill meend it,
Amongst the Curtlaghs dou vill seend it;
Where it does lie in safe Cust-ody,
No flesh alive, but the dead Body.
Aut tu --
Da Dextram misero and tecum me toll per undas
Sedibus ut saltim placidis in morte quiescam.

And, dear Joy Vench, for Nees's sake,
Help me to trot the Donny-Lake;
Dat my poor Soul may prick his Ears,
And rest in peace with my Fa-deers.
How, Palinure, (replied the Scold)
'Twixt me and God.
Good, thou art too bold:
Would thou pretend to be a Spirit,
And go to Hell e're thou art buried?
No, no; do not mistake thy self,
The Devil is no such silly Elf.
But I will tell thee for thy Comfort,
We Will search thy Carcass out in some Port:
If it from the Eels.
Snigs we can retrieve,
Or Crows han't buried thee aleeve;
Aeternumque locus Palinuri nomen habebit.

And raise a Tomb shall still endure
The Name of honest Now Killinure, within five miles of Dublin.
Palinure.
Ergo iter incoeptum peragunt --

Thus being appeased, they move their Station
Toward the Confines of Purgation.
The Ferry-man, that kept the Port,
Perceiving such a strange Resort,
Of Monsters, making toward the Strand,
Cried out in Warlike manner, Stand:
Who, who comes dat? Stand, who comes dat?
Or vid my Pike I Will fire die Pate.
Quisquis es Armatus qui nostra ad limina tendis,
Fare age quid venias jam nunc and comprime gressum.

Believe me, ho, who e're appears.
Thus armed to 'sault our Quar-teers;
You shall not pass, until I know
A Reason why you shall or no.
Therefore to shun a farther ill,
Stand off, I say, at your per^ll:
This place is for a legless Crew,
And not such o're-grown Calves as you:
Nor can our Wherry bear such Loobies;
I deal with Shadows, not such Boobies.
Nec vero Alcides --

Nor truly did they fare so well,
The Tories that came last to Hell,
O Sheil, Mac Teage, and Owen Roe,
Tho they were Gentlemen, you know: They were Irish-men.

And sure you cannot choose but hear
What hurly-burly they made there;
How they were like to beat the Porter;
Broke up the Doors to take free Quarter:
And then, forsooth, it is in our Hist'ries,
Nothing would serve 'em but my Mistress;
Rummag'd the Buttery, and the Spence,
And ravished the poor Kitchin-wench.
The Tories played the Devil in the shape,
Of Plunder, Burglary, and Rape:
To save the House was all our fears,
From being fired about our Ears.
Nullae sic insidiae tales absiste moveri.
Nec vim Tela ferunt.

Hold, hold! My Ears you are after grateing;
I prithee (Dear Joy) peace thy prating,
Says Shela; do thou think that we
To go to Hell need Policy?
Troius Aeneas pietate insignis and Armis
Ad genitorem --

But honest Nees, well-known for leading
An Army off, and eke for Beading,
Only to see his Sire, his Highness
Comes out of mere stark Love and Kindness,
To get disarmed off all his Glory,
A Colonel's place in Purgatory.
Si te nulla movet tantae pietatis imago
At Ramum hunc, aperitque Ramum quae vest latebat.

If all those Charms cannot prevail,
I Will show thee yet a better Tail;
A Tail it is, contains such matter,
Would make thy very Teeth to water:
Do thou see this? Thou simple Ass,
Do think I come without my Pass?
So pulling out her Three-leav'd Blossom,
Which lay as close as Louse in Bosom,
Cries out, Do you see this, you damned Rogue?
He crossed himself to see the Shamrogue;
Turned up his Whites, but could not vent
One word, for very wonderment.
Vill dou see dis? Vere are die Ears?
Does tink dat Lees have no Beg-geers?
And now no Tanks unto your Brogue-a,
Ve vill go over vid dis Shamroge-a.
Ill Smell upon dee, and die Pink,
Dou art a Guddinghang, I tink,
Replied the Kern; and being pleased
To see the Branch, his Fury ceased:
As fast as he could drive, took Paddle,
And clapped his Bum into the Saddle.
To serve the Prince, and make the Nun-room,
He lath'd the Hold, and cleared the Gun-room.
-- Gemuit sub pondere Cymba.

Nees overgrown with Calves and Chins,
And Guts as heavy as his sins,
No sooner stepped upon the Hatches,
But every Plank and Cable retches;
And had not Shela used a Spell,
He had gone never to have cracked the Shell,
Throw which the Water strained did flow,
As fast as Milk through wisp of straw.
Tandem trans fluvium incolumes --

Thus having past the Stygian Flood,
He landed them upon the Mud;
Half buried, half in water drowned,
Dawbing and wallowing in Lobb's Pound;
Through Woods and Boggs, each step, poor Nees
Above the Calf, and She her Knees:
Bare-legg'd, barefooted, and bare-thigh'd,
The Nymph made many a graceful stride.
Her Coats about her Waste tuck't high, A Fingallian Woman.

Her Smock advanced above her Thigh;
Her Gown of finest Scarlet Freez,
With Puddle-dirt above her Knees;
Sultana like, on Water-Tabb,
Instead of Lace, some call a Drabb:
Her Smock Sultana'd with the same,
Fit to array so spruce a Dame;
Hanging in Plates so thick and wide,
Nees could between, a Gallop ride:
A Ready Artificial Mode,
To stride more easy on the Road,
Or sit at home at naked Rock,
And do her Business in her Smock.
To lug her Child out of the Water,
(As he before had done his Father)
She carries him upon her back;
If he a Dram of the Bottle lack,
Could should'ring throw her Breasts behind,
To suck as often as he had 'mind:
A Charity not rarely done;
For there they suck at Forty One.
Her Waste as slender as her Cows,
With a White Kerchief on her Brows;
Her brawny Calves, and Splay-foot bare,
Her Thighs like moving-Pillars were;
And with an equal distance wide;
So natural 'twas for her to stride.
About her Ears her golden Main
Hung down, like Pack-thread died in Grain;
Her Stockins twisted like an Harslet,
She wore about her Neck for Bracelet;
And as Antipodes, the Jade,
Carried her Brogues upon her head:
Their naked Trunks they thus expose,
To save the expense of Shoes and Hose.
A penitential Voyage, and sorry,
They make to come to Purgatory.
Here did that Monster first appear,
That threefold headed Dog, Cerberus hic ingens latranti Regna trifauci
Personat --

Cer-beer;
Stretched in the door, set up the howl,
A Leash of Wolves were in his Jowl;
Until the Witch to get to Hell,
Had cramb'd him with enchanted Spell.
So being soop't with Vsquebagh,
He went to sleep, They on their way;
And enter (if you will credit Story)
The Magic Gates of Purgatory.
Continuo auditae voces, vigitus and ingens,
Infantumque animae flentes in limine primo.
-- Ab ubere raptos.

The first place where the Ghosts did haunt 'em,
The Ancients called, Limbus Infantum.
Limbus Infantum.
Here they beheld a numerous Train
Of Orphans in the Wars were slain;
Some mounted upon Pikes, and some
Torn from the dying Mothers Womb;
With Embrio's, and prodigious Throngs
Of Infants got by Priests and Nuns,
In Abbeys, and in Monastries,
And murdered by the Votaries,
To cloak a Venial Sin; to whom
A Pit, or Privy was their Tomb;
The Issue of the Bed defiled,
Honora's Bastard, Alice.
Alsoon's Child.
And here did Nees spy his poor Soldiers,
Thrust in a hole by head and shoulders;
Where they behind left both their Ears,
For running from the K -- 's Cool-Ieers:
Some run the Gantlet in the Fields,
Others with Gads tied Neck and Heels:
Some mounted on the Wooden-Horse;
And some with Hemp were mounted worse.
Nor does this thing by Chance succeed,
But as by the Judges it is decreed:
For by a Court of Clamper, The Seat of Four Courts in Dublin, called Hell.
'een
As it is this day in Dub-leen;
I say, a Court of Clamper held
In Hell it self; they are compelled
All to appear at the next Sessions,
And there to make their true Confessions;
Where Father Mine gives Absolution;
Or else they are sent to Execution:
For every one, amongst the Spirits,
Takes place according to his Merits.
Limbus Amatorum.
Proxima deinde tenent Moesti loca qui sibi Lethum
In sontes peperere manu, Lucemque perosi
Projecere animas --

In the next Limbo he discovers
A desperate Troop of whining Lovers;
Who in their Melancholy Fits,
For Madness, run out of their Wits.
Inter Quas Phoenissa recens a vulnere Dido.

Amongst this Train he spied the Widow,
His Old Acquaintance, Guddy Dido,
That pined to Death, (the fawning Strap)
Some say for Love, some of a Clap;
When from her Nees turned Helm a Larbour,
To Anchor in false Jen -- 's Harbor.
Nees gliding at her through the Shade,
Cast a Calve's Eye from a Sheep's Head:
If I have not lost my little Senses,
Sure, sure, says Nees, dis my old Vench is.
Quam Troius Heroes --
Vt primum agnovit.

But when he drew more nigh her Quarters,
And knew her by her Straw-twist Garters,
Up to her face he boldly went,
And thus he made his Complement:
Infoelix Dido --

Dear Dido! dou unlucky Jade,
Ill chance upon dee, art dou dead?
Take little sneezing for de King.
But she replied, and said No-ting;
Minding no more his senseless Babbling,
Than if she were a Rock of In Fingaul.
Mablin.
Sure, sure, says Nees, she does but jest,
Dis of de Natures not the Beast;
Pre-dee come here, my pretty Rogue,
And give me de one little Kiss.
Poge,
For Old Acquaintance; for it is dee,
Dat is my only Cram-ma-cree.
Siste gradum, teque aspectu ne subtrahe nostro.

I pre-dee now, my dear Joy, stay;
Vat Devil make it run away?
She cannot hold one Touch, but itching,
Is after be, to run a Bitching.
Shall never pass so vid her Bears;
Nees has not seen dese Tousand years.
Let Us sit, and smoke a Peep for pastime;
Extremum fato quod te alloquar hoc est.

A parting Kiss: Dis is de last Time.
Kiss me! phooo! Fart upon dee, Nees,
Dou may as rader Kiss my Breech.
And now I know dee for a Rogue,
I scorn dee as Dirt of my Brogue.
Belching an Oyster in her Fist,
I care not dis for all die grist.
So fled as nimble as the Wind,
(Bidding the Prince to kiss behind,)
To Sichy, the old Cuckold nigh,
Where she to Fish had other fry.
Inde datum molitur iter, Jamque Arva tenebant
Vltima, quae Bello clari secreta fremebant.
Hic illi occurrit Tydeus --

Thus bawk'd, they march from Lovers Pound, Limbus Armatorium.

Until they came to Champion Ground;
Where they did camp with Sword and Shield,
That lost their Lives in bloody Field;
Their Heads cut in Three halves, e're they
Could have the time to run away.
Here Nees met Tedy, and Macarty,
Scot, Dempsy, and Scolloge na Party,
O Connor Bourk, and Owen Medon,
Mackillacud, and Poul O Padon,
And his Comrogues, so lately broken,
Sent for the Devil to a Token:
In Rank and File they all drew out,
On every hand, to view the Lout.
Nec vidisse semel satis est, juvat usque morari. --

Nor is it enough they saw his Grace;
Like Sots, but they must stand to gaze;
Crowding about him all to hear,
And learn what News in Shamrogsheer.
They cursed the Flemmings, and the French,
But highly praised his Excellence,
His Zeal and Conduct, (when the day
Was lost, his Wit) to run away.
His Back no sooner turned, in the place
But they abused him to his Face.
But the poor Danes, and Red-Shank Rogues,
As soon as they beheld his Brogues,
And bloody Bionet draw near,
Their Caves under ground.

They were the ancient habitation of the Danes, visible in many parts of
Ireland to this day.


Conny-holes did stink for fear:
Some run away, and some did throng
To speak, but could not find a Tongue:
For they resolved on it, they said,
No-ting to say, when they were dead.
So muzzled in enchanted Noose,
They could not to a Bo, say Goose.
In Recompense of which dumb Show,
All they could have from Nees, was Ooo-gh.
And now not thinking more than I am,
Who should he see, but young Atque hic Priamiden laniatum corpore toto
Deiphobum vidit, lacerum crudeliter ora.

O Priam. Fingallian, Bryan, or O Bryan, descended from Heber, the White
ancient Kings of Munster.
Priam.
So Clapperclaw'd, you would think his Grace
Had got an Ear-mark in his Face:
His Face was broken in three halves,
Patched over with Plasters, and with Salves.
Besides, his Ora, Manusque ambas, populataque tempora. Raptis
Auribus.

Ears were cut, and Locks,
And Et truncas in honesto vulnere nares.

Nose was eaten by the Pox.
So simply looked poor Priam oge,
So peppered was the Donny Shoge,
That Nees, (for all his Cunning Pate)
Could scarce discern his Fellow-mate;
But when he viewed his Couch of Straw,
And found he was the Man he saw,
He clapped his hands; but first he crossed him,
And thus he after did accost him:
Dear Bryan oge, and is it you?
Pox take you, Brother, How do you do?
What, Hell-Beast, art thou yet alive?
Blood of the Kings! How do thou thrive?
My Shole and Be, I am as Joy
To see dee, as a Cob, my Boy.
Joy, vilt dou take a litile Snuff,
For King and Queen? Joy, take enough:
Or if dou'd rather smoke a Peep
For de young Prince. Art dou asleep?
With that he hit him such a Thump,
As struck him flat upon his Rump,
In point of Courtesy; and so
Desired of his Grace to know,
Quis tam crudeles optavit sumere poenas?
Quis tandem de te licuit?

What Devil brought him to that Mien,
To make him look so Shaggereen?
Vat Traitor vas be so disloyal,
To Coventry, the Blood of Royal?
-- Mihi fama suprema
Nocte tuli --

Vat Guddihang durst be so bold?
And fate and be, my self vas told,
Ven dou vas after being dead,
Vas make me break my heart in Deed;
Tunc egomet Tumulum. --

Den did poor Nees upon de Green,
Put up for dee a dead Cof-feen,
Vid Flags, and Scutcheons in a Crate,
Built for de Prince to lie in State:
-- Et magna manes ter voce vocavi.

Thrice did I raise the Hull-lil-loo!
To save dee Shoule, but 'twou'd not do:
-- Te amice nequivi Conspicere.

For, fate, and be, my own Bro-deer,
Although I writ dee a Let-teer,
Ven dou was dead, and turned to dust,
(My own heart too vid sorrow burst)
One word in Answer did not come, Son,
Or a Green-Sod had been thy Tombstone.
Atque hic Priamides. --

God bless thee, Nees, said he; much Grace
And Goodness light on that sweet Face:
My dear Joy, thou have don me all
The Honor of a Funeral.
But it is my Irish Luck indeed;
Lacene, the Witch that made me bleed,
(And forced me in this Pound to waver)
These are the Tokens of her Favor.
When the Dutch-Horse leapt over the Wall,
And made the Fort one Funeral;
When wake, we found the Town a burning,
And all our Throats cut in the Morning.
(e) (o) Sed te qui vivum casus age fare Vicissim
Attulerint, An quae te fortuna fatigat
Vt tristes sine luce domos loca turbida adires?

But prithee Nees, in sober sadness,
What Dee'l possessed thee with this Madness,
That thou should leave thy stout Brigades,
Thy Bannaclab, and thy Pottades,
Thy Cows, thy Sheep, and thy Garrans;
Thy Slimbred, and thy good A Three Cornered Oat-Cake.
Stow-ans;
Thy Woods and Bogs, and thy fat Soil,
In Darkness here to toss and toil;
In such a Malapert as this is, Poenarum fernox.

Where all our Fare is empty Dishes.
What should the Prince do here among us,
Where Is neither Brandy, nor Mundong us?
All at Board-Wages, hard enough,
Threepence a Week to buy us Snuff:
And, Faith, when we are paid together,
We do not get that Threepence neither.
Hac vice Sermonum. --
Sed comes admonuit breviterque effata Sybilla est.
Nox ruit Aenaea, nos flendo ducimus horas?

In this, and in such Nonsenee, they
Did blunder out the live-long day;
Till Night began to light her Matches,
Putting on Vizard, and Black-patches;
And from a Goddess to a Witch, She
Turned in a Trice as black as Gypsy;
When she to rate 'em thus begun,
What, Sirrahs! will you never have done?
'Sdeath! have I nothing else to do,
But sit all day to stand to you?
Full time it is we should be trudging,
E're it be dark to seek a Lodging.
Are we come here, says she, to sleep?
(Laughing to see the Mawkins weep)
No, Nees, this Irish Melancholy
Will never do; forbear thy Folly:
Or we may lose our selves in new ways:
Hic locus est parts ubi se via findit in Ambas.

(For there was here a Cross of Two ways)
But how to go the right way home,
Nees knew no more than Pope of Rome;
But Shela, who was read full well
In all the Cavities of Hell,
Taking the Prince about the middle,
The Mystery did soon unriddle.
Dextera que Ditis magni sub moenia tendit.
H^c iter Elysium nobis: At leva malorum.

That on the Right, says she, before thee,
Is the high Road to Purgatory;
That on the Left's the beaten Road
Unto the Devils Chief abode;
Which out of Favor he intends,
And keeps it for his better Friends.
You know it, (Sir) march on, I pray;
You Goodman Two Brogues, that is your way.
Deiph^bus Contra, nae saevi magna sacerdos.
Discedam --

Nay, do not rage, replied the Prince;
Have but a little patience,
And if my Company's uneasy,
I Am vanished in a Trice, to please ye.
I go, I go, to fill the number
Of those that never sleep nor slumber;
Confined into a little Cot,
Where there is neither Pipe nor Pot:
No Two Pence Ordinary is here,
As much as Frumaty-Cel-leer:
Nay, not as much has Bryan oge,
To put in's head, as one Shamroge.
I decus, I nostrum. --
Tantum effatus and in verbo vestigia torsit.

Vell, vell, said Nees, vat can be cured,
Poor Bryan must not be endured:
So clapping A Plug of Tobacco.
Pig-Tail in his Fist,
They parting cried, and crying, kissed.
Respicit Aeneas subito, and sub rupe sinistra
Maenia lata videt tripli^i circundata muro.

Nees, gaping round about him, spies
Under the ground an Edifice,
Surrounded with a Tripple Moat,
Where Ducks and Geese could walk a-float;
And with impregnable Bastoons,
And Counterscarps, and Demiloons;
Where they had planted Ashes tall,
To stop the growing of the Wall:
Of all appeared above the ground,
Not half a Foot was to be found,
But Mud, and Sods, a Bridge to pass,
And that was covered over with Grass:
Porta adversa ingens --

A Gate there was of wondrous scope,
On Wooden Bolts did shut and open,
To let in People as they throng,
And keep 'em in when they were gone;
Rough-cast with yellow Lime and Mortar,
Where lay asleep the watchful Porter;
A very fit and proper House, Sir,
For such a worthy Guest to Cosher.
Nees weary grown, and loath to budg,
Took up his Quarters in the Lodge;
Swearing he could not part, not for his
Own Leef, till he got Door Cup.
Dough a Dorris.
With that the Porter brought 'em out
A Meddar stopped with a clean Clout;
Which tho 'twas reckoned but a small one,
Contained Three halfs of a whole Gallon.
Come Wench (says Nees), Dram of the Bottle;
With that, soak't off a whole half Pottle:
She pledged him half, more modest, and he
With Butter qualified the Brandy. Secuudus Campus, Dolorum.

Hinc exaudiri gemitus, and saeva sonari
Verbera, tum stridor ferri, tractaeque catenae.

Scarce had they drank, when they were scared
With Horror, which the Frolic marred:
For here they heard such Hull-lil-loo's,
Such Scrietches, and such Hub-bub-boo's, Hinc sui ductus in alium Campum
miseria doloribusqu Fuuestissimum Vice comes apud Osullevan

With Iron Bolts each loaded Stamper,
Rattling of Chains, and such a Clamper,
Put Nees into such Panick Fears,
His Brains were sunk into his Ears:
The little Remnant Nurse with Mout,
Had left from sucking through his Snout;
Which way of draining, does appear,
Makes Wit so scarce in Shamrogeshire.
Constitit Aenaeas strepitumque exterritus hausit.

Nees, shaking like an Aspin Leaf,
Under her Coats flown for Relief,
Cries, My Dear Joy, vat's here de heat?
Shela, vat's mean dis sad Rack-ete,
Dat, dat we cannot for de noise,
Ve cannot for'em hear our Eyes?
Tum vates sic orsa loqui. --

In Parables, mysterious Nun,
TO inform his Highness thus begun;
Although the Prince her Learned Discourse,
No more stoodunder than his Horse;
Sometimes said, I, and sometimes No,
When neither, salv'd it up with Ooo-gh.
Dux inclyte Teuerum.

Oh! Thou great Prince of Sheep and Cattle,
That never yet turned Face to Battle;
To run you through the Stygian Histories,
There Is very few discern these Mysteries:
Yet for the Grace I have with Joaney,
Queen of the Spirits*
Shoges, and my one Croney,
I know as much ( Nees) as another,
But dare not tell't, were it my Brother:
Yet if you are curious to know,
I Will strain a Point: Nees answered, Ooo-gh.
I must not do it, and yet, said she,
Tho we are Sworn to Secrecy;
I Will tell it, Nees, tho I should hang:
Was not Anchees, that Fit for nothing but the Gallows.
Guddihang,
My own Gos-sope, and thy own Mother,
Did stand with me to twenty other?
Hold, hold, a little Joy, says Nees,
Dere's yet a Crimsho on de Lees;
Ere you begin, Skerrit Dough no Skeal.
drink off your Ale,
For Drink is shorter den your Tale.
With that about went wodden Meddar,
Till both were Drunk and slept together
Under a Blankit or Covering.
Plad, which did extend
Cross the long Hall, from end to end:
On Litter laid, like Horse at Manger,
Which served for Family and Stranger.
This was their Fare in Purgatory,
But you, says Nees, forget your Story.
Rouse up; Before we go abroad,
I Will tell it Nees upon the Road.
In such Discourse they march along,
Then to her Tale she turned her Tongue.
Gnossius haec Rhadamanthus habet Durissima Regna
Castigatque auditque dolos. --

The Guddihang, that rules all
The Roast in Hell, is called Old Noll.
Mac Rhadamanth, a furious Devil,
Severe Revenger of all Evil:
Tho some Nickname him Old Rogue.
Old Scollogue,
Others do call him Young.
Robbin-oge.
Subigitque fateri.

He is the Prince of all this Province,
Abbot of the Infernal Covents;
If he but catch you in his Nabb,
Will make thy Dock squirt Bannaclab; Sower Milk.

For every slip will lay A Stroke.
a Wolt,
And strong A Cudgel.
Mus-tard for every fault;
For all thy Roguery and Tricks,
And play the Devil on two Sticks.
I would not be in his Condition,
That dares call Penance, Superstition;
Keeps Sundays, and Revileth Mass-days,
Eats Fish on Feasts, or Flesh on Fast-days;
Of Saints and Images speak slightly,
Fears not the Priest more than the Almighty:
Who Merit slights, nor hopes Salvation,
In Works of Superarrogation.
These are Offenses High and Menial;
But all the rest, said she, are Venial,
And bring no guilt upon a Nation,
As Murders, Plots, and Fornication.
Tum demum horrisono stridentes cardine sacrae
Panduntur portae. Cernis custodia qualis?

And now with horrid Noise, Dolorem puteus.
which no Pen
Can e're describe, the Doors did open;
As if all A Town in the heart of Fingaull.
Lusk and Cannought too,
Were joined in one loud Hub-bub-boo.
See thou that Monster with the Tail,
That ugly Monaghan Ferterd.
Spanci-all,
The worst of all the Devils? Within
Are worse a thousand times than him.
-- Tum Tartaras ipse.

And Hell it self from this same Brink,
Is distant twice as far you would think:
Phelim ghe Medona, The highest Hill in Ireland.
As Phelim Ghe Medlona, from
The lowest Valley of the A Valley in Kildare; Whence the Motto of the
Geraldines, Crom-a Boo. Gigantum Campus.
Crom.
Hic genus antiquum Terrae. --

Here did the ancient Danes Retreat in,
And all the Giants make their Seating.
Haco, Storater, and Bastollenon,
The old O Ruan, and O Collenon;
Whose Tombstone was (as it is sung)
Three hundred twenty two Foot long.
And there was Osker, great Mac Osin,
Who was to great O Fin near Cousin:
His Fathers-Brothers-Uncles Bard,
Called for that cause, his own Bas-tard.
Chastis'd with Whips, (a woeful story,)
Against Nassau, for turning Tory;
With great Vidi and Crudeles dantem Salmonea poenas.

O Salmon, a sad sight he,
Who would be Mac, and O Almighty:
Insulting over the petty Rabble,
Till he was met byth' Cones-table.
From all his Haughtiness was slur'd,
And fell at last into a T --
Even to a Spanlong, from a stride,
For Fall at last will have a Pride.
And here was that prodigious Tooll,
That Monstrous Giant, The great Garragantua of Ireland -- So famous in the
Irish Chronicles.
Finn Mac-Heuyle;
Whose Carcass buried in the Meadows,
-- Cui tota novem per jugera corpus
Porrigitur. --

Took up nine Acres of Pottados:
Nees could not find out, shoud he Rake Hell,
And skim the Dee'l, such a Mi-racle.
Quid memorem Lepithas etc?

What should I talk of A valiant Conqueror; He overcame the Picts.

Vide Cambrensem de rebus Hybernicis.


Oma Loughlin,
Dermot O Kings of Connough, descended from Heber, the White. Baron of Finglas.
Roirk, Kings of Connough, descended from Heber, the White. Baron of Finglas
Perish O Coughlin?
That it would grieve thy Guts, I Am sure,
To feel what Penance they endure.
Under their Head there hangs a Skein,
Ready to drop into their Brain;
-- Epulaeque ante ora paratae
Regifico luxu. --

Over their Nose prepared lies
A sumptuous Banquet of great price.
Pottados, and a Spole of Pork,
Where Nees longed sore to be at work;
Opsters, and Loysters; A Gam-moon, Lobsters and Oysters.

And Ham of yellow fat Ba-coon.
And Butter to eat with their Hog,
Was seven years buried in a Bog;
Enough for three full second Courses:
And though they Stomachs had like Horses,
As Ravenous as Mountain-Bears,
They durst not touch it for their Ears.
Often they labor to Enclose,
But still fall short, length of their Nose:
For if they offer but to stir'em,
There is a Fury ready for'em;
Furiarum maxima juxta
Occupat and manibus prohibet contingere mensas.

A little Devil, that does watch 'em,
Would claw their Jackets, if she catch 'em;
And always has her Rods in pickle,
If they presume, their Ribs to tickle:
And be it is very hard, said Nees,
To be so tempted by dis Chees;
To be invited to de Host,
And den be beaten by de Roast;
Now had I as leeve nor a groat,
I had de Hagg*
Callagh by de Throat:
Dat I might teach her Irish Breeding*
That is good, Hospitable Feeding.
For when Nees spied the Dishes, he
Had like to have strained his Modesty;
Yet he of Manners would make show,
But could not for his Guts tell how.
And was Resolved, as a Sol-deer,
To make each place his free Quar-teer;
But scratching of his Head at last,
Found 'twas unluckily a Fast!
For Nees of Knowledge had no Lack,
Had in his Guts an Almanac.
Knew by the Motion of the Sun,
When 'twas a Fast, and when 'twas none;
And now (a Pox on all ill Luck,)
The Fast in Nees's Stomach stuck;
But being Hungry both, and Dry,
( For Law has no necessity.)
And since his Hunger could not well
Digest with Complements in Hell,
Clapping his Hand on Basket-hilt,
With fury as he were to Tilt;
In mighty* Rage, swore by that Book,
He Would have it, or by Hook or Crook:
And what shift (think you) made the Lorance,
But slily to pretend Ig-norance;
For Ignorance the Gods appeases,
A Sovereign Cure for all Diseases.
The tender Mother of Devotion,
Which Project, Nees, did put in Motion,
That she would favor her own Shiled, Child.

And over a lame Dog help the Style;
Who without Priest or Dispensation,
Salves all with Mental Reservation;
And this the substance was of the Plot,
To Eat, and then say, he forgot.
Nees fell on Ham; then cried, a Gray,
Shela (dear Joy,) fat day's to day?
And be I do deserve a Beating;
For fate, I tink, I Am after Eating.
-- Atque intonat ore --

I am undone! Il-lil-lil-loo!
I am undone! What shall I do?
Oh Nees! Thou art a wicked Liver,
I am undone, disgraced for ever.
Now for this Trick, Hunger and Cold
Be thy Reward, to be so bold;
The Pope cannot Absolution give,
Eat Flesh upon St. Patricks Eve!
Despair, (...) Luck.
Spereen upon thy Fathers Brood,
And may it never do thee good,
Baas gu^ Taggard.
Be Death, without a Priest, thy Doom,
And no Dog howl upon thy Tomb.
Say on die Padreen, till dou Burst,
De Fox fares better Vhen he is Cursed;
And now (says he) I see my Fare,
De Devil take me, if I spare;
For over Boot, fate over Shoo;
And so in Earnest he fell too,
For Chair, upon a Pannier set,
For all was Fish came to his Net.
Shela, that by this time grew dry,
With Cursing Nees, and Progeny,
Spying a whole Churn on the Tilt,
More then half filled with Butter-Milk;
Got up the Churn.
Cunnoge to her Knee,
And took a Dose for Company;
But of the Butter would not taste,
'Cause (as you heard) it was a Fast.
Here Nees to show that he was free,
And given to Hospitallity,
('Cause he one scrape had not left more,)
Ordered the Fragments to the Poor.
Hic quibus invisi fratres dum vita manebat,
Pulsatusve parens, and fraus innexa Clienti.
Aut qui divitiis soli incubuere repertis,
Nec partem posuere suis. --

Here lodged a pack of envious Brothers, Campus Impiorum.

And Sons of Whores, that beat their Mothers;
With cheating Lawyers, here spied Nees,
Who Rob their Clients of their Fees:
Test-Breakers, and Law-Dispensators,
And Corporation Regulators;
Who more unconstant than the Tide,
For Interest, change from Side to Side.
A throng, amongst these Temporizers,
He finds of Usurers and Misers;
Who cark and care, to leave it all
To Fools, to Piss against the Wall.
Whore-mongers, and old Fornicators
Slain in Adultery, and Traitors,
Who rush into unlawful Battle,
And Steal their Landlords Sheep and Cattle:
To make their Penance, here are fain,
And get their Pen'worth for their pain.
-- Ne quaere doceri
Quam poenam. --

It is but needless to Importune,
To know the difference of their Fortune;
Some grind the Quern, Poenarum vallis and Rota.
and never part it;
Some hang on Trees, and some are Carted.
The Maids beat Hemp, the Boys twist Gads,
Some Highway Rogues, and some Dog-Pads;
Snuff-Stealers, Geese, and Hen-roost diverse,
Sheep-Nappers some, and some Hog-Drivers.
Where each one had, as they did try 'em,
Their Sentence suited to their Crime.
Some Burnt in the Hand, and some served worse,
For Stealing Mother of the Horse. A Mare.

The Rebels, Tories, and such Rogues,
That Died untimely in their Brogues,
In Hell are tied up from their Meat,
No bit to Drink, nor drop to Eat.
That silly Rogue, for hopes of Gain,
Burnt a Cravat of Point Lorr^in,
Because his Lady made a brace
Of Cobbs, by burning Silver Lace.
That Mawkin there hangs by the Head,
For picking Paint off Ginger-bread;
And lies exposed to Wind and Weather,
Extracting Gold from Gilded Leather.
This on the Pill'ry lost his Breath,
With Eggs and Turnips stoned to Death.
That Guddihang lost both his Ears,
Penance for Gutting the Oys-teers:
This Fool his Letter Sixpence cost,
To save the charge of Penny-Post*
This dropped his Candles in the Mire,
And after dried 'em at the Fire;
And many suffer in these Pounds,
For passing Halfpence for Half-Crowns.
Where Thesy sits, the saddest Soul
That ever Drank.
yelpt in Wooden Bowl,
Crying (in sort of scornful Laughter,)
Learn better Manners, then, hereafter.
Discite Justitiam moniti, and non temnere Divos.

I Will teach you Monaghans to tell,
And know St. Patrick from Tom Bell.
Vendidit his Auro Patriam, dominum que potentem
Imposuit; fixit leges pretio, atque Refixit.

That Lawless Prince, a Captive lies,
(Ready for spite, to eat his Eyes)
Did sell our Country for a Spell,
And now makes Penace for it in Hell:
He broke our Heads, and for a Paister,
Did place upon us a harsh Master.
One Tyrant brought into disgrace,
And put a Greater in his place.
He by a sinister Intreague,
Did, with his Country, sell poor Teague
Eternal Slave to the Monsieur,
As he had lost Two Farms before.
Made Laws, and Vows, and Promises,
And broke 'em all, to break poor Nees.
Hic Thalamum in vasit Natae --

That Fornicator Teague O Raughter,
Did Trip a Dance with his own Daughter,
And joined his Giblets, against all
The Laws Ecclesiastical.
Non mihi si linguae Centum.

But if I had a Thousand Tongues.
Brogues,
I could not Name thee all the Rogues;
Nor beat into thy addle Brains,
Their various Punishments and Pains.
Acceleremus ait, Susceptum perfice munus.

Thus said the Nun, when she no more
Could find to say, she then gave over;
Exhorting Nees to rise his sitting,
Observe his hits, and mind his knitting;
And stir his Lazy Stumps apace,
To give the Present to her Grace.
Nees by this time (the Board made clean,)
Began to buckle on his Knife.
skein;
And ready to attend the Nun,
Took Grace Cup.
Dough an Olt, and so trudged on.
Dixerat, ac pariter gressi per apaca locorum
Occupat Aenaeas adytum, corpusque Recenti
Spargit aqua --

Thus gorged, they foot it both together,
Throw Glin and Corough, God knows whither;
Till at the Cabin they arrived,
So richly for the Queen contrived;
There was in the Porch a Font of Water,
Wherewith Nees did his Chops bespatter.
Then with a Prayer, which he did say,
Profoundly blessed for the whole day;
He fell a fumbling for the Posies,
Which strait Transplanting, from his Breeches.
Trousies;
With Courtesy and Eloquence,
(Becoming so Renowned a Prince:)
Cries, Take your Present for a Whore,
So -- Ramumque adverso in Limine figit.

threw the Shamrog in the door.
For gifts, (not staying the unlocking,)
Like Irish, enter without Knocking;
His Actis, proprie exequitur secreta Sybillae
Devenere locos Laetos, and amaena vireta
Fortunatorum nemorum, Sedesque beatas.

This done, Limbus Patrum.
about the Coasts he beats
Of the Fair, handsome.
gay Woods, and happy Seats:
With Crystal Springs, and now they water'em
Upon the Banks of Limbo Patrum.
Where Nees no sooner had set Footing,
But, overjoyed, he fell a Hooting;
So proud he Stalked, upon the sudden,
Nees hardly knew the Ground he stood on:
And of his Senses half bereaven,
Swore a great Oath, he was in Heaven.
Wandering till now, without a Spark,
Groaping for Shela in the Dark;
So late Redeemed from smoaky Huts,
Their Eyes were dazzled with the Sluts;
For here the Old Old Rogues
Sculloques were all
Largior hic Campus Ether, and Lumine vestit
Purpure^. --

In a large Field as warm as Wool;
And had (exempted from our Cares,)
-- Solemque suum sua Sydera Norunt.

Their own, both Sun, and Moon, and Stars.
A Slut supplies the place of Candle,
In Socket of split Deal, for Handle:
With Rushes steept in Kitchin-Scurf,
And stuck in Candlestick of Turf:
And Fire enough to Tossed their Nose.
Some Exercise, and some Repose;
On Rushes some, and some on Pallets;
Some Vermin pick, and some pick Sallets:
Some pace the Whip, some trot the A Dance.
Hay,
Some at their Beads, and some Pars in gramineis exercent membra palestris
Contendunt ludo. --

at play.
Have you, in the gay Town of Lusk,
Observed their Sports about the Dusk
Of Patrons-Eve, when all the Rout
Of Raggamuffins flock about;
Men, Maids, and Children, Dogs and all,
To Celebrate the Festival;
So were they here assembled from
Each Corner of the Nation; some
Of every Rank, and had the Rogues
-- Et sulva luctantur arena.

A Thousand merry gay Sports.
Gamshogues.
The Old Men played at Blindman-Buff,
Some Roast Pottados, some grind Snuff:
At five Cards some, some wipe out scores
At One and Thirty, and All-Fours.
The Priests that Lodge upon this Common,
Do play at Irish, and Bac-Gammon;
For Prayers, for Kisses, and for Beads,
For Masses, and for Maiden-heads:
The Laymen Box, and Fight, and Wrestle;
And some make Ropes of Twisted Gads.
Hasle.
Pars pedibus plaudunt chor^as, and carmina dicunt.

Some Trip a Dance upon the Grass,
And every Bore.
Culleen has his Lass:
All Excercised, great and small,
All at some Game, and some at all:
For all were Gentlemen that played,
Not any one that had a Teague a Trade! Il-lillil-loo.
Trade.
E're in Mechanics Teague would Toil,
He Would run for sixpence forty Mile.
Nec non Threicius --

There was O Threicy, with Old Darcy,
Playing all Weathers at the Clarsey:
The Irish Harp, whose rusty Mettle,
Sounds like the patching of a Kettle.
Margery Cree
Mageen, yea, and be he could play,
Lilly-Boleer, Bulleen a la;
Skipping of Towns in Fingaul.
Gort, tripping of Swords,
Frisk of Baldoil best he affords:
And for Variety Cronaans,
Ports Lessons,
and Portrinkes, Jiggs,
and Strin-kans.
They had no Anthems for to Choose,
Their Hallelujes, were Hull-lil-loos:
And so as merry as the day
Is long, they past the Time away:
Hic genus antiquum Teueri. --
Magnanimi Heroes --

Here did the Ancient Heroes grace
The Warriers of former days. Limbus Hero^um.

Sons of Miletus.
Heber, and Hereman, Son of Heremon.
Nynvillagh,
de Danam, 3d. Conqueror of Ireland, he overcame Fervolg, and 100000 men in one
Battle.
Twathy de Dane, and Neil of the Nine Hostages of 9 Kingdoms.
Neil, Noyhillagh,
Son of Fin-Mac-Heul.
Eoghy O Finn, and A famous Giant.
Cahir Moro,
Con Kedcagh, so called from 100 Battles he fought.
Con Kedcagh, yea and Bryan Boro, more famous than all his Predecessors.
Bryan Boro,
Miletus, Father of Heberbane, first Inhabitant of Ireland; whence the Irish
are called Clonna Mile. Toby O Flannagan Moulin, and Mulrony, O Mulconry.
And great -- Et Trojae dardanus Author.

O Mile, that was the first
Of all our Nation, here was thrust:
Was Nees great Wonder make on a'me,
To see the Rebels look so tame.
Stalking about the Bogs and Moors,
Together with their Dogs and Whores;
Without a Rag, Trouses, or Brogues,
Picking of Sorrel and Sham-rogues:
Their warlike Per campos pascuntur equi. --

Horses grazing round about,
And bloody Clubs fixed in the Ground about;
That fertile Ground, where the tall Grass
Did grow too fast upon the Place,
Should you over Night a Gelding turn in,
You Would hardly find him the next Morning:
For whatsoever they fancied most,
Thieving or War, the Little.
donny Ghost,
Now they were dead, with the same Vigor,
Did imitate in Mood and Figure.
Shela, as soon as she espied
The Men and Horses by their side,
Did swear she would be after riding,
And strait did mount the Saddle striding:
Her Mill-posts, one, on either side
In Gad, for Stirrup, she had tied.
On the other side a Rope Straw.
Suggain,
With Girt and Hoosings over the Main;
Bridle and Crupper too, where Nees
Was got behind with bended Knees;
Digging in the Flank, with a Thorn.
Spologue,
In place of Spurs, stuck in his Brogue:
Tho all that they could do, could not
Put Dapple out of wonted Trot;
For tho from hence they sought relief,
Yet was the Jade not very Swift. Blind.
brief,
Nor very sure; for she was bleend,
And lame of the fore-Leg beheend;
The better sure for that Disaster,
Who could not overrun her Master;
And for her being Blind, they say,
She had less blame to lose her way:
T'her Feet sh'ad neither Shoes nor Clogs,
The fitter then to trot the Bogs:
Nor one Tooth left, she was so old,
For that the wiser Nees was told.
And glad he was, amongst the Colts,
To take the Jade with all her Faults.
In such an unfrequented Coast,
Who gained some way by riding Post.
Till the base Jade did let a Fart,
Which made 'em light, and Cursing, part.
To the next Limbo Nees did pack,
Bearing his Saddle on his back;
Cursing by Candle, Book, and Bell,
The Mare was glad she escaped so well;
For now a brace of Beggars mounted,
To make the Proverb good, she counted;
And hardly thought they would been so civil,
But rid directly to the Devil,
Conspicit ecce alias dextra levaque per herbam
V^seentes.

Here round about the Mountain-Hogs,
He saw them wallowing in the Bogs;
Some at the Irish-Trot, some pacing,
And some were with the Beasts a grazing:
They drank a Health to the Nations Glory,
Singing old Rose, and Tory Rory:
Laetumque Choro peana canentes.

With Rhimes, Cronaans, and many a ga^ Tric^
In Adoration of Saint Patrick.
Hic manus ob patriam pugnando vulnera passi.

Here all that fought in Vindication
Of Shamrog-shire, made Habitation.
The Champions of the Irish Cause,
A numerous Train of Mac's and O's,
Whom the Monsieur, by treacherous Art,
Had crammed into this Malapert.
Here Chaster Priests, and Friars truckle,
Who never made Confessant Cuckold:
With Rimers here, had their Abodes;
And Bards, who made their Patrons Gods,
Omnibus his nivea cinguntur tempora vitta.

Where every one had on his Brow
A Laurel made of twisted Straw; Suggane.

Shela, (that now had got amongst 'em,
And to be gone, thinking it longson,)
Cries out, upon the sudden, you Rogues,
Quae Regio Anchysen? --

Where is this Fellow, Goodmen two Brogues?
She asked them round the Square with Nees,
Where is this Guddihang, Anchees?
Musaeum ante omnes. --

But of Son to great Ossin, who was Son to Fin-Mac-Heul. His Stature was 145
Cupids, if you will believe O Flannagan, O Sullevan, Mulrony Collonan, and the
rest of their Authentic Legenders.
Mack-Muse, above the Rest,
Exalted by the Head and Crest.
To' his Stature, out of mere Regard,
Made Captain of the Sable Guard.
Nees, who with Gazing lost his Eyes,
Thought him the fittest, to Advice:
Till Shela, who was most intent,
Thus past her Cloister Complement.
Discite -- Quis habet Locus? illius ergo
Venimus. --

I prithee Joy, if thou have Leisure,
I beg thou will do me the Pleasure,
To do the Grace, to do the Favor,
To do the Kindness, for this Knave here,
That we may see Anchees; the Lad
Came only here to see his Dad.
Since Soldiering will do no Grace,
To get in Hell, an Evidence-Place;
For his time moves, on Rusty Wheels,
Much in the Elbows, out at Heels:
Which Loss his Highness would Repair,
By having Liberty to Swear;
And thou will much oblige poor Nees,
To show him to the Plot-Of-fice:
This favor Nees, and Shela Begs,
For we are weary of our Legs.
Atque huic Responsum paucis ita reddidit Heroes.
Nulli certa domus Lucis habitamus apertis
Riparumque toros, and prata recentia Rivis
Incolimus --

To which the tall Red-Beard Replied, Clo^e Derg Carret-pate.

Dear Joy, Thou comes on the Blind-side;
For we have neither House nor Home,
Nor any thing, to call our Own:
But live like Flies, in Bogs and Bushes,
And make our Beds on Banks of Rushes,
Or at the Fireside, where we
Ly all, Hickelty-Pickelty.
Nor has the most Notorious Tory,
TO his humble Crate, one single Story:
Garret nor Stare-case (which is Sadder)
To Climb up, on an A pair of Stairs.
English Ladder;
Where one low Gate to the first Floor,
Serves both for Chimney, and for Door:
Dis is so like our Shamrog-sheer,
Says Nees, Dou art my own Bro-deer.
Sheet on de House vid two three Story,
Give me de Vood for Tief and Tory;
And be is Nees tink dis more Comely,
For Home is Home, though nere so Homely:
Could I but see de Old Bore.
Sculloge,
Though he had neider Trous nor Brogue;
But cast an Eye upon de Elf,
Vhile my own Eye is vid my self;
Let Nees be Beat.
frapt, and suffer Rack,
Be Cut to pieces.
Spleee'd to Spoles, and damned as Black
As Next the Heart, nearest the Mouth,
Butter-milk, if ere I mean
To Stray so far from Home again.
-- Sed vos si sert ita cord voluntas.

Nay, if your longing be so great,
Mac-Muse, you shall no more entreat;
Hoc superate Jugum --

Stride up with me this tall Moun-tain,
And I will put you in the Lane:
Thus said, the Neighbouring-Fields he shows,
Bidding them follow on their Nose;
And that would lead 'em to the Place,
Where they might soon behold his Grace.
Nees, glad to hear of the Old Scull-oge,
Did kiss his Thumb.
Tumb, and Made a Leg.
scrape a Brogue;
Which done, scarce had he star'd about,
When, as he said, it so fell out:
-- Et facili vos tramite sistam.

At pater Anchyses penitus convalle virenti
Fataque, fortunasque virum, moresque, manusque.

Here Musing lay Anchees the Guddihang of a King, in a brown Studdy.
In a green-Arbour, reaping all
His Kit, and Kin, both great and small;
Their Hanging, and unlucky Fate,
Were Maggots of his doting Pate:
And their high Breeding, from the Fountains
Of Art, the Woods, and Boggs and Mountains.
Isque ubi tendentem adversum per gramina vidit
Aenaean. --

But when he saw the Couple Posting,
Throw the Green-Meddows to accost 'him;
-- Alacris palmas utrasque tetendit
Effusae genis lachrymae --

Clapping his hands, set up the Howl,
For all his Gouts, a Joyful Soul:
To see 'em Trotting to'ards his Grace,
And to his Legs he got a pace.
Propt on his Staff, came Hops, and Jumps,
Now on his hands, now on his Stumps;
And sometimes on all four did leap;
For kind will go, when it cannot creep.
Thus struggling, till at length he laid
His Palsy Hands upon his Head;
But so surpised to see the Mawkin,
-- Et vox excidit ore.

He could not speak one word for Talking:
At which a Shower of Tears, as Proof
Of further kindness mixed, with Snuff,
Came Running down his Beard so pleasing,
Which set his Gravity a Sneezing:
At which the Nun did Cross her Face;
And Nees did say, God save his Grace:
This way his Passion finding Vent,
The Youth he thus did Complement.
Venisti tandem? --

And art thou come at last my Rogue?
And all to see an Old Sculloge?
Art thou alive? see I thy Face,
Is this thy Voice I hear? The Grace
Of thy Discourse, able to turn
To Buttermilk.
Bonnaclabber a whole Churn;
I ever thought it would be so Nees,
And now you are better than thy promise:
Quas ego te terras? Et quanta per aequora vectum
Accipio? --

But prithee, Nees, what part of the World
Art thou come from? Whence art thou hurrl'd?
Tell me -- Quantis jactatum nate periclis?

(my Dear Joy) how goes Squares?
And all the State of thy Affairs?
Lest thou wast Hanged, I Vow and Swear,
Nees, I was in a pack of Fear.
Whether by French, or Dutch thou fell,
English or Scotch, I could not tell;
And therefore now I beg to tell,
What Wind 'twas drove thee into Hell.
Ille autem tua me genitor, tua tristis imago.

Good bless dee, Fader: Vill dou hear me,
I Will tell it fat vas bring it dear me?
Is dis vas make me in dis Place,
Only to see die own sweet Face:
Saepius occurrens haec limina tendere adegit.
Stant mare Tyrrheno Classes.

De Fleet on Curragh of Kilmore,
Burnt by de Scotch upon de Shore.
But now (Dear Joy) my own Fa-deer,
Since me have met so lucky here;
Da jungere dextram
Da genitor, Teque amplexu ne subtrahe nostro.

Give me die Paw, and let us shake
Our Hands, for old Acquaintance sake:
So taking Snuff, he made wry Faces,
Sie memorans larga flotu simul or a rigabat.

And both together wept their Graces.
Ter conatus ibi collo dare brachia circum,
Ter frustra comprensa manus effugit imago,
Bar levibus ventis, volu^rique simillima somno.

Here Nees, with gentle Shoulder Shrug,
Began to give the Irish-Hug.
Thrice did he fold his longing Arms,
Thrice he in vain bestowed his Charms;
For the pale Ghost, without more ado,
Did vanish like an empty Shadow:
And flew as swift as any Bat,
Before an Ear could lick her Cat.
Here in his Complement he faulter'd;
For with Anchees the Case was altered;
And though he was his next a Kin,
What but the Cat can ye have of the Skin.
Interea videt Aenaeas --

Nees, in the mean, espied a Wood,
That with a Bog surrounded stood;
Planted with Palaces of Pleasure,
And Orchards rich with Irish-Treasure;
Garlic, and Leeks, Pottado-Roots,
With Bilberrys, and Hasle-Nuts.
Hunc circum innumerae gentes, populique volabant.

Encompassed with a River, where
All Folks resorted far and near.
Have you beheld, when people pray
At Saint John's Well on Patron-day, In the North.

By Charm of Priest and Miracle,
To cure Diseases at this Well;
The Valleys filled with Blind and Lame,
And go as Limping as they came:
Just so this Raggamuffin Rout,
(Flocking an hundred Miles about)
From every Pole and Chantlet run,
As thick as Atoms in the Sun.
Horrescit visu subito, causasque requirit,
Ins^ius Aenaeas --

The Prince at this began to stammer,
And could not rest, the Ninnihammer,
Until he knew a Reason why
Those Troops about the Banks did ly;
And till Anchyses did deliver
All the deep Mysteries of the River.
Tum pat^x* Anchyses. --

Have you not heard of such a Man,
(Says he) could turn the Cat in Pan?
That could, to his Immortal Glory,
Transform a Whig into a Tory?
A Favorite make of a King-hater,
And form a Jesuit of a Quaker?
That valued not his Friends to lose 'em,
And hugged the Vipers in his Bosom:
Could turn a Monarch to a Mouse,
Transform a Tailor to a Louse:
And turn a Nation out of door,
And turn himself out of Three more:
That could a Bullet, at his like,
Anabaptize into a Pike;
Transform a Buzzard to a Bird,
And turn a Custard to a T --
And Wine to Water, (some say Piss,)
And all by Met^mseuchosis.
O-o-ogh (says Nees.) And be, I fear me;
(I tink) dou'rt after ask to jear me.
Have thou not heard, thou simple Ass,
Says he, of Old Pythagoras?
And be, not I in all my Leef,
I Will chance upon him for a Teef:
Fere should I hear of him, I tro,
He was not born at Lusk --
-- Oh! no:
But if thou will forbear thy Blunder,
I will unriddle all the Wonder.
Animae, -- Laethei ad fluminis unda^,
Securu^ latices and longa oblivia potunt.

Those Granadeers, that flock about
From Hill to Plain since the last Rout,
The bloody Rout in Londonderry.
Derry Battle,
Drink Daries dry, and stroke the Cattle;
Steal Sucklings, and through Key-holes sling,
Topeing, and dancing in a Ring;
Of Lethe take so large a Douse,
And long Oblivion-Cups Carouze.
Eternal Imps, that drink and sot,
Till what they Are they have forgot:
Their former Notions gone, the Fairies
Transform to Rats and Mice in Dairies;
As if this Body he should force
To be transformed into a Horse*
I Am not thy Father as I was,
But an irrational dull Ass;
A very Mungrel of a Stallion,
A Metamorphosed Fingallion.
This I thought good to tell thee first,
That thou may know the Devil's just.
Now to our Race, that thou may more
Rejoice, when all the Mischief's over.
Dixerat Anchyses, natumque unaque sybillans,
Conventus trahit in medios.

Thus said, unto a Mount his Son
He leads, together with the Nun.
Where all the Woods and Valleys rung on'em,
And placed him in the very throng on'em:
That every one might flock to see,
And know what News in Tripoly.
Nune age Dardaniam prolem --

Now to it, my Son, now comes the Story
Of all thy Race, thy Nations Glory:
The Kings that did, and hence shall shine,
Descended from Mac Heber's Line;
I Will read in History a short one,
And eke declare thee all thy Fortune.
Ille vidis para Juvenis qui nittitur hasta.

That Tory-Knave, cast but thy Eye on,
(Fierce as a Wolf, bold as a Lion)
That leans upon his bloody Lance,
He is the first begins the Dance:
And by a Massacre shall rise out,
To feed the Crows, shall pick his Eyes out;
Phelim O Neal.
Phelim the Kern, began the Wars,
Descended from the Highlanders;
Born and bred up amongst the Woods,
And savage as the Mountain Studs:
By Lavin spawnd amongst the Bogs,
To be a Rogue from Race of Rogues.
The next deserves our Commendation, De Burgo.

Is Bork, the Glory of our Nation;
Slyvius Aenaeas pariter pietate vel armis
-- Egregius --

And young Enees, Mac Nees, the same
Enees, that shall Restore thy Name:
The Wood-kern, Nees, (whom I Will maintain) as
Egregious a Rogue in grain, as
Is Nees himself; and, let me tell you,
Will make as terrible a Fellow;
If he to get can once prevail
A Foot within the English Pale;
The Desperado's how they run!
And tempt the Fates to be undone!
And though they have scarce an Ounce of Snuff,
Yet will the Bully Ruffins huff.
But those you see so richly dressed,
With Civil Horns upon their Crest;
The Cuckold's Wreath, shall Crown 'em then,
Are Citizens and Aldermen:
With Statesmen, Chancellors, and Judges, Fitton, Nangle, etc.

On purpose chose to be our Drudges:
Who Laws and Statutes shall Invent,
To Work an Irish Settlement.
Quin and avo comitem sese mavortius addet,
-- Romulus --

But e're a total Restoration
Do heal the Ruptures of this Nation;
In Britain shall a Monarch Reign,
Will bring this Nation to the Wain;
Whom Ilia shall in England bear,
That shall extend his Scepter here;
Who (by a Usurpation bold,)
Shall lose his Land. Oliver Crom.
Behold, behold,
A double Crown Impales his Brow,
Who was both King and Prophet too:
In Heaven, whom Almighty Jove,
Shall honor with a Crown above;
Viden ut geminae stant vertice crista.

At pater ipse suo superum jam signat honor.

Who shall bequeath unto his Son,
The Power of this Dominion;
Septemque una sibi muro circundabit Arces,
Foelix prole virum. Qualis Berecynthia matter.

In Moats and Walls, enclosing* then
Co^k-bill, Cock-hill. St. Nicholas and Paulgate, Conduit-Hill, and the two
Hills of Keisers, and School-house Lane.
Seven Hills, possessed with valiant men;
As Virgin-Lady Crowned does ride,
Through Dublin-City, by whose side
An hundred Gods, for Lackeys run,
Lackeys, for They were Irish.
Trades these Gods had none.
Their chiefest work shall be their Sport,
To breed Dissension at the Court;
Where they shall never cease to flock,
Till they have brought his Head to'th' Block.
Thus shall he fall, and to his Son*
He shall bequeath an empty Throne:
-- Qui rursus latio regnata per arva,
-- Redit. --

Which e're he fills, must banished, Toil,
For Laurels in a Foreign Soil:
Thence, with Majestic Glory born,
With greater Triumph shall return;
Whose Restauration-Day, the Head
Of Rump and Regicides do dread:
And though poor Ireland hopes in vain,
'Twill never be Ours, while He does Reign.
Qui rursus constituet Rem.

A Court of Claiming he shall call,
Poor Teague again is out of All:
His Claim rejected, and his Lands
Restored into the English hands.
Nor dare a Nocent-Rebel once stir,
In Vlster, Connaught, Mead, or Munster;
The Irish Glory so departed,
And poor Enees so quite dead-hearted;
That he has hardly left a Groat,
To pay for cutting English-Throat.
The Heretics shall sit at helm,
And rule (while he does Reign) the Realm;
Shall bear on Breast the Royal Stamp,
All Offices in Court and Camp.
So that poor Nees shall not be able,
To put in for a Cones-table:
But still to make his own Life easy,
He shall do all he can to please ye;
Who was, had he Teagues Cause maintain^d,
The best of Kings that ever Reigned.
He dead, -- Hic Casar and omnis Juli Progenies,
^^gnum Coeli ventura sub aexem.

his Brother mounts the Throne,
and once more Ireland is our own.
^ie Petre now shall bear the sway,
and Popery shall come in play:
^e shall new model all the Nation,
^^om College unto Corporation:
To former plight he shall transplant us,
By Mandats, Briefs, and Quo Warranto's.
Gospel and Law shall trample over,
By a Supreme Dispensing Power:
If any jealous Lord oppose it,
Shall purge in Inquisition Closet;
And by his Will, which is his Law,
Shall keep the Heretics in awe:
In spite of Law, shall do his best
To take off Penal, and the Test;
And for the Freedom of our Nation,
Shall make an Act of Toleration;
Where all may have their Liberty
To go to Hell as well as Thee.
Shall turn the Nobles in disgrace,
For Teague and Rory to make place;
Turning, ( Ill omen of his Fall)
'Till he himself turn out of all:
Of Promise-making-Kings the best,
'Till over-ridden by the Priest;
Which turned the Helm into a Helm.
Paddle
And threw great J^^^s out of the Saddle.
Wonders shall Chronicle his Reign,
A Wilderness shall cross the Main.
The Belgick-Lyon then shall keep
From Roman Wolf the abandoned Sheep.
A Sun shall rise up in the West,
That over-cast shall set in the East;
Deserted by his chief Commanders,
Frighted with Bear-skins, and Fin-landers;
Shall, with the scampering Court withdrawn,
Leave there an Abdicated Throne:
When he has fixed his French Intrigue,
Shall for protection fly to Teague:
Where French and Irish Officers
Shall fall together by the ears.
Monsieur shall fight, his Own to hold;
Teague, to retrieve his Country sold:
Till Frog and Mouse in bloody wrath,
The Stork shall come and swallow both:
The Belgian Stork without a stroke,
(That Nests within the Royal Oak,)
Shall drive the Locust from our shore,
And name of Nees, shall be no more*
But now our Forces overthrown,
And Nees, with Abdicated, flown;
On a new Sun fix both thine Eyes,
Exalted in the British Skies:
Who timely through the Tempest broke,
An Orange grafted on the Oak.
Whose Juice the English Hearts shall cheer,
And shall diffuse it is Virtue here; Huc geminas inflecte acirs, hanc aspice
gentem
Romanosque tuos. --


Destroying Popish Priests and Steeple,
And worst of Vermin here, the People:
Where ere an Orange comes in place,
Poor Nees shall make a sour Face:
In's Stomach stick, which to the rest
Shall be a Cordial to digest.
Hic vir, hic est tibi quem promit^i saepius audis
Augustus Caesar. --

This, this is He, the Warlike Prince,
Heaven promised long in their Defense;
Englands Augustus, who shall be
The Subject of Chronology:
Who, placed upon the British Throne,
Shall make poor Nees to sing, O hone!
-- Divugenus --

Sent from Above; who shall restore
The Dagon they so much adore.
-- Aurea condet secula. --

The Golden Age of Liberty,
From Yoke of Pagan Slavery;
And rescue from the impending shower
Of Priest, and Arbitrary Power.
-- Super and Garamaentes and Indos
Proferet Imperium --

His boundless Empire shall advance
From larger Britain over France:
Nor shall the Blacks, or Indian Shore,
Set Limits to his Naval Power.
-- Jacet extra siderae tellus.
Hujus in adventu --

Beyond the Seas, not far Remote,
There lies a little Lowland Spot;
In Farm from Neptune, which shall be
Of this great Mars the Nursery.
Thence, by a Solemn Invitation,
Shall make a Second Reformation:
Who swifter Winged than flying Fame,
And silent as the Night he came;
Shall, without noise of Proclamation,
Bring swift Deliverance to that Nation.
Whose Amunition's like white Powder,
Nor are his Public Triumphs louder;
Which, wheresoever the strokes Rebound,
Does Execution without Sound.
Without a word bring home the Fleece
Of Jason, or a Fleet to Greece.
-- Jam nunc and Caspia Regna
Responsis horrent divum. --

The Court, and many a Pagan Peer,
With the lost Monarch sculk for fear;
Who bleeds e're he Receives a Wound,
Cares, Doubts, and Jealousies abound:
Proud Modena, from Albion Banished,
Shall (with her young Impostor vanished;)
Fly over to France, to Shield her Honor
By Him whose Counsels have undone her.
The Holy Fathers and the Monks,
Shall scour with their Religious Punks;
Their Relics, Crosses, Cowls and Fringes,
Shall with our Church be off the Hinges:
The Fools, who did not timely scower,
Shall Plot in Newgate, and the Tower.
Nec vero Alcides tantum Telluris obibat
Fixerat aeripidem Cervum licet --

Nor did Alcide e're undertake
So great a Task for Virtues sake;
Or half so much attempted he
To set a Captive-Nation free,
Though the swift Stag he did subdue,
And with his Shaft the Hydra slew.
Nor Bacchus, who joint Tigers sent
In Chains, from Nysa's steep Descent;
Et dubitamus adhuc Virtutem extendere factis.

And shall we doubt such Virtue lacks
Courage adequat to his Facts?
Aut metus? --

Or fear diswade the Son of Jove,
His Title to this Land to prove;
Whose Conquest, in dispite of Foes,
(Let Teague and Monsieur Interpose)
This Government shall still retain,
While Kings in British Isles do Reign?
And now behold the petty Kings,
That more remote this story sings;
Who by Invasion, and strong hand,
Shall play the Devil in this Land.
But voe is dat same Cohil clovederg, Anglice Cohil the Red. K. of Ireland; so
says Mulconry; but Mulrony, who is a more Authentic Historian, affirms, it
alludes to de Coursey.
Cuckold born,
( Says Nees) whose Head is stuck vid horn?
-- Nosco crines incanaque menta.

And be I know de Culleen, fate,
By his Red Beard, and Carret Pate:
Must he come in? so great a Rogue?
Then every Day must have his Dog.
This, says Anchyses, is the first,
Shall Laws ordain t'encourage Lust?
-- Curibus parvis and paupere terra
Missusin Imperium Magnum. --

Advanced a King, the Beggars Brat,
From a small Crate, and Garden-plat.
Who of this Land the lazy Custom
Shall break, and into Arms shall thrust 'em
Those silly Troops, not used, God knows,
So often to Triumphs, as to Blows.
-- Quem juxta sequitur jactantior Ancus.

The next of Valor, that gives proof,
Mac-Ancy, a vainglorious Huff;
A swelling Bladder, since his Death,
Blown with the Wind of popular Breath.
Vis and Tarquines Regis, animumque superbum Vltoris Bruti.

Will thou the Kings of Miletus, Father of all the Kings of Ireland; whence the
Irish are called Clonna-Mile. Ger. Cambrensis.
Clonna-Mile
Behold, that hence shall rule this Isle;
The haughty mind, and all the Rout
Of the Revengeful, This is Ed. de la Bruce, who in the year of Ed. 2d. styled
himself King of Ireland. Baron Finglus, and Sir John Davis of the State of
Ireland.
de La Brute!
The first that shall assume the power,
With Tory Troops the Bogs to scower;
And send an Army of Commanders,
To fight the Britains, and Low-Landers:
Quin Decios Drusosque procul. --

Behold the The Decys, an ancient Family in Ireland; they opposed Tyrone's
Rebellion in Munster; and were always Friends to the English Interest, till now.
Decy's, far and near,
And Drusye's in their Ranks appear;
Mac-Tory-Quat, and Ensign Camill,
With Madoge sharp, to cut off Mamill;
Or strip the Infant from the Womb,
Laid with the Mother in one Tomb: Aspice Torquatum. --

-- Et Referentem signa Camillum.


Or spin their Guts out, being bound
First to a Tree, and then whipped round:
Illae autem. --

Nor shall in this their fury cease, The Cruelty committed by the Irish Rebels
upon the English.

Till they make Candles of their Grease:
Stab, Hang, or Burn 'em, Damn, and Curse,
Without Compassion, or Remorse:
In Houses, Churches, or the Roads,
To clear the Land of English Toads;
Shall slay their Sheep, Upon their Sheep and Cattle.
(the Fury Elves,)
And burn their Barnes, to starve themselves:
If but a Cow shall set up Tone
In any Language but our own,
As an Infringement of our Charter,
They shall condemn to present Slaughter.
Heu quantum inter se Bellum! --

What Bloody Wars, what Dire Infections?
What Murders, Plots, and Insurrections;
Will these men cause, when cross the Ferry,
They bend their Troops to Londonderry?
Sending their fierce Battalions forth,
Against the Rebels in the North?
And then like a swift Inundation,
Threaten the Scot with an Invasion.
Ne pueri, ne tanta animis assues^i^e bella.

Boys! Boys! be not so hot to sin,
And learn to sleep in a whole Skin.
Tuque prior, tu parce genus qui ducis Olympo.

But thou thy Countrymen may spare,
Was Born thy self in Shamrogshire.
The rest, Nees, throw thy Club at Them.
'ame,
And make 'em run away for shame.
Ille triumphata. --

He with his Hugh buey O Neal.
Provinder and Laggage,
Over top of Altitudines ultoniae. Gen* Cambren.
Ardes shall draw his Baggage.
That Prodigal so fiercely stood,
In the expense of British Blood.
Eruet ille Argos. --

He shall destroy the Norman Race,
And all the English Lords displace.
King -- n himself shall melt his Wings,
The warlike Offspring of the Kings.
Stout Bl -- y too shall feel our Blows,
Those Champions of the English Cause.
Many, with Inch -- n, shall fly
To England, for a fresh supply.
Their Goods Sequestered and their Lands
Restored into the Owners hands;
Vltus avos Trojae. --

To be revenged upon his Pate,
That kept poor Nees from his Estate:
But when they Land at Derry-Bay,
Let Nees expect a bloody day.
Quis te magne Cato? --

Who can forget the Learned This is Cormack Mac Art, styled, the Cato of
Ireland.

He writ a Treatise of the Virtues of a Pottado, beyond the Wisdom of Solomon,
the Knowledge of Aristotle, the Rhetoric of Cicero. Con. Clerenaugh, and
Mureartagh O Collegan.


Cato,
That writ so much on a Pottado;
Who crammed in every Page four Columns,
Six of Poor Robin's single Volumns.
At the Quis te Gracchi genus. --

Mac-Graths, who can but wonder,
Aut geminos duo fulmina Belli.

Or the two Burks, those Sons of Thunder?
With that poor Devil, O Parvoque potentem Fabricium?

Fa -- beer,
That base Bastard, and proud Beg-geer.
Or Serany, Son of a Pander,
Raised from the Plow to a Commander;
-- Vel te sulco Serrane serentem.

Kicked merely out of merit up,
From Tail of Horse, to Head of Troop?
Whose famous Deeds recorded may be,
Quo fessum rapitis Faebij?

Amongst the Acts of Art Mac Faby: Donnogh Mac Art Mac Faby.

Who shall retrieve our Ruins best;
Thou art the Man of all the rest.
Aspice ut insignis spoliis Marcellus opimis,
Ingreditor, Victorque Viros supereminet omnes*

Then clapping* hands, as sign of wonder,
Behold (says he) that Son of Thunder,
Tyrconnel, with his Spoils possessed,
The bravest King of all the rest.
His Haughtiness bred in the Bogs,
Shall call his Betters, Rogues and Dogs.
From Butchers Bratt, raised to a Peer,
To be a K. in Shamrogshire.
Hic Rem Romanam-sistet. --

This Devil shall do that which no Man
Could yet effect, restore the Roman;
And in his time establish Popery,
Which Curse ye Meroz calls a Foppery.
Chapels shall up, the Churches down,
And all the Land shall be our own.
He shall secure our Title here,
By a Rebellion in each Sheir,
An Army shall Collect the Rent,
Confirm our Rights by Parliament.
The Act of Settlement shall bate,
And Nees shall get his own Estate,
If by the Monsieur not supplanted,
Who for a Sum has Covenanted;
And both their Interests be not lost
By the prevailing British Host.
-- Sternet Poenos. --

He shall subdue the Heretic,
To bring in trusty Catholic.
Humble the Peer, Exalt the Peasant,
Without Assize of damage-Feisant.
And shall advance the meanest sort
To highest place of Camp and Court:
All shall be common as before;
No more shall Justices, no more
Shall Court of Claims, or Council Table,
Or Formidon, be formidable.
Drink down Excise, know no Commit,
But Routs and Riots in each City;
Cut Throats; in Massacre skilled well;
And Plunder, though it were in Hell.
Thus shall he rule the Rebel Rout,
Till by the Monsieur josled out;
Reduced to such a low Condition,
He shall not to Curse have a Commission.
Yet though his short insulting be
But a continued Tyranny,
All Articles he shall defy, Sheridon's Case.

And none shall say, black is his Eye.
Atque hic Aenaeas, una namque ire videb^t,
Egregium forma Juvenem, and fulgentibus Armis,

But here Enees had now espied
A gay young Spark march by his side, Mark Tal -- his Bastard Son.

In a Blue Scarlet Coat did shine,
And Yellow Trouses, wondrous fine.
He had a Scarf about his Arse,
Edged with White Fringe of Yellow Lace:
His Cap with Plume of Feathers set,
Sent from the Pullets of Lorett:
His Wig St. Peter's Hairs did bless,
A Present from his Holiness.
His Crevat, flowered over with Snuff,
Made of the Virgin Mary's Ruff;
So finely dressed, that you would deem,
'Twould do a Blind-man good to see him.
Quis Pater ille virum qui sic comitatur euntem:
Filius, anne aliquis magna de stirpe neporum?

Dear Joy (says Nees) vho is that Owl,
Valks vid his Fader Cheek by Jowl?
Is it his Son, or Bastard Heir,
Or some gay Irish Officere?
Quis strepitus circa comitem?

Vhat makes 'em all about so busy?
Quantum instar in ipso?

O hone! How like the Fader is he?
And be so like, sure as a Gun,
De Fader is his very Son.
But now the Night, like thickning Smoke
That dwells in Crates, possession took
Of The Firmament, when he begun,
With weeping, thus to advise his Son.
Tum pater Anchyses lachrymis ingressus in oris.
O nate ingentem Luctum ne quaere tuorum! --

Oh Nees, poor Nees, do not importune,
To know thy Countrey-mens misfortune,
That will befall them by Adventurers,
By English, Dutch, and Scotch Debenturers:
Our Lands possessed, we put to rout,
By two Brigades of Horse and Foot:
Transported some, and some Transplanted,
Whilst the prevailing Party Ranted.
Till he is restored, with all his Train:
But here is the Devil on it again;
Ostendent Terris hunc tantum fata! --

The Fates will only show his Reign,
To hope for more, is but in vain.
-- Nimium vobis Romana propag^.

The Roman Tribe would be too strong,
If this good luck should last too long.
How many Gallant Troops, this Sot
Will he Condemn unto the Pot?
How many fitter to Command,
And Soldiers too, will he Disband?
And carry on the sly Intrigue,
To make a Vacancy for Teague.
Nec puer Iliaca quisquam --

And truly, Nees, there is never a one
For us to crack of, when he is gone;
Not one, like Him, will ever appear
Again, to grow in Shamrogeshire.
Heu pietas! Heu prisca fides!

Vbboo! Vbboo! A Pack of Cards,
The Good Old Faith, which none Regards:
The Shams, the Dice, and wondrous Flight*
This Lord will manifest in Fight.
-- Neo illi quisquam se impune tulisset
Obvius armae^o. Seu cum pedes iret in hostem
Seu Spumantis equi. --

Whither a Donny Musque-teer,
Or Guddihang of a Troo-peer.
Not one shall meet him, not a Man,
But he will shun him, if he can.
Heu miserande puer! Si qua fata aspera rumpas
Tu Marcellus e^^s. --

Now Nees, (poor Boy) had thou the Pate
To overcome thy harder Fate;
It Is Nees alone, it is only He,
Tyrconnel, my White Boy shall be.
-- Manibus date lillia plenis
Na^a Corona. --

( Il-lil-lil-loo:) My Crumacree,
The hopes of all thy Family:
Bring me a Bunch of Suggane Ropes,
Of Shamroges, and Pottado-Tops:
With Pig-tail, steeped in Chamber-Lees,
To make a Laurel for Enees;
With Crevat-string of Wattle-Twist;
Confess thy last unto the Priest:
Lilli-bo-lero, lero sing,
Tyrconnel is no longer K --
-- Sic tota passim Regione Vacantur.

So hooting through the Woods, they sat
To light a Pipe at the next Crate;
Died through with Smoke, the spacious Bowl,
Out of mere Providence* kept foul;
When Nees of Funk had never a Corn,
Would, fier'd, like a Chimney burn:
The Smoke went round, which they did draw
Through supplemental Foot of Straw.
TO enlarge the Head, which lighted shows,
Like a Carbuncle on the Nose;
Left by his Sire, a Legacy,
The Jewel of all the Family.
Quae postquam Anchyses natum per singula duxit,
Incenditque animum famae venientis amore,
Exin Bella Viro memorat, quae deinde gerenda,
Et quocunque modo fugiatque, feratque laborem.

Last, after he had led his Son
From Crate to Cabin, with the Nun,
Expecting nothing but to sport on
The hopes of their succeeding Fortune:
He falls again to open War,
But there-withal he does declare;
How to prevent it, where, and when,
He does demonstrate there, and then.
In short, it was to run away;
Which said, he had no more to say.
Sunt geminae somni portae, quarum altera fertur
Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus umbris.

There are two famous Gates of Sleep,
Through which all Maggot Dreams do creep,
As nimble Hocus, and Hobgoblin,
Through Creeks, and Key-holes, use to hobble in.
The first whereof is built of Horn,
Through which all is true, that e're was born:
Altera candenti perfecta nitens Elephanto,
Sed falsa ad Coelum mittunt insomnia manes.

The other made of Ivory,
The Sally-port of Forgery;
Where it no sooner makes a pother
In one Ear, but goes out at the other.
His ubi tum natum Anchyses unaque Sybillam,
Prosequitur dictis, portaque immi^tit eburna.

Through which, when he had led 'em both,
Where (think you) should he let 'em forth,
But at the Horns? A subtle Mystery,
To ratify our present History.
The Dream being out, they dropped a Mass,
And parted at Peg-Trantom's Pass.
The old Man he returned to Hell,
And Shela, to Enchanted Cell;
Ille viam secat ad naves, sociosque Revisit.

And Nees got under him his Feet, Vice-comes a Purgatorio reddit.

To view his Soldiers in the Fleet: O Sullevan.

Who, glad to see his Grace Restored,
With Hil-lil-loo's the Harbor roared;
For to the Devil Nees was gone,
And left his Men a Roguing on.
Tum se ad -- Recto fert l^ttore cursum.

Some to the Sign of the Mare-maid.
Woman, sail,
With the Fish growing at her Tail.
Some the Unicorn.
Garrane, their Lodging made,
With Barber's-pole upon his Head:
Others, at the next Sign below,
Of The Sarazens-Head.
Irishman, y-crying O-o-o-h!
But Nees, who had the Noblest place,
Lodged at the Sign of the The Globe.
Ca-bash;
The only House; (and 'twas a wonder,
Although in Hell) that escaped their Plunder.
Nees, with his Torys, now so gay,
Directs his Course to Dublin-Bay;
But finding there, that things went so
(Managed by a worse Devil, De^a^x.
Devo;)
He chose, deprived of all his Glory,
To Scamper back to Purgatory.
Anchora de prora jacitur, stant littore puppes.

The Anchor tied with Cord of VVood,
He strait-way cast into the Mud;
Resolving thence to Travel by Land,
And all the Cotts did ride on dry Land.
NOtwithstanding the Care taken in the Marginal Notes, to explicate the
Fingallian Words, or Irish Phrases; yet, many having escaped, we think fit to
add this Alphabetical Table, for their fuller Explanation.

THE TABLE.
A.
A'Me, Them. Agra, Dear. Arroon, Joy. Alsoon, Alce.
B.
Brogue, Shoe. Barrede, Cap. Banna-clab, Thick-Milk. Bolcane, Strong-water.
Brief, Swift. Baldoyl, Towns in Fingaul. Bolrudderry, Towns in Fingaul.
Bonratty, Towns in Fingaul. Boldarys, Trumperies.
C.
Currogh, Heath. Cronaan, Song. Curtlagh, Weeds. Commaan, Heath, Common. Cott,
Boat. Culleen, Bore, Tenant. Corkeen, Kerchief. Cramacre, Sweetheart. C^ge*
Wooden-Pot. Cosher, Go^^oping. Cunnoque, Churn.
D.
Dough a Dorris, Door Cup. Do^gh an Olt, Grace Cup. Drollains, Fopperies.
Dunboyn, A T. in Fingaul.
E.
Eoghy Offin. A Giant.
F.
Frig, Dance. Frap, A Stroke. Frapping, Beating.
G.
Gad, A With. Gay, Handsome, Garrane, Horse. Gamshoge, Game, Sport. Godeen,
Staff, Pole. Guddi-hang, Fit for nothing but the Gallows.
H.
Hay, Irish-Hay, a Dance. Hut, Cabin.
I.
Il-lil-lil-loo, Irish-Howl.
K.
Kern, Woodkern, Bore. Kesh, Creel.
L.
Liffy, The River runs through Dublin. Lusk, A Town in Fingaul. Lough Erin Two
Lakes in Ireland. Lough Neagh Two Lakes in Ireland.
M.
Macham, A Game at Cards. Madog^, A Skein. Mander, Dally. Mageen, Margery.
Mackillmone, Song, Cronaan. Mustard, Cudgel. Meddar, A hollow square piece of
Wood, to drink out of. Monaghan, Clowns, Inhabitants of the County of Monaghan.
N.
Nees, Enees, Aenaeas.
O.
Oge, Young.
P.
Padreen, Paternoster. Padeen, Patrick. Portlaghrin, A Dance.
R.
Rory, Roger.
S.
Shela, Sybilla. Spanciald, Fettered. Spereen, Despair. Shamroge, 3 leaved
Grass. Shanon, A River. Swords, A Town in Fingaul. Spole, Of Pork. Spologe, A
Thorn. Sculloge, Old man. Strink-an, Jigg. Strowan, A Three-corner'd
Oatmeal-Cake.
T.
Tuffoge, Fart. Trouses, Breeches.
W.
Wolt, Lash.
Y.
Yolk, Heart.


FINIS.

