THE FAMOUS TRAGEDY OF King Charles I.

Basely BUTCHERED by those who are,

Omne nefas proni patare pudoris inanes
Crudeles, violenti, Importunique tyranni
Mendaces, falsi, perversi, perfidiosi,
Faedifragi, falsis verbis infunda loquentes.
IN WHICH IS INCLUDED, The several Combinations and machinations that brought
that incomparable PRINCE to the Block, the overtures happening at the famous
Seige of Colchester, the Tragical falls of Sir Charles Lucas and Sir George
Lisle, the just reward of the Leveller Rainsborough, Hamilton and Bailies
Trecheries, In delivering the late Scottish Army into the hands of Cromwell,
and the design the Rebels have, to destroy the ROYAL POSTERITY.

Printed in the Year, 1649.

To the Sacred MAJESTY OF Great Britain, France and Ireland, KING CHARLES II.
May it please Your Majesty,
I.
Stern Fates permitted, Your Great Sire to fall
By those (who at the first) disguised their ends
With specious shows, and have procured our thrall
Like holy miscreants, and Religious Fiends,
By a most pious trick, have slav'd us all
To Death, an Hell, till Jove his mission sends
By Michal's hand, to Thee Great Charles His Heir
To Redeem us, and fill the Regal Chair.
II.
The depth of their Design, was hatched in Hell
From the first hour, Your Father warmed his Seat;
So that even Infants now can prattle well
Twenty years since (in thought they were as great
As now they are) and (O most strange) to tell
Had taken Oaths, their Machine, to complete
Or sink in the attempt, though to the Nation
It seemed, they nothing sought, but Reformation.
III.
O Reformation dire, that kills our King,
Does both invert, and subvert, Discipline;
Vacates all Law, each private man does bring
(For fear) to countenance, their damned Design.
Propriety, Great Britains Gimiel KING
Taken away, while Treason in a line
Like the plague takes, and the damned Faction grows
Great in that Tribe, in which at first it rose.
IV.
Our Goods and Lives, we forfeit at their wills
Our Noble Heroes, do by dozens fall;
The Loyal Gentry, grief, or Prisons kills;
The People each day robbed and spoiled of all,
While those Plebeians, who procure our ills
Feed high, sleep soft, have Kingdoms at their calls.
Strange revolution, O accursed mutation
That appoints Cobblers for to rule a Nation.
V.
But sure (Great Prince) thou often have laughed aloud
To cogitate, what their ambition
Has brought them to, who now are grown so proud
As (fearlesse of thy strength, and their condition)
As to proclaim Thee Traitor, midst the crowd
And to divulge, their Traiterous prohibition
If thou return, for to regaine thy right
Thou must expect to perish by their spite.
VI.
Summon all Nations, to thy speedy aid,
Search from the Orient to the Occident,
The Gets, and Parthians, Switzers, (who are swaid
By fierce Camillas second) Tartars bent
To blood and horror, those whose God is said
To hang twixt Heaven and Earth, the Truculent;
Fastidious Moore, take all, except against none,
For many hands, must lead Thee to Thy Throne.
VII.
So let this most unhospitable Land
Smart for her Treasons till all kneel to Thee
Offering themselves as Slaves to Thy Command
Whom Jove has sworn, an Earthly Deity
That by Thy heavy, and Victorious hand
Those Monsters who doomed Thy great Sire to die
May receive treble vengeance, and so perish,
Ensuing times, may fear their thoughts to cherish.
VIII.
That having gained thine own, appeased the Rabble,
Silenced Thy foes, by Counsels or by Death,
Purged that accursed foul Augaean stable
At Westminster, by Thy vindictive breath
Like Thy Great Ancestors, Thou may be able
To wear in Peace, Great Britains glorious Wreath,
While all Thy Subjects for to serve Thee Joy
Singing allowd with me, Vive le Roy.
To the Author, on his Tragedy.
WIth a sour aspect, and a Critic eye
I have perused, thy well writ Tragedy;
My ravished soul, grew sicker then the Age
When as I hastened, to the latter page:
Wrapped in a sweet amazement such an one
As dreaming men, sometimes, do think upon
Who when they wake, are wroth and vexed sore
They of that sweet delusion taste no more.
I wished thy Play had been more largely writ
Or I had never seen, or perused it.
In which Apollo, and the three times three
Sweet Thespian Ladies, chaunt (though dolefully)
Such stately lays, that famous Sophocles
Would write his Plays a new, saw he but these:
Melpomene, girt in a purple Robe
Her hand in Heaven, her foot upon Earths Globe
Is taught by thee, to chaunt forth Tragic notes
Such as do damn the Rebels and their Votes.
He that can read thy Play, and yet forbear
For his late Murdered Lord, to shed a tear,
Has an heart framed of Adamant and may
Pass for an Atheist the Reformed way.
But to conclude, thy raptures I admire
As those are sung, even to Apollo's lyre,
E. D.

THE PROLOGUE TO THE GENTRY.
THough Johnson, Shakespeare, Goffe, and Devenant,
Brave Sucklin, Beaumont, Fletcher, Shurley want
The life of action, and their learned lines
Are loathed, by the Monsters of the times;
Yet your refined Souls, can penetrate
Their depth of merit, and excuse their Fate:
With this position those rude Elves that dare
Against all Divine, and humane Laws, make War;
Who count it treble glory, to transgress
Perfect in nothing, but imperfectnesse.
Can find no better engine to advance
Their Thrones, then vile, and beastly Ignorance:
Their bloody Myrmidons, of the Table round
Project, to raze, our Theaters to the ground:
No marvel they lap blood as milk and glory
To be recorded, villains, upon Story.
"For having killed their KING, where will they stay
"That through GOD, and MAJESTY, make way,
"Throwing the Nobles, and the Gentry down
"Levelling, all distinctions, to the Crown.
So that (which Heaven forbid) should they reduce
Our English world, to their confused use,
'Twill be admired, more then a prodegie
To hear an Herald, state a prodigee;
An 'twill be thought, a sharp, and bitter blur
To salute any, by the title (Sir.)
We here present you, his deplored fall
Whose Death will prove a ruin general,
(If Fates forbid not) and we hold to view
What the world knows, is not more strange then true:
Anotomizing Treason, damning them
Who Murdered Charles, to share His Diadem,
And to preserve their Souls in flesh, whose ends
Unto the ruin, of all Europe tends:
But Joves all potent thunder shall divide
Their plots, and sink them, in their height of pride.
Exit. The Persons.
Fairfax. Ireton. Rainsborough. Peter's. Bosvill. Cromwell. Pride. Sir Charles
Lucas. Sir George Lisle. Blackburne. Lord Capell. Lord Goring. Treason,
Ambition, Lust, Perjury, Sacrilege, Revenge, Parliament Men, Messengers. Mrs.
Lambert. Mutes.
Soldiers Servants.

THE TRAGEDY OF King CHARLES the First.
ACT. I.
Enter Hugh Peter's, and Oliver Cromwwell. Cromwell. MY fine facetious Devil,
who wear'st the Liverie of the Stygian God, as the white Emblem of thy
innocence; Have thou prepared a pithie formal Speech against the essence and
the Power of KINGS? that when to morrow all my Myrmidons do meet on
Onslow-heath, like the Greek Exorcist, renowned Calchas, when with his Magic
numbers he encouraged great Alreus Son and martial Diomed to prosecute their
Siege against Priam's Town, by thy insinuating persuasive art, their hearts
may move, like Reeds, when Boreas breath smites the huge Oaks, that on Mount
Pelion grow, I know that Nectar hangs upon thy lips, and that the most absurd
Syllogism, or care-deceiving paradox, maintained by thee, shall seem
oraculous, more dangerous to question than the Sacred Writ:

Sing then (my Hugh) and so thy Numbers sing,
All those that hear, may jointly curse their King.

Peter's. Most valiant, and invincible Commander, whose Name's as terrible to
the Royallists as e're was Huniades to the Turks, or Talbot to the French; thy
Nose, like a bright Beacon, sparkling still (the Aetna, that does fame our
English world) hangs like a Comet over thy dreadful face, denouncing death and
vengeance; the Ancients famed Alcides for his Acts, thou have not slain, but
taken the Kingly Lion, and like great Tamberlaine with his Bajazet, can render
him within an Iron-Cage a spectacle of mirth, when e're thou please. Had the
Snake-footed, earth-borne Sons of old but had thy aid, Imponere pelion ossae,
old Saturn might have laughed to see his Son sit sadly by him in the
Cimerian shades, while thou did sway the Empire of the Skies; Englands best
Patriot, and my noble Patron, a Sermon (such as Ignatius Loyalla himself, were
he to morrow to supply my place, for dangerous Doctrine, direful Use, and
dreadful Application, would glory to name his) I have provided such an one,

As shall confirm our Faction ten times more
Then all that they have known, or heard before:
In it I Will prove Kings (ab origin) have been the Peoples plague, given them
by the angry Gods in wrath, the mere exuberance of their crimes, the sordid
Vulgar being delighted much to honor those dull Images which themselves erect,
and dread those Anticks which themselves depaint, themselves affording both the
horns and nails which make them either dangerous or ugly, I will assert, that
Regal power is Devilish, and inconsistent with the Peoples Freedom: I will
make it good, the Tyrant now in hold, (whom some yet call, their Lord King
CHARLES) does merit violent death, as guilty of the many thousand horrors
committed in the late most bitter War, I will demonstratively --


Crom. Enough, enough, (my dearest Hugh) thou art my better Genius, thy advice,
I will rely on with more sure respect, then on a Sybils words or Delphian
Oracle, drink the Elixar of that precious metal, [he gives him Gold] it is
sovereign against that perilous disease, called Speaking truth, 'twill prove an
animation to thy mind, for to proceed in thy audacious practice (I mean,
against the King and's House of Peers) thou wilt find it a most precious Antidote
against the poison, wavering fame shall spit, and to conclude, a perfect
supplement of all defects that Time, or Fate, shall by harsh doom appoint,

But what will please the best (my dearest Hugh)
'Twill purvey for thee, Wine, and Wenches too.

Pet. Sir, you are pleased to make my faults your mirth, I do confess the
luscious Paphian sin, has ever vanquished all my virtuous powers, the
Cyprian Queen (in full aspect of Mars) being predominant solely at my birth,
besides the constitution of my body made up of moisture and venerable humors
(though some great Ladies say, lean men do best) may help for to extenuate my
crime of being too often proved beneath the Navell: But Noble Sir, this
Colloquie is too poor, if we consider our most high resolves, our language
should be like those Laws we mean to give, awful and to be wondered at by
mortals, sable-brow'd Saturn, and bloodthirsty Mars must seem sole Rectors
over us abroad, though Venus and her soft Son the sightlesse Boy, challenge
our utmost faculties in private.


Crom. Thou art that Lodestone, which shall draw my sense to any part of
policy in the Machiavilian world, we two (like Mahomet and his pliant Monk)
will frame an English Alchoran, which shall be written with the self-same
pensil great Draco engraved his Laws; but first, we must subdue the testie Scot,
and send the Beggars home, as lousy, though not so propt with limbs, or so
well shaped as when they chose the politic Hamilton to be their General:
mean time if those auspicious stars of sin, whose influence has prosper'd
Treason hitherto, shall still continue gracious to our villainy, Tom Fairfax may
take in the Town of Colchester, and force those stubborn truly-valiant Heroes
(for in my thoughts I do esteem them so who have taken shelter in that ancient
City at least for to comply on remiss terms; my next work then is to
new-mould our Army, and give a strong purgation to those Punies who act for me,
and may be called my Parliament, whose great work yet remains to do (my Hugh)
the King shall die, and they shall Father the most damned act upon the power of
justice; that done, all Earls and Lords shall down for to make way for me and
those I favor,

Then thee and I, and those whom we create
Will Reign like Princes, and the Lords of Fate.

Pet. I knew before the scope of your intents, and do applaud them as
magnanimous, and the sole way left to preserve our lives; in order unto which
your dear design, it shall be my task, both at Press and Pulpit, to render
Kingly Government obnoxious and incompatible with the Peoples Rights; to prove
the imprisoned King a truculent Tyrant, whose blood alone can expiate Heavens
wrath, and purchase an atonement with the Deities; expect me all I may
(renowned Sir) for promulgation of our well-fixt Cause, from which no fear of
pain, or hope of profit shall be of force to draw me.

For he that dares attempt, and goes not on,
Does leap for safety into Phlegeton.

Crom. Our conference here must end, some three days hence I march toward the
cold North to meet the Bannock feeding fierry Scots: they have (I heard)
already worsted Lambert, and puffed up with the pride of victory come on like
Lions, flushed in humane gore, I shall not need to pray your readiness.


Pet. Command me as your Creature; Sir, you were pleased to impose a task upon
me (which, by the aid of some one amongst the Nine, I know not which to thank
for the good turn) I have performed, after a tedious pumping: the Theme you
gave me, Sir, you know was this, The Peoples right transcends the power of
Kings. Sir, I have done my best to justify your learned Axiom in this scroule.

gives him a Paper.
Crom. Your love to my requests makes your performance of them swift and
punctual by the great Genius of this Land (over which I hope to Reign) I had
forgot what late I urged you to, this shall oblige my love -- What Is here -- I
am an ill Versefier or Versemaker, (what do you call your Trimeter-men?) and
none but those have sipt of Hellicon (I Have heard) can grace a Verse in the
reading it -- pray sing them your self.

gives the Scroule back to Peter's.
Pet. How Sir? sing them!


Crom. Sing them, or say them, all is one; think not I I take you for a
Ballet-Poet, but I want terms of art.


Pet. At your pleasure Sir.

Peter's reads Even till this Age the People durst not see
The pride of pomp in formal Tyranny,
The People who raise Kings unto the Crown
Are ladders, standing still, to let them down.

Crom. The Peoples backs is the worst pair of stairs a man can possibly
adventure upon; they are strong, but slippery; firm, but false: You are an
excellent Similist (my Hugh) it is an apt comparison to similize the People to a
Ladder; but I pray Heaven thee and I have not ascended so high upon this tall
Ladder that we shall never have an opportunity to descend without hazarding our
necks.


Pet. I beseech you Sir, either hear me, without paraphrasing, or command me
read no more --


Crom. Nay, now I see thou art a pettish Poet; read on, I Will be as silent as a
Statue --


Pet. Abolish these false Oracles of might,
'Cause we were once blind, shall we now hate light?
Why, like the wood that yields helves to the Axe
Should we upon our selves lay heavy tax,
Setting up Kings our freedom to confound
With our own strength, exhausting our own ground?

Crom. So, so, enough of this, I Will hear the rest in in private, let it
suffice (dear Hugh) that I accept your Verses with all love, and do assign
you (if Apollo please) a Grove of Bay to shade your learned skull from his
all-piercing Beams; wing'd-Time has sent one of his Sons to warn me hasten
hence; my fate moves swift, and I must move with it (my Hugh) Farewell, fail
not to offer up strict Orisons unto our swarthy Patron if now I prove
victorious:

A King and Kingdom is my valors prize,
By both their ruins, I intend to rise.
manet Peter's. exit Cromwell.
Pet. This fellow (sure) was born (as the Third Richard, who once ruled this
Land) with his mouth full of teeth, Nature has given him an iron soul, able
and active limbs, a politic brain which is indeed a storehouse of politic
stratagems, as if she meant him for the fall and ruin of all mankind; his
stout Confederates work their ends amain, but he outworks 'em all; the very
mine they have placed for to blow up their pious Sovereign, shall countermine by
Him ruin to themselves, and I sail with them to the invisible Land (my Hugh)
the King must die, those were his words: Oh sad and fatal project! when they
have served their utmost ends upon Him, and on their knees took Oaths to
re-instate Him, must a black Coffin be His Throne, and a cold Vault His
garnished Pavillion? Let the famed Villains of all former times have their
dire deeds razed out of Fames black Book as trivial accidents and neglected
dreams, that these may take up all the room on Record for the most glorious
Miscreants e're Rebelled; but what strange fancy lurks within my brain, which
makes me tax their ways with whom I act, whose deeds I do applaud as
meritorious, deserving honor, and the best repute? what vile sinister fate
governs my life? I loath the ills I do, yet hug them next my heart. Pardon
great Jove and my most gracious Prince, whose virtues do deprive thee of a
being; I must go on, though Orcus yawne upon me, and Demogorgon (with his
damned crew) dictates in person what I preach or write. Cromwell I come with a
disguised face, with as reserved a cunning as that Greek that broughe in
Pallas's Horse to halfe-raz'd Troy; thy craft I will repel with double care,
resting as jealous as I lay perdue behind a potent Foe; thy guilt is great, so
mine and all of us; it is policy that must protect my life, and place me a
degree above you all.

For he that will the Devils Master be,
Must have a mind, more mischievous then he.
Exit.
The end of the first Act.
ACT. II.
Enter Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow, in Arms, Drums beating, Colors flying,
with Soldiers as before the Town of Colchester. Fairfax. THus having tamed our
Enemies in Kent, quieted Cornwall, and secured Devonshire; what now remains,
but with accustomed courage to take in this strong Town of Colchester? within
whose Walls do lodge diverse of note, who are professed and open Enemies unto
the State we serve.


Ireton. The fate was just, that with delusive hopes has led them to a
receptacle of ruin, from whence they cannot budge without our knowledge.


Rainsborow. They Are taken in our Toils, and must not escape with life; quickly
let us draw out our Line, and raise our Batteries, girting the Town with a
close Siege, and let the Canons dreadful voice proclaim to them their
certain ruin.


Fairf. First let us Summon them to yield on Terms; if they prove so
Foolhardy as to refuse, then let our Iron-balls in smoke and sulphur sing a
sad Requiem in their fearful ears, sound loud the Summons, that the Foe may
hear and know we wish a Parlee.

A Parlee sounded.
Sir Charles Lucas, Sir George Lisle, Lord Capell, Lord Goring, etc. appears
as upon the Walls. Sir Charles. Who gives this hasty Summons?


Fairfax. Know Sir, the General and the Army raised for the preservation of
the State of England, for to support and vindicate their Privileges; in their
Names does demand, that you yield up your selves, and all are under your
Command, together with this Town, unto their use.


Sir Charles. Traitor to God, and to thy gracious Prince (for whom I hold this
City) chosen thereto by the Essexianists; know, I and these my loyal valiant
Cohorts will hold this Town while twenty do survive, and rather then yield up
the Town to you we will blow our selves (with it) into the Air.


Sir George. Fairfax, thou and thy traiterous Associates shall find, this Town
harbors such Men as dare meet thee ingyrt with all thy Myrmidons, one to a
hundred, and a hundred to a thousand; Fortune has favored thee I do confess
(thou have triumphed thou bloody Marius, and shall descend unto Hels shades
like him) but that proves not the justness of thy cause:

For, by the same rule Ottaman may boast,
The partial Deities favor him the most.

Rainsborow. By that God whom I serve thou Traitor Lisle, I Will see thee hewne
to pieces, and thy cursed Body thrown unto the Dogs.


Sir George. Avaunt thou homebred Mungrel, who art (in truth) merely a valiant
Voice, an hollow Cask in which some rumbling wind delights to sport it self;
Thersites thus, durst menace Agamemnon, Know Fellow, I have been victorious
even against a multitude, have trod the thorny path of cragged War, my Body
naked and my Feet unshood, have viewed those horrors of a purple Field
untroubled and untouched, which but-to hear summed up, would fright thy
Coward-soule from forth her dirty Dog-hole.


Rainsborow. Why spend we time in Dialogue with these Miscreants, these
cautiffe Elves, who fight for Yoakes and Fetters, with as much zeal as
half-starv'd Wretches beg a boon to sat their hungers, and wish profusely for
to spend their bloods to please a Tyrants lust?


Lord Capell. Away, Mechanic Slave, what saucy Devil prompts thee so to
prate, when to the meanest here thou ought to stoop with all obsequious
duty? thou sordid Groom, whom of a Skippers Boy, the Westminsterian Rebels
made thee their Admiral, whom even the dullest Seaman so despised, they
scorned to hale an Anchor at thy bidding, and at last (tired with thy loathed
company) intending to have sowz'd thee in the deep (moved with thy tricling
tears, and pitious plaints) set thee on shore to foot it back to Westminster;
how dares thy perjured tongue to challenge us, serving our dread Lord, His
sacred Majesty, Him whom all Europe wonders at, as the best of all the
Christian Kings, who for his discreet valor Rivals Scipio, for prudence
Solomon, for temperance without parallel, as are his sufferings, and griping
griefs by you (base Traitors) each day heaped upon Him, having immured His
Royal Person up in a strong Den fit for untamed Lions, banished His loyal and
Imperial Lady, and with Her the two eldest of His Issue, bereaved Him of His
Navy and Revenue, and what e're truth called His; know perjured Rebels, e're
this Summer end, (perhaps e're Sol does hunt the Nemean Lion) we shall have
strong relief, you a just punishment; if not,

Our comfort is, though we be left in the lurch,
We Martyrs, fall, for God, the King, and Church.

Ireton. You Will not accept then of our profer'd Summons, or come to composition.


L. Goring. Compound! confound we may (perhaps) some thousands of you.


Sir Charles. I am resolved ye Traitors, and so I know are these my honored
Friends, which is the sense of all within the Town, to hold this place even to
the utmost hazard; nor are we destitute of much Provision, enough for to supply
us many Months; when that fails, we have Horses many hundreds, of Dogs and
Cats even a multitude: Zeno, and Chrisippus, the two maine pillars of the
Stoics Sect, pronounce such meats as useful to Mankind as the best Sheep or
Neat: the ancient Almaines held the self-same doctrine: We Will be their
Imitators, and that you may know it is our resolution, forsake your station,
e're we leave the Walls, or the hot breath that lightens from an angry Canons
throat, shall try to waft you thence, away, away, we will meet you in plain
Field:

Thou true Jehovah, now own thine own Cause,
Thou know we fight for thee, our King, and Laws.

Fair. Draw up our Troops, we will make these Boasters feel
The potent rigor of our strong-edg'd steel.
Alarm, excursions, a shout within, and crying, Open the Gates, On, on, on.
Fairfax cum suis Exit.
Enter Sr C. Lucas, Sr G. Lisle, and Ld Capel, their Party: At the other door,
Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow, with their Party, they charge three to three,
while the Soldiers on both sides encounter, the Roundheads are beaten off, a
Retreat sounded. Sir Charles. The Power superior to the God of War has graced
our first attempt with victory; the Rebels (with exceeding loss) are fled,
whom the most valiant Capel has in pursuit; see how they scut over the
neighboring Plains like flocks of Sheep before an hungry Lion; so for the
future, let Almighty Jove infatuate their proud hearts with panick fear who
strike at him himself in his Vicegerent:

Kings are Earths Gods, and those that menace them
(Were It in their power) would share His Diadem.
He speaks this looking upon some Roundheads lying dead on the ground. Alas
deluded self-destroying Men! whose erring Souls by this winged Hermes, has
ushered unto the depth of Barathrum, in blew flames, for evermore to howl,
cursing your selves for your impieties! Oh erring Vulgar! oh besotted People,
that take such pains to become miserable, who (with the Phrygian Fabulators
Dog) catch at vain shadows, and lose the substance! So the Athenians courted
thirty Tyrants to be the Party that should gall their heart strings; and the
fond Syracusians labored sore to have the Dionisii be their Consuls: Was ever
any Nation blessed with so good a Prince (as CHARLES our King) that so
opprobriously deserted Him? succeeding Ages cannot choose but say,

Nations have suffered cause their Kings were ill,
But Britains CHARLES, His Peoples sins did kill.
But let it hap as God shall appoint, if it be written in the Book of Fate the
Rebels shall dissolve the English Monarchy, with the life-bloud of their most
gracious Prince, yet let us hinder that dire ominous day, (while we have being)
with our utmost might, and e're we fall and be commixt with new and stranger
earth, by hard achievements and heroic acts (performed for Charles, and for
our Countries sake) let us provide us fame when we are dead, that the next Age,
when they shall read the Story of this unnatural, uncivil War, and amongst
a crowd of Warriors find our Names filed with those that durst pass through
all horrors by death and vengeance for their KING and Sovereign:

They may sing Peans to our valiant Acts,
And yield us a kind plaudit for our facts.

Sir George. If we defend this Town against the Rebels fury but one Month
longer, the Hamiltonian Duke (who now has passed Tweed with a numerous Army,
full Twenty thousand Scots, Ten thousand English commanded by the truly-valiant
and invincible Knight, renowned Langdale, we shall have honorable and sure
relief; mean time by frequent Sallies we will endeavor to break in pieces
Fairfax his guilty Forces; the Prince of Wales is now upon the Downs, and with
Him most part of the Royal Navy; the Londoners speak high against the Junto,
and every day are feared to rise against them; the loyal Welsh continue strong
in Arms, and eke in every Angle of the Land the People wish for action; the
face of things at present promise fairly:

But should all fail (by force of Destiny)
Our comfort is, we (when we list) can die.

Sir Charles. I heed not Hamilton or his Resolves, knowing him to be ambitious,
treacherous, a Proteus that can shift into all shapes, a sly insinuating
Sicophant, who by his most falacious machinations has been the ruin of the
KING and us; 'twas he that instigated first the KING to raise a War against
the Covenanters, (yet underhand incited them against Him) 'twas he that gave
His Majesty advice to go in Person to the Senate House, there to demand the
five seditious Members (yet secretly sent them word of His intentions) 'twas he
(how e're he seemed in show averse) that when His Majesty escaped to the Scots,
when Fairfax wholly had subdued His Forces, procured the damned sallary of his
Master, for Twenty thousand pounds; and, I much fear, it is he, and only he,
that will betray the Army he now leads, (know thou not George) he ever did
aspire to be the King of Scots.

It Is he that has made England all on flame,
Blasted its beauty, burnt its goodly frame;
And the Armilla, which his zeal does twist
Is to be Cataline, yet a Calvanist.

Sir George. Let him be damned and sink to Hell with all his Sins about him,
let us do our parts, and leave the rest to Heaven (Faith Sir Charles) since we
have beat the Foe, while swarthy Tom flies with his timorous Troops, here let
us frollick one half hour, Mars and Thalia sometimes do accord, only a
Health or two unto our Royal Master.


Sir Charles. George, I am easily led by thy advice, although it suite not with
our present state to play at Barly-breake in a Golgatha, or drink down sorrow
amongst a heap of Trunks as livelesse as those Clods they lie upon; I prithee
do thy pleasure: but, say that Ireton (who stands facing us) should in the
midst of our intended mirth come up and turn our triumph into purple tears,
and in our Goblets mix our sanguine gore.


Sir George. Why? 'twill be rare, I Would wish no other sport; we Lapethites
should soon repel those Centaures, the scuffle (sure) would be as strange and
famous as that wherein all Ixion's Horse-hoof'd race, were sent to Hell (swift
Nessus only scaping) who was reserved for a more dreadful Fate, they shall
have naught to boast of (come they here) but Iron in their Fesh, and Gunpowder
in their Noses.


Sir Charles. Be it as thou do wish, I Will strive to be as merry as Democritus,
and laugh at war and damages.


Sir George. You highly honor us (most noble Governor) My fellow Soldiers,
have all Speaking to the Soldiers. your Arms in readiness as you were now to
Charge the surly Foe, we will not jest away our lives, or give the Roundheads
cause to boast a triumph in their Cathedrated Conventicles; two of you fetch
Sends two Soldiers. that Runlet of old Sherrie that is placed behind the door of
the Town Hall, bring also store of Pots, for we shall use 'em here (as the
Trojans, when by Atreus Sons they were beleaguered close for Hellens rape,
Hector, Sarpedon, Troyolus, and old Priam, beneath fair Illion's Walls (gyrt
in bright Arms) sat banqueting before the black-hayr'd Greeks, we will sit
securely and pledge full-crown'd Cups, (perhaps) 'twill mad the Rebels:

Which if I know, I shall grow fat with laughter,
And I will use to drink them down hereafter.

Sir Charles. The same good fellow (George) thou ever were; see how the Rebels
grin and gape upon us.


Sir George. They should participate of our flowing Cups would they take but
the pains to come amongst us, such as the Roman Cateline did provide for those
he had drawn in to his Confederacy, Wine mixed with blood (an horrid
Sacacrament) by which they swore to level Romes proud battlements, The Soldiers
return with the Wine. So, set it down (my Friends) and quickly pierce it, and
then draw out with as enlarged a mind as Princes give Gratuities -- it is rich
and lusty liquor, such as would make Heraclitus to laugh, and dull Diogenes
dance, even in his Tub; Here noble Governor, this Bowl brimfull unto the
happiness of Him whom fame of all the European Kings does call the best.


Sir Charles. With as much willingness as one half-spent with a contagious
Fever, receives a Dose he hopes may bring him health, will All kneel, they
drink the Health round while the Chambers are shot, and Trumpets perpetually
sound. I solemnize it upon my knees.


Sir George. So, this was well performed, about again with it.


Sir Charles. Once more receive it Soldiers, and that done, let us retire unto
our Garrison, believe me (George) we play with lightning too securely; you know
I dare as much, as him dares most, but dare not to be too confidently rash.


Sir George. By heaven (Sir Charles) we will not part so tamely; we will have one
Catch e're we forsake this ground, if you please but to aid me with your
voice, (for it must be sung in parts) You (Soldiers) all join voices in the
close, what says Sir Charles?


Sir Charles. You may command my suffrage (worthy Lisle) I know the Song you
fancy; begin --


SONG.
Sir George. Plump cheek'd Bacchus, we to thee
Will yield all honor, as befits,
For sure thou art a Deity
That can refine the dullest wits,
The liquour of thy Vine
Is precious and divine,
It makes even Cowards fight.

Sir Charles. It prompts our tongues to talk,
Though not our feet to walk,
And dictates what to write.

Omnes. Drink then (Boys) and drown all sorrow,
Who knows if we shall drink to morrow?

Sir George. Even in the midst of danger
When safety is a stranger
And no hope of relief,
Take a bowl full of Canary,
We of our woes grow weary,
And cry a fig for grief.

Sir Charles. Drink each a hearty draught
Till by the brains you are caught,
'Twill quite expel all humors;
Cry, God preserve the King,
And shield him with his wing;
And a -- for the Roundheads rumors.

Omnes. Drink, etc.


Sir George. Judge you Gentlemen, is not this better than to be always moyling
in Sand and Saltpeter, continually employed in raising Rampires, throwing up
Sconces, and inventing Stratagems, to foil that Foe who fears to look upon
us? has not this added to your former vigor? we must not always fight, lest
we become all but one wound; nor ever tipple, lest the Circaean liquor do
metamorphose us into swinish shapes: he that is a true Soldier

Will undertake all horrors, for his chinke;
And no less venture, for a Wench and drink.

Sir Charles. This doctrine (my friend Lisle) is dangerous, yet too much
preached and practiced in all Armies; Soldiers do dim their glory, and
detract from their own worth that love to drink and drab; he only may be
termed truly valiant that can repulse and vanquish his own passions; but this
Dish I perceive (my Soldiers) is too much stuffed with Sage, for you to
palliate -- I wonder Noble Capel stays so long, I fear he has engaged
himself too far after the flying Foe; he knows not which way back for to
retreat.


Sir George. He Is an experienced Soldier, and so inured unto the several
Stratagems of war, that 'twere a sin Mars would severely plague, but for to
doubt his fortune.


Sir Charles. I would not be too confident, or too careless, Heavens bring him
off with safety, and with honor -- let us now re-enter our invincible Fort, and
there consult for safety; we must expect the Rebels will once more make their
approaches to our Walls (perhaps) with new Supplies; we will prepare a Tempest
against they Storm.

But if great Jove remember whose we are,
His ponderous thunder will their Onset mar.
Exit.
The end of the second Act.
ACT. III.
Enter Cromwell, solus. Cromwell. THus far my policies run smooth and
current, deep Rivers glide as silent as the night when shallow Brooks fall with
a troubled noise; wherefore was Man created like the Gods, but that like them
he should dispose his acts to the great dread of some, envy of others, easily
deluded the King my Master, I have led on with hopes of re-establishment so
long, that now He doubts my feigned reallity; and a strong Party in the Junto
sit, who without me, are now in Treaty with Him, but I shall break the neck
of their Design (perhaps) before they think it, the several Commanders of
the Army are now all of my Faction, while Fairfax (silly Fool) sits like a
Statue, as if he nothing knew, or nothing durst, I have proposed unto the
several Officers to forsake the King, and yield Him up (as one not fit to
live) unto the block; I have informed them, (and it takes exceedingly, so
forward are the Fools to work my ends and their own certain ruin) that the
King is a Man of blood, by no means to be trusted, being of a rigid and
implacable Spirit, hating (even to the death) all have opposed Him, and that
should He regaine his former Power, He quickly would make use on it to their
ruin, that therefore they should make a retreat in time, nor yield their necks
unto a Tyrants mercy, that they having declared so highly for Him, might the
more easily (by far) entrap Him; nor was it a discredit so to do, since in
all Ages such a politic course has been thought just and safe: they (snared
with my words) resolve to do so, for to remove the King by violent death, and
to set up a Military Power; now my plots work, the Stage grows great with
horror, the English Monarchy grows sick to death, its very Basis has an
Ague-fit, which will not cease to shake it, till it be Levelled to the humble
earth.

Mount, mount my thoughts, unite like scattered springs,
It Is a strong Torrent that must bear down Kings.
Here I appointed my dear Buffone Peter's, Enter Peter's, Boswill, Pride, with
Soldiers. and Coll. Boswill, Pride, and my whole Army to meet about this hour
-- See, they come; Welcome dear Friends, you have observed your time: My Hugh,
how thrives our Counsel in the Army that our great General the Lord Fairfax
guides? I am sure these gallant Souls serve under me are all unanimous to
shake off Kings, and while the Iron's hot to strike that blow which shall for
ever free the English Nation from Tyrants, and their awful power.


Peter's. Heroic Sir, they all (even as one Man) applaud even to the skies your
rare projection, both Officers and Soldiers covetous for to accomplish what is
by you proposed, and as a signal of their Resolutions, see here, the more part
of a queint Remonstrance, which must by us be brought unto a period, wherein we
will divulge unto the world, the reasons and grounds of our intents.


Cromwell. As I would wish, never till now could England hope a happiness;
why, how now Boswill, why art thou so sad? the noble Pride stands -- like a man
astonished, or like a marble Statue whose aged feet are wrapped in withered
moss, what is the matter?


Pride. Nothing (dear Sir) but an excessive joy which has surpised my
faculties, and crazed upon the organs of my speech, my mind is busied 'bout the
Kingdoms fate, my Soul in a deep conference with my sense about mature
affairs.


Boswill. The constitution of my Soul agrees with thine in each degree of
temper, (most honored Cromwell) from our late-sworne Principles I Will not
recede though Heaven rained down fire upon me, though Earth yawn'd wide, and
Hell gorged balls of Sulphur, the King (that Man of blood) shall lose His
Head, and all His prime Adherents wait on Him unto the other world; the People
we will Rule by the Sword's power, their lives and goods, (by Conquest) we have
gained, our sway must be maintained by Strength, not Law.

The Sword that cut a passage to our Sphere
It Is that alone must secure us there.

Cromwell. Oh let me put thee in my bosom (Boswill) henceforth let us converse
more nearly, and like the Zodiacks Gemini mix our loves, we will be a second
Pylades and Orestes, and never part till death (my Hugh) let us hear some part
of that Remonstrance, 'twill highly spur us on to action.


Peter's. You shall, the most material Clauses (Sir) are these, which take with
this exordium I penned late yesternight:

He Reads. Absolute power of necessity must subsist and keep above water,
though all else be assured of drowning, to the loss of all (or at least many)
branches of universal Freedom, and therefore the Fox did not conclude amiss
when he saw his fellows steps march toward the Lions Den, Nos vestigia
terrent, if we enter into a strict scrutinie, we shall find that our choice and
our nature gave us Kings, the dignity conferred upon a single Man, was (sure)
intended for the good of all, but where one draws from all, can that be
pleasing or fortunate? or to leave this one, can that be injury? and therefore
in order theretowe declare, That we will call King CHARLES to an account as the
prime Promoter, Abettor, and sole Occasioner of all the murders, and outrages,
committed this many years, during the War, and bring Him to a Trial for His
life; That with Him we will bring to judgment all those of His Party, who (in
order to His Arbitrary Commands) have murdered, spoiled, and impoverished the
Freeborn People of England --
Crom. Hold, I have heard enough, why this is done to purpose, and shows all
gallantry did not die with Brutus and his Confederate Consulls; now Laurel
wreathes commixt with Myrtle branches shall deck our fortunate brows as the
true Patriots of our native Country, (We Will give the whole world cause for to
remember us) aside the ensuing Ages when they read our Acts shall bless our
memory with devout respect, but flying Phoebus now has left our Hemisphere,
black night has now put on her ebbon robe and wrapped the Welkin in a sable
shroud, we must away now toward the frozen North, (my fellow Soldiers) we
must direct our march to jerke the Scots back to their Sedgie Cottages;
malevolent Saturn, oh be thou propitious, prosper thy Agent in his deeds of
death,

Which are so grim and horrid, full of ire,
Some will suspect, the Devil, was my Sire.

Exeunt omnes. Enter Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow, cum aliis, as in a Tent, a
Table, and Tapers. Fairfax. How goes the night?


Ireton. About the hour of twelve.


Fairfax. Now then, while all the worl'ds involved in silence, and man and
beast takes their repose and rest, let us determine 'bout these captive Heroes,
who, with this Town of Colchester to morrow must yield themselves unto our
mercy.


Rainsborow. Renowned General, under whose conduct we have been fortunate and
victorious, I need not now recite, since you well know what vast expense of
blood, of toil, and treasure, we have been at since we besieged this Town,
the third part of our Army quite consumed by the immured Enemies frequent
Sallies, by our unfruitful Onsets, and hard Duty, and how mercylesse they have
shown themselves to those (of ours) whom Fortune gave them Prisoners; all which
considered, I do give my vote (and justice speaks the same) that Capel,
Goring, Lucas, and stout Lisle, die without mercy, even that very day which we
receive the Town.


Ireton. Which is to morrow.


Fairfax. The Law of Arms will not allow of that, they yield themselves on
Quarter, and for the Peers (I mean Goring and Capel) our power does not extend
to question them, they must be ordered as our States decree: the ancient only
Captains of the world, Hanibal, Scipio, and Themistocles, esteemed it far
more glorious, having conquered their proud Antagonists, to preserve their
lives (given them as their boon) then to inflict an ugly censure on them: I
love an Enemy that is truly valiant, these have exceeded story in their Acts,

And have repelled a Siege, such as Breda
Never beheld, nor famous Ravena.

Raisborow. Then let them live to be a terror to us, and once more to engage
the Land in broils, (know Sir) we are not safe whilst these subsist; and
should your clement mind so sway your sense, as not to take their lives, who
have sought ours, we shall have cause to disesteem your Person and your Power,
as him, whose easy nature and sost temper is incompatible with our persons
safety, our honor and repute:

Since, if by you, mercy to them is shown
You seek our ruin, and project your own.

Fairfax. Ha.


Ireton. Though in a rough unpollish'd phrase (he utters truth) most noble
General, let not his seeming rudeness raise your anger, since time has taught
you he is truly faithful, no less magnanimous in active war; Sir, it
concerns you nearly not to permit your innate love to valor, so graile the
wings of just deserved fury, you must not tolerate these men to escape with
life:

For 'twill be thought if you remisly do,
You love their actions, and applaud them too.

Fairfax. You then are Generals of the Host, not I; but be it as you council,
share you betwixt the brave Spirits of Two that (if Pithagor as transmigration
were) would make a Thersites, or Thraso valiant, (Rainsborow) see them shot to
death as Soldiers destined by fortune to a noble end; some two hours hence I
shall expect to hear you say, they are dead.

My Soul (I feel) is wondrously perplexed,
Who knows but mine or your turn may be next?
Exit.
Rainsborow. He Is much distempered, sure they have bought his mercy; how
stoutly did he argue to preserve them, with what reluctance, denounce their
doom.


Ireton. An ardent love to worth and honor moves him (without all doubt) to
pity their sad fate, for though mountains may meet, and generate e're they,
and we, enter firm union, yet we must needs acknowledge they are Men of most
approved valor; but see the cheerful Lady of the light appears in the Horizon
decked in her saffron robe, having forsook old Tithons chill embraces, she
summons every young and sprightly Sol to wrap her in his odoriferous bosom --
hark, they A shout within. shout; What may this portend?

[Enter a Soldier.] What news does thy tongue labor with?


Sold. The Town of Colchester is just now surrendered unto the Generals hands,
the Governor Sr Charles Lucas, his loved associate Sir George Lisle, with the
L. Capel, old Goring, and a number more of Gentlemen are cried up as Prisoners.


Rainsborow. Be it thy charge forthwith to certify Lucas and Lisle, that they
prepare themselves two hours hence to travail toward the Empire of the Skies,
or to the shades of Dis, I mean, to die.


Sold. I shall, Sir.

Exit.
Rainsborow. Come Commissary, let us go view the Town to cheer our Friends,
and doom our scornful Foes:

It glads my Soul, and is the only good
That I delight in, for to spill their blood.
Exeunt ambo.
[Enter Sr. Ch: Lucas, and Sr. George Lisle, as in Prison.] Sir Charles. The
iron hand of Jove lies heavy on us, (oh George) the proud Rebellious crew
prevail, Loyalty sinks with plumets at his heels, while cursed Rebellion rides
on the Sun beams, justles Jove from his seat, and fathomes Clouds.


Sir George. They may thank that invincible Champion, Hunger, had not he
helped, the Town had yet been ours, the woeful cries of Women, and of Children
imploring Bread to staunch their pining stomachs, their guts almost congealed
to stone within them, their faces black with famine, stalking the streets like
(magic summoned) Ghosts, together with our own dire need, enforced us to
surrender to those Rebels, but Joves dread vengeance (sure) will seize on them
that might (but would not) have prevented this; degenerate London, who have
shaken hands with thine Allegiance, thy aspiring Fabrics ere long must lie --
What speaks thy haste?

[Enter a Soldier.]
Soul. From the Commanders, Col. Rainsborow, and Co^missary Ireton, I have in
trust to let you know, some minutes hence you are to die.

Exit.
Sr Charles. Oh perjured Miscreants! is this your mercy? this my prophetic
Soul still whispered to me; I knew they in our bloods would bathe their guilt,
and sacrifice our lives to their God Treason, these Victims befit Molech, not
Messiah, whom these professed Saints, but real Devils, seem to make the umpire
of their deeds.

Angry Rhamnusia, though we fall to dust,
Punish these Traitors, for their acts unjust.

Sir George. Then it is decreed, we must take leave of day light, and tread the
paths of immortality.

Jove, art thou just, have thou reward for those
Who unto pious acts their lives difpose?
And have thou lost thy vengeance, can it be
That these aspiring Titans, escape Scot-free?
Where are thy dire Cyclopean balls, the same
That mudling Mulciber, does in Lemnos frame?
It Is thy Olympic vigor can alone
Ding down these Rebels unto Phlegeton.
[Enter three Soldiers armed.] Ha, what are you?


Soldiers. Your Executioners.


Sir Charles. You are our welcomest friends; who is allotted to make his exit
first?


1. Sold. Your self must lead the dance of death.


Sir Charles. Here then I bid farewell, unto this Stage of misery, my life has
been but one continued Scene, wovenwith perturbations and anxieties -- but
stay, whither must now my fleeting Soul take wing? into you Starry mansion, or
steep Tartarus, up to the Milkie way, she will take her flight

Where Souls of Heroes do enjoy their bliss,
Where all Celestial comforts, meet, and kiss;
Mankinds Redeemer, oh Emanuel!
Who in Man's shape on Earth were pleased to dwell, Receive my better part --
are you prepared --


Soldiers. We are.


Sir Charles. Charge me then home, I love to chew those Winter-plums, they are
those Cordial comfits I accept, as sick men do great Gallens Antidotes;
methinks the Earth goes round Copernicus: thou did relate a truth, that
Tellus ever has an Ague fit; Sol wrap thy glorious head within a Cloud, or if
thou needs wilt view my Destiny, put on a mask of blood, Death is but Somnus
Harbinger, we visit his all-peacefull Monarchy, e're we arive at Heavens golden
gates, where such as knock with a religious hand, do never miss of entrance;
Let me embrace thee (George) e're I part hence, They embrace. Thou will not
long survive me -- Shoot, shoot.

Incomparable Strafford (see) I come
To wait on thee in blessed Elysium.
They shoot. So, you have done it bravely, you are good Marks-men, I applaud
you for it even in Death -- so many passages are allowed my Soul, she knows
not which to issue out at, this fabric of my flesh now 'gins to totter, like
to some City (for it is Peoples finnes) rocked by the humerous winds; what a
fierce combat is there now maintained betwixt my wounded heart and mighty
Mors, who grasps it 'twixt his hands, squeezing it like a sponge; so furious
Boreas smites the solid Oaks that on Mount Pelion grow, making them nod like
unto feeble Reeds, (George) thy hand, my twins of light, have lost their wonted
property, death with his icie-fingers seals them up: Farewell, great CHARLES, I
die thy loyal Servant. George, we shall meet some minutes hence (I doubt not)
in a place where all joys enjoy one center; the worlds great Architectresse
never saw two of her Sons murdered so barbarously after fair Quarter
promised:

Therefore great Jove, if thou love loyal breath,
Take vengeance on the Authors of my death.

Sir George. There cracked the cords of life, He dies. Oh noble Lucas! let me
breathe out my Soul, Kisses him. upon thy azure lips: so brave a complete man
no Monsters (these excepted) would have butchered; my turn is next, is it not?


Soldiers. It is.


Sir George. Nor would I purchase life with one Entreaty, this object so
inflames me I am grown weary of this fleshly weed, and feign would put it off,
exchanging it for an immortal robe, invelloped with Carbuncles, and Saphires
-- I, but to have our live bereft by a sharp violent death to sleep in a thin
shroud, involved in feigned earth, our Nerves and Arteries shrunk up like
singed Lute-strings, or the withered Wreath of some famed Hero, made away
in the dark for to converse with Worms, and half-form'd creatures, such as the
slime of Seven headed Nile produces by the aid of Phoebus beams: Oh! there is
a contemplation that would stagger the most resolved Spirit, but destiny must
be obeyed, Death is still death though diversely inflicted: to have ones Throat
sluc'd with a golden Knife, or to be thrust through with a silver Sword,
mitigates not the wound, more than the sufferance. But, oh ye vengefull Furies
of dark Hell! ye three-fell Sisters of steep Erebus, awful Aenyo, all ye
dreaded Hags ominous to mortals, forsake your black Cimerian Cells, and with
your steely Whips ascend the Earth, Lash, lash these Traitors to despair and
obloquie; Let strife, contention, fraud, guile and deep horror seize on great
CHARLES his Foes, severing their strength, and frustrating their hopes till
they sink lower, underneath their Treasons, then plumets cast into the Baltic
Sea: Now do your office, They shoot. I am prepared; Oh! you have put Balls of
wildfire in my Bowels, I am but all one Aetna; Farewell, base gloomie world,
in which deluded Man, ravished with toys, hunts after bubbles; till them he
break and vanishes as he had never been, I sink beneath the burden of my
own weight, would with my fall, the Machinie of the world might be unriveted
and shook to pieces, the Air, co^mixt with Earth, the humid with the tumid
Element, and active fire contesting against them both, reducing all to the
Original Chaos; but I contend in vain, the Gods created Man but for their
sport, and its fit I should fulfill their ends, wishing but not prevailing; I
spy the pure immaculate Soul of Lucas, travailing through the Air to find a
residence: Stay gentle Spirit, company is good, when tedious journies are
prescribed, we will both fix in one Sphere, when looking down, we will behold and
smile,

To see these seeming Saints, but real Friends
Fall by their devilishly devised ends.
He dies.
1. Soldier. The Traitors both are dead.


2. Soldier. Traitors, those are Traitors, whose most rigorous doom, we have
obeyed, in murdering these brave Men.


3. Soldier. How Is this? let us seize upon him.


1. Soldier. Do, and make have to most assured damnation.


2. Soldier. I am no longer of your base society; Draws. Heaven pardon what
is past, my future deeds shall amply expiate my former crimes, the blood of
noble Lucas and brave Lifle,

On Rainsborow's base head, I will requite,
And send his Soul unto eternal night.
Exit.
1. Soldier. Let us remove the Bodies, and make after him.

Exeunt, bearing the Bodies.
The end of the third Act.
ACT. IV.
[Enter Peter's with Mrs Lambert.] Pet. THis he imposed as a command, it has
not been my practice to solicit in causes of this kind for other men.


Mrs. Lambert. Too soon you have made trial of your skill; does your grave
habit suite with such course employment, reverend Sir?


Peter's. Faith Mistress, amongst Friends, the outward garb ought not to cause
a nicety; He is my honored Patron, took me half frozen from the foodfull
Earth, and warmed me in his bosom; and 'twere a dull ingratitude in me not to
reward his bounty with my service: the radiant luster of your Star-like eyes
makes him to bow as your obsequious Vassal, whom thousands count it honor to
obey; so great an influence has your excellent beauty upon his manly
faculties: He Is now returned, decked with triumphant Wreaths, from chasing the
Blew Bonnets to their Mountains, having taught that stubborn People, his Name
can make the Genius of their Country tremble, the politic Hamilton is his
Prisoner, all knees bow to him, as Great Caesar's Rival; nothing does want for
to complete his Conquest, but your assent to love him.


Mrs. Lambert. Why so I do, and all Men else that do retain his temper.


Peter's. Your love admits of a too vast extent, I mean, can you affect him so,
as to admit him to your Bed?


Mrs Lambert. St Winifrid forbid it; you know (Sir) that I have a Lord and
Husband, a Man made up of magnanimity, whose love is mixed with an indulgent
care, should he but doubt of such an Injury, your Master, I my self, and all
by him suspected, had better enter a Phalarian Bull, or stand the thunders
shock -- alas! I dare not.


Peter's. These are but Womanish fears, incident unto all your Sex; come, you
must yield to love him, how should your Husband know of your day Banquets, your
nightly Revels, and sweet Paphian sports? he is now in Lancashire, Disbanding
Troops of Horse: or should some wayward Feind convey the knowledge of your
stolen Embraces unto his jealous ear, my Masters greatness countermands his
fury, circled within his arms, should heaven, earth, and hell conspire to
wrong you, 'twere sin to doubt a danger: Consider (Lady) what a potent
Friend, what treasure, honor, and content you will gain (if mundane glories do
affect you) by yiedling love for love to him, whom other Dames of highest blood
and fortune would sue for such a favor.


Mrs Lambert. Although my inward thoughts do tax my levitie, yet won with your
most sugared eloquence; I here yield all of mine, Lambert calls his, unto your
Masters bosom.


Crom. I accept it (Lady) nor Enter Cromwell, having been seen to peep through
the hangings, during the Colloquie 'twixt Pet. and Mrs. Lambert shall my most
delicious Parragon ever have cause for to repent her favor, my self, my
Sword, all under my Command, the spoils of Nations, all that Earth can boast,
shall at thy beck be proved for to be summoned (Popea-like) bathe thou thy
delicate body in Asses milk, commixt with Almond flower, (with Cleopatra)
dissolve inestimable precious Stones in every glass of luscious Wine thou
drink'st, tread thou on Tyrian Silks and Ermins skins, let Art and Nature both
industriously conspire to sat thy lavish wishes, my Treasury is
inexhaustible; Three Kingdoms (Dear) I graspe thus -- in this palm, their
Riches and their glories all are mine, the Goddess of the world my Patroness
Fortune has given all into my hands; as for the Man (they call the KING) He
has not four and twenty hours to live, I Have hyr'd a dapper Lad, a
neat-tongu'd (but inexorable Fellow) for fifteen hundred pounds, to ease Him
of the burden of His cares, (good King, he is fitter far for to converse with
Saints and Seraphims, than with erroneous and ambitious Mortals, and 'twere a
sin (a grand one) for to deter the hopes Celestialls have for to enjoy His
presence) my Bradshaws brains do brood, and has discovered a line of Law
that never yet was talked on, which says, If Kings do not obey their Subjects,
they may chastise them with Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death; with him a Crew
(whom I have eke in pay) do fit as Judges to make good this Maxim: my
Bradshaw is grown proud of his great Office, I Have Ordered him for to be
clothed in Purple, all Heads for to stand bare on every shoulder when the Lord
President (for so I have created him) shall be in presence, his Co-adjutors all
have honor too; and when assembled, have no worse a title then the High Court
of Justice: these all are sworn for to fulfill my ends, and Doom their KING
to die; which once performed, then I am Lord alone, though not a King by Title,
yet by Power, and thou (my Dearest) shall share glories with me, thy lovely
brows decked with a Coronet of Ophir Gold, inchas'd with Onix Stones; nor do
thou dread thy Husbands anger, his open violence, or his clandestine plots, he
is my Vassell merely at my pleasure; and if I hear he but repines at our
Embraces, I Will spurn his Soul out with my foot. (My Hugh) this business was
well managed, thou art a fluent Orator, when Cypryan Venus, and her winged
Son, waits at thy elbow, this service has obliged me more unto thee then all
thy former industries.


Peter's. I am your humblest Creature.


Cromwell. But why (my dearest Mistress) is that face of yours (which even the
Gods gaze at with greedy longing) obscured with sullen mists? what sorrow
claims a superiority over your harmonious senses? oh let not care plow
furrows in that forehead! is (now) more smooth than polished Ivory, or the
true Turtles feather; give but your grief a name, and if it lie in humane power
to ease you, resolve, a speedy and a pleasing remedy hasts to your comfort.


Mrs Lambert. Sir, can you think my heart is so obdurate? or that I can so
soon be lost unto a feminine temper, as not to cogitate with what hasty
rashness I have extinguished Hymen's Tapers, which (some hours since) rivald
Sols beams in luster, with what a forward zeal I have infringed my Marriage
Vow, and given away that which is none of mine? oh Heaven!


Peter's. 'sfoot Sir, she is fallen into a relapse; kiss her Sir, (quickly) or
she will cool so fast, and her heart freeze into so hard a lump, not all your
future Courtship or activity, shall be of force to melt her to your wishes.


Crom. How stupid am I in these amorous Arts dear Mistress! let not
penitential fancies (the spurious issues of dull Melancholy) gain the least
power over your faculties: what can you fear, while I dare be your friend?
think on the glories that I late proposed; all which shall be made yours, with
eminent safety.


Mrs Lambert. I shall endeavor, Sir, to bear my self as her that loves and
honors you.


Cromwell. Now thou sing'st sweetly, in a far more melifluous tone than
Quires of Nightingals, and that this temper never may forsake thee, our time
we will spend in various delights, such as Caligula, were he again on earth would
covet to enjoy; enter ye six prime Westminsterian Senators:

Music, strike hie, our Spirits to advance,
While we do mingle in an active Dance.

Enter six Masquers, habited for ambition, treason, lust, revenge, perjury,
sacrilege, music; they dance with them, join Cromwell and Mistress
Lambert, Peter's singing out last, they dance together by themselves. SONG.
Let these joys ever be in prime,
Naught but virtue is a crime;
Maugre the wise,
Mean men must rise,
Every Olympiad of time.
Taste then boldly, terrene pleasures,
Yours is the Earth, and all its Treasures;
Rifle, Plunder,
And keep all under,
Let Murmurers wait your leisures.
Exeunt Masquers.
Cromwell. This was performed as I would wish, now Sweet let us in for to
complete our happiness, and taste those joys which Jove himself will envy,
knowing Agenors Daughter, or Calisto, Inachian Io, or his blasted Semele, were
not indu'd with beauty so immense as thee (my dearest happiness)

Set on unto the Chamber of delight,
Do not dream (Lambert) thou art horned to night.
Exeunt.
[Enter Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow. etc.] Fair. I need not advertise you Col.
Rainsborow, not to be implacably severe, against the refractory Chomley; or
when you are sat down before that most impregnable Pontefract. Castle to
storm more often than fair advantages calls you to action: Mars go along with
you, I am for London with my Prisoners.


Rains. My Lord, your humble Servant, victory and triumph ever wait upon you.


Ireton. Farewell noble Colonel.


Rains. Adieu, sweet Commissary, Exeunt Fairfax and Ireton. Alone, and in all
haste to take my journey, to so remote an Angle of the Land, there to take
charge of those I never saw, discard their General, and make my self their
Leader, this is a strange injunction, but I must do it: [Enter his Servant]
Have thou delivered what I gave in charge?


Servant. I have Sir; he will not fail punctually to perform it, and sent
you, the true and exact relation (as near as he can gather) who were the prime
Promoters (of your unlookt-for) Journey.


Rains. Let Us to Horse, I Will ride twelve miles this night, they shall have no
cause to blame my tardinesse, away.

Exeunt. Enter Blackburne (being the Soldier that escaped from amongst the
Fairfaxians, with an intent to kill Rainsborow, Act. 3.) with him, three
Soldiers, their Pistols and Swords.
Black. Hist, this way the Villain posted, only his Man and he together; I
hope the divine justice will not suffer him, for to escape our hands; that way,
that way,

Exeunt.
[Enter Rainsborow and his Servant.] Rains. We have quite lost the beaten road
-- there let our Horses grase awhile; I feel strange thoughts fighting about
my heart, either my guilty fancy did delude me, or I beheld the Ghosts of Lucas
and of Lisle, all full of wounds staring just now upon me, there, there, do
thou see nothing?


Serve. Not I Sir; good Sir let us forsake this gloomie glade, it presents
horror, and besides the night is near half spent.


Rainsb. A grim, but supine terror clogs my soul; Morpheus with his leaden Mace
arrests my senses, I needs must sleep awhile.

Lies down.
[Enter Blackburne, and his Mates.] Black. Kind Fates, I thank you; this is
that cruel Tiger (my Fellows) who contrived the much lamented deaths of
generous Lucas, and the valiant Lisle.


Rains. Ha, who sent thee hither?

He rises up.
Black. Thy sins; I come to kill thee.


Rains. It is no easy task that thou have undertaken, I have an arm as
vigorous as thine, a Pistol that will lighten e're it thunders, a Sword too
that never yet forsook his Master in time of danger.


Black. If thou but call to mind thy damned Treasons, thy Charnell plots, and
vile Conspiracies, thy murders, rapines, and fell outrages, a Child of seven
years old may quell thy force and lead thee captive in a string; if thou
dare think thy numerous crimes have not barred up the door of Heaven against
thee, pray be but speedy in thy orisons, I have no mind to kill thy Soul.


Rains. Saucie Slave, think on thy own sad end; and either at my feet implore
remission of thy rash attempt, or thou art dead.


Black. So brave, have at you Sir.


Servant. This is honor beyond They charge with their Pistols, Rainsborow's
Man falls; also one of Blackburne's Confederates. thought to fall, or to
survive my Masters second.


Rains. Come on, Sir.


Black. Though thou have escaped my scalding lead, my cooler steel shall find a
passage to thy heart.

They sight.
Rains. Thou art not (sure) invulnerable, even Thetis Son was slain by
Phrigian Paris -- but, oh my guilt hangs heavy on my Arm! and impedes the
violence of my blows -- there.

They sight.
Black. Will you not sink, or have you many Souls that take their reign by
turns? if it be so, I have so good a Cause I cannot shrink beneath the
Trenchant blade, till by my single force, I have dismissed them all; there
Dog --


Rains. Injurious Destinies, have you enriched my fame with many victories over
whole Troops of men, for to permit my fall in the Catastrophe, by a most
despicable Knapsack-bearer, why carves my flesh as Butchers do their meat, and
bores me till I grow transparent -- Oh! my blood drils like to some prodigal
spout which Huswifes set a tilt to cleanse their linen -- but, shall I fall
without revenge --

He falls.
Black. Oh! are you measuring out your length in clay? Ye Twins of valor Lucas
and brave Lisle,

Your heads, up from your earthly pillowes rear,
And see your Murderer lie weltering here.

Rains. My spirit's faint, my heart is sick to death, I hold the panting lump
betwixt my teeth, But 'twill not brook to stay; Let all those that have sought
their Sovereigns ruin look upon me and my deserved destiny, I would invoke
the powers above, but them I have so much exasperated, they will stop their ears
to my complaints: Oh! I die --

Thou King of flames, let me in Sulphur swim
Near to that Caudron, holds my Patron, Pim.
He dies.
Blackburne. Oh dire and dreadful end! he is gone to his own home, (the cursed
Dungeon) with as much willingness as holy Anchorites surrender their white
Souls to holy Angels, his Body we will throw in yonder ditch for Beasts and
Birds, to prey on:

They remove him. I have some wounds, but none (I think) are mortal. Come,
fellow Soldier, let us have to shelter, this deed, when once divulged, will be
examined strictly --

Beyond the Seas, for safety I will fly,
Till England once more be a Monarchy.
Exeunt.
The end of the fourth Act.
ACT. V.
[Ent. Cromwell with Mrs Lambert, in their night Robes.] Cromwell. APollo is
too hasty in his rise, and emulates my happiness; had Jupiter enjoyed so rare
a Creature as thy self (my Dear) in his lascivious arms, he would have
charmed bright Phoebus to the East, and have united day and night in one, as
when he revell'd 'twixt Amphitrios sheets; how likes my love of her new
Bedfellow?


Mrs Lambert. You are as valiant Sir, in those soft skirmishes Venus expects in
her pavillion, as in those deeds of death Mars does approve of in his Tent of
War.

[Enter Peter's.]
Pet. Good morrow to the most renowned Cromwell, and his most excellent
Mistress; Sir, I this morning have received a Letter directed unto you, I
think it comes from Commissary Ireton.


Cromwell. Some news of more than ordinary consequence if it bear date from
him:

He opens and reads the Letter. Lieutenant General,
THe deed is done, (which either ever makes, or marres us all) the King
(according to the doom of our High Court of Justice) this morning lost His
Head, thousands of people being Spectators of His Tragedy; His Body we have
given to the Duke of Richmond, to be disposed of as he thinks fit: the Vulgar
(generally) are much enraged at it, and say (having proceeded so far in our
Treasons against him, that we despaired of pardon to preserve our own lives,
and to make our selves Master over them) we have murdered the most virtuous
Prince in Europe at his own door, but we shall muzell the mouths of that
many-headed Hydra ere it be long; and in the mean time must resolve to keep
what we have got by fraud and force, by oppression and violence: we have
Outlawed the Eldest and Second Son of the dead King, and proclaimed, That if
ever they be taken on English ground, they shall die without mercy: we are now
modelizing the Commonwealth, in the prosecution of which, both Soldiers and
Senators, desire your aid; this I was commanded to certify you: and had I not
been commanded, it had been done of his own accord by

Your assured Friend to serve you, IRETON.



Crom. Then now I am above the reach of fate, prepare (my Hugh) though not to
be a Bishop, yet to dispose of a whole Diocese: you Lady (the sole Mistress
of my hopes) are yet untainted in your Husbands thoughts, let him again repose
his horned head betwixt your delicate paps, I must with speed to London, whence
I will send thee thy lap-full of Gold (my Danae) and Jewels rich and sparkling,
for to adorn thy only eminent beauty; nor shall be long ere I in person visit
thee.


Mrs Lambert. Sir, you have robbed me both of honor, and my heart at once; so
strange a Fate does sway me, that whatsoever you judge to be convenient, I must
not contradict.


Crom. Thou art as wise as beauteous, rest confident of my fidelity, Farewell
Star of the North.

Kisses her, she goes off. Come (Hugh) lets post unto the famous City
To sit in Council with the State Committee.

Exeunt. [Enter Chorus.] Now all is lost to humane sense,
The King is murdered on pretense
He was a Tyrant, and in Him
Our Laws and Rights to laethe swim,
Buried forever in His death,
Since they subsisted by His Breath,
1. See here, what would make Indians weep,
These 14 Versee are spoken wholly in relation to the Kings Murder. 2. And
force the Monsters of the deep;
3. Shed tears into the brinie maine,
4. And after drink them up again;
5. That which forced Sol to hide his head
6. Pierced into Graves, and waked the dead;
He discovers behind the travers the dead body of the King; also the Bodies of
the Lord Capel, Hamilton and Holland. 7. And that which made the Angels hide
8. Their faces (deep in scarlet di'de)
9. With their soft wings, and does compel
10. The Catholic to turn Infidel,
11. And to believe Presbyter John's,
12. And strictest Solifidians,
13. Are damned (even from their Cradle) since
14. They murdered so divine a Prince.
This body, when possessed of life
Pointing to Hamilton. Was the sole Causer of the strife
And breach (which so our Land has rent)
Betwixt the King and Parliament;
'Twas he, that by his Hell-bred plots
decoyd the King amongst the Scots;
Yet afterward (his own to hold)
Sold Him to Traitors for their Gold;
All this in hopes to win that Crown,
Desire of which, has brought him down
Unto the earth, slain (even by them)
From whom he hoped a Diadem;
His Soul the Furies mean to ply
With tortures to eternity.
This Body when it used to walk,
Pointing to Holland. Knew better how to Drab and talk,
To wear gay Clothes, and Complement,
Then to be wisely eminent;
For loyalty unto his King
His folly not, his faith did bring
Him to the Block. But here lies one,
Pointing to the L. Capel. The glory of his Nation,
A man for valor, virtue, wit,
Who learning loved, and cherisht it
Without compare; his Charity
Extended unto each degree,
Ages and Sex, (had they no more
But this one Devilish Act in store
Of murdering him) the Rebels (sure)
Could not, yet eight year more procure,
To Reign by blood, by rapines, horrors,
Treason, inexplicable terrors;
But what the Fates allot we must
Submit to, and in them we trust
To see these Monsters fall and rot,
By God and virtuous men forgot.
Exit.
FINIS.

