Imprimatur.

Junii 6. 1692. GUIL. LANCASTER.

A SERMON PREACHED AT ST. HILARY'S IN THE ISLE OF JERSEY BEFORE THE GARRISON,
APRIL 10th. 1692.

By PHILIP FALL M. A. Rector of St. SAVIOVR's in the said Island.

LONDON, Printed for John Newton, at the three Pigeons over against the
Inner Temple Gate, in Fleet Street, 1692.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in GOD, HENRY LORD BISHOP OF LONDON, One of the
Lords of Their Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
My Lord,
I should not have presumed to Prefix so great a Name as that of your Lordship,
to so small a thing as this Sermon, were it not an Accessory to the Memorial
which I once humbly offered, and which your Lordship had the Goodness to lay
before His Majesty and Council, when a Motion was made for the Establishment of
a Fixed and Sedentary Chaplain to this GARRISON: The want whereof seems to have
had much Influence on the Evils complained of by our Deputies last Year, and
set forth in the ensuing Discourse. For had the Soldiers here in GARRISON been
well instructed in the Duties of their Profession, by one appointed to attend
continually upon this very thing Romans 13. 6.
, I am apt to think they had not run out into the Excesses they have amongst us.

My Lord, You are Excellently fitted, both by Inclination, and that high
Station to which your noble Birth and great Virtues have raised you, to do
Good: And perhaps never any in the like Circumstances did more, nor has more
generally Obliged all sorts of Persons. But there is one Capacity wherein your
Lordship may do much Good to this poor Island. It is th^^ of PRIVY-COUNCELLOR.
That most Honorable Board are our Judges in the last Resort: Their Orders are
our Laws: And to them we apply for Redress of our Wrongs. Pardon me, My Lord,
if being a Native of this Island, and having so many reasons to be concerned
for its Welfare, I humbly crave your Lordship's Favor, and Protection to it.

I had once thought to have added a short Scheme, or Account of it, by way of
Appendix to this Sermon; both to explain some Passages in the Sermon, and to
gratify the Curiosity of many who (I know) would be glad to be informed of our
Constitution But I had rather leave it to better Hands, which are not wanting
amongst us. I am,

My Lord, Jersey Apr. 22. 1692. Your Lordship's Most Humble and Most Obliged
Servant, PH. FALL

A SERMON Preached before the GARRISON IN JERSEY.
Luke III. 14. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of Him, saying, And what
shall we do? And He said unto them, Do violence to no Man, neither accuse any
falsely, but be content with your Wages.
THESE are the Words of John the Baptist, the Forerunner of our Savior, to
those Soldiers that came to be Baptized of Him. The Jews were some time before
become Tributary to the Romans, who had GARRISONS over the whole Country, and
these Soldiers belonged to those GARRISONS.

It may be doubted whether these Soldiers were Romans, or Natives listed into
the Roman Service: It seeming reasonable to suppose, that all that came to
John's Baptism had some Knowledge of the Jewish Religion, whereof Baptism was a
Rite. But among the Romans, and even among their Military Men, there were not a
few, who, living among the Jews, had grown into a liking of their Religion, and
became Proselytes to it: A famous Instance whereof we have in Cornelius, Acts
x. 1. who being a Roman, and Captain of the GARRISON of Caesarea, was one of
these Proselytes, and upon Preaching the Gospel, was the first Roman Convert
that came over to Christianity. There is no necessity therefore to suppose (as
some have done) that these Soldiers, mentioned in the Text, were Jews, bearing
Arms under the Romans, but we may with better reason believe they were Romans,
Proselyted ('it is like) to the Jewish Religion.

And there is this Argument to prove they were Romans, That the Charge given
them by John the Baptist in the Text, referrs to those Violences and
Depredations, which GARRISON- Soldiers are too apt to commit in Foreign
Countries: Such I call those differing from their own in Situation, Language,
and the like, though subject to the same Sovereign: Which Charge had been less
necessary to Jewish Soldiers, who in all reason cannot be thought to have
committed those Disorders among their own Countrymen. And the Soldiers likewise
demanded of Him, saying, And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do
violence to no Man, neither accuse any falsely, but be content with your Wages.

In which Words I shall Consider,

1. The Persons here called Soldiers, under which Denomination we are to
understand Men engaged in a Military Life as their proper Calling, in
contradistinction to those that bear Arms without making it their particular
Profession. All that are taught the use of Warlike Weapons, that they may
defend their Country in case of an Invasion, may be called Soldiers, but not in
a strict Notion. The Soldiers here named, were such as fought for Pay. For
there is express mention made of their (...), or* Wages.

2. The Duty incumbent on such, with regard, not to the time when they are
abroad in the Field fighting against the Enemy (there are other Duties sit to
be recommended to them at that time Deuteronomy. 20
but when they are dispersed into GARRISONS, and Quartered upon the Country,
for the Safety and the Defense thereof; For (as I have already Observed) the
Soldiers in the Text were Soldiers in GARRISON. They (says the Bapist) must do
Violence to no Man, that is, not to their Friends, those among whom they Live,
and whom they are sent to Protect; they must accuse no Man falsely, but they
must be content with their Wages, or their Pay.

Lastly, I shall Conclude with a particular Application to you of this
GARRISON; wherein after I have mentioned the Exorbitancies, and Oppressions, we
the Inhabitants of this Place did so lately groan under, I shall take notice of
the present case we enjoy, through the Excellent Conduct of him Lieut. Col.
Johnson, Deputy Governor.
that has now the chief command amongst us.

1. I shall consider the Persons here called Soldiers, under which Denomination
we are to understand Men engaged in a Military Life, as their proper Calling,
in contradistinction to those that bear Arms without making it their particular
Profession. There is a necessity for this Distinction. For it is not doubted but
all Men have a natural Right to defend themselves by Arms, against unjust and
unlawful Aggressors, and be Soldiers in that Sense; but it has been often
Disputed, whether Men may make a Trade of Killing, and take up the Sword for
Pay, which is the true Notion of Soldiers. The Question is here decided in the
Affirmative. For the Soldiers that came to John's Baptism were Men that
followed the Wars as their ordinary Employment, and they took Pay for it; and
yet when they come, and enquire of him what they shall do to be saved D. Aug.
Epist. V. ad Marcellinum. Si Christiana Disciplina omnia Bella culparet, hoc
potius Militibus consilium Salutis petentibus in Evangelio diceretur, ut
abjicerent Arma, seseque Militiae omnino subtraherent, etc. At quibus proprium
Stipendium sufficere debere praecipit, Militare utique non prohibuit. -- Id,
lib. 20. contra Faustum. Cap. 24. Nisi Bella a bonis suscipi possent, Joannes
cum ad eum Baptizandi Milites venirent, dicentes, Et nos quid faciemus?
^esponderet eis, Arma abjic^^e, Militain' illam deserite, Neminem percutite,
vulnerate, prosternite Neminem. Sed quia sciebat eos, cum haec militando
facerent, non esse homicidas, sed Ministros Legis, and non Vltores injuriarum
suarum, sed Salutis Publicae defensores, respondit eis, Neminem conc^sseritis,
etc.
, he does not bid them throw away their Arms, which he must have done had the
Calling been unlawful, but he directs them only to Duties proper to the way of
life they had chosen.

At the 12. Verse, we read the Publicans came also to him. Now this was a
Profession as obnoxious as that of Arms. But neither does he bid these to quit
their Employment. All that he says to them, is, Exact no more than is
Appointed you! Meaning, the Employment was good, so they forbore the Frauds,
and Vexations, that made it Infamous.

Indeed, there appears no where in the Gospel any design to Interfere in the
various Callings, and Professions of Human Life, further than that may be
necessary to secure the great and indispensible Duties of Piety, and Moral
Righteousness. When our great Law giver came to reform the World, he left it,
as to its civil Constitution, just as he found it. Whatever Changes he made in
other Matters, he made none in that. This himself declared, by saying that his
Kingdom was not of this World, John 18. 36.
meaning, that his Business was not to meddle with the Temporary Affairs of
Men, otherwise than to oblige all Persons to live Justly, and Honestly, in
their several Professions, and Callings. Therefore no Calling is unlawful under
the Gospel that has not a Moral and an intrinsecal Evil in it. But such
unlawful Callings there be (if base and sordid Occupations deserve the Name) as
of Bawds, Panders, Wizzards and the like, who live by these Crafts as others do
by the most laudable Professions. But these are not Callings which Christianity
allows, because repugnant to those Eternal Rules of Piety, and Moral Honesty,
which Christianity at no time dispenses with.

In the Ancient Church, when Men professing any of these unlawful Arts Tertul.
lib. de Idolol. cap. 5. D. Aug. lib. de Fide and Oper.
, became Christians, they were not admitted to Baptism till they had Renounced
them. Thus we read Acts 19. 19. That many that had used curious Arts, that is,
that had practiced Magic, being coverted by Paul's Preaching, brought their
Books, and burnt them; declaring thereby their Abhorrence of that wicked
Profession, and publicly Disclaiming it as inconsistent with Christianity.

There were some other such Professions which the Primitive Zeal condemned; v.
g. Stage Players acting on Heathenish Theaters D. Cyprian ad Euchratium de
Histrione, Epist. 61. Pro Dilectione tua and Verecundia mutua consulendum me
existimasti, Frater Charissime, quid mihi videatur de Histrione quodam qui apud
vos constitutus, in ejusdem adhuc Artis suae dedecore perseverat -- Puto nec
Majestati Divinae, nec Evangelicae Disciplinae congruere, ut pudor and honor
Ecclesiae tam turpi and infami contagione foedetur.
; Statuaries that made Idols for Pagan Worship Tertull. lib. de Idol. passim.
--
; Drivers of Chariots in the Circean Games D. Aug
; Galdiators Tertull.
, and the like, we find inveighed against in the Ancient Fathers, as Men whose
Callings unqualified them for being Christians; though I think some of those
Callings were not so properly evil in themselves, as because they had too near
a Communication with the Superstitions of those Times.

But whatever censures the Church passed on such Professions, we do not find
that when Men, whose proper Character it was to bear Arms, embraced the
Christian Religion, and desired Baptism; I say, we do not find that it was
denied them, as it was to others, till they had laid down their Swords, and
engaged never any more to return to that Employment. We do not read (for
example) that when Cornelius the Centurion (of whom mention has been made
before) and Sergius Paulus Acts 13. 7, etc.
Proconsul of Cyprus (for that also was a Military Command) came over to the
Faith, they were obliged to give up their Commissions, before they could be
received into the Church. No, it appears they continued in their Employment
after their Baptism. Therefore in the Apostolical Constitutions Lib. 8. cap. 32.
it is expressly ordained, That, when a Soldier shall desire Baptism, he shall be
taught to abstain from Violence, to accuse no Man falsely, but to be content
with his Wages; which if he promises, he shall be admitted: That is, he shall
be Baptized, without being obliged to abjure the Wars. He may be a Christian,
and a Soldier still; he shall only be put in mind of the Admonition given by
John the Baptist to those Soldiers that came to be Baptized of him. That was
all that was to be put to him, at that time, in reference to his Profession.

And accordingly how many of those Ancient Christians went on to addict
themselves to Arms, and retained their first Profession after their Baptism, is
evident from the Writers of that Age. Even in those earlier Days, and under
Pagan Emperors, the Roman Camps, and GARRISONS Tertul. Apol. cap. 37. Hesterni
sumus and vestra omnia implevimus, Vrbes, Insulas, CASTELLA, Castra, etc.
were filled with Christian Soldiers; who thought it no more unlawful for them,
than for Heathen Soldiers, to serve their Emperors in their Wars.

It Is true, while those Emperors continued Pagan, and turned Persecutors (as
many of them did) the Christians in their Armies were exposed to
Inconveniences that made them often decline the Service; not out of any
scruple at the Service it self, but at the unhappy Circumstances that attended
it at such times; for Instance, In taking the Military Sacrament, or Oath
Tertul. de Idol. cap. 19.
they were required to Swear by Jupiter and Mars, and the other Heathen Gods.
They were set to guard Idol Temples Id. de Corona Mil. cap. 11.
. And the great Officers were obliged to attend the Emperor when he went into
them to offer Sacrifice Sozomen. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 6. Vid. etiam
Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 15.
. In receiving their Pay, or the Emperor's Donative, they were forced to throw
Incense on Heathen Altars Nazia^z. Orat. 47. in Julianum 1.
. And there were many Military Pomps, and Ceremonies, at which they could not
assist without being desiled with Idolatry Tertul. lib. de Corona Mil. passim.
. Nay, they were urged to turn their Swords against their Fellow Christians, as
in the case of the Famous Thebean Legion, under Maximinian, a Legion of
Christian Soldiers Martyrium S. Maurit. and Sociorum ab Eucheris Lugdunens.
conscript. apud Surium ad Diem 22. Sept.
, who being commanded to Swear that they would Persecute the Christians, as
Enemies to the Gods, threw down their Weapons, and chose rather to be
Decimated, and to suffer at last, all of them, a most Glorious Martyrdom, than
to become the Ministers, and Executioners of the Emperor's Cruelty, against
those of their Religion.

While the Military Profession was clogged with these Difficulties, it cannot
be denied but the Christians were very shy of Engaging in it; and Holy Men
Origin. contra Cells. lib. 8. prope finem. Tertul. de Idol cap. 19. Id* de Cor.
Mil. Cap. 11.
were apt to cry out against it as a Snare. But whenever there was a Relaxation
of those things wherein they could not comply without Prostituting their
Consciences, the brave and generous Christians returned to their Arms; and
nothing being exacted from them contrary to their Duty to God, went on to serve
as cheerfully as they had done before. Passio S. Maximiliani Martyrio ob d^tre*
^atam Militiam donati, nuper Edita Oxon.


But then chiefly were all Objections removed, when the Emperors became
Christians, and the Military Oath was changed into an Invocation of the Blessed
Trinity Venerius de Re Militari lib. 1. cap. 5. Jurant autem per Deum, and
Christ^m, and Sp^^itum Sanctum.
, and the NAME of CHRIST was Painted on the imperial Banners Eusch. de V^^i
Constan^ni lib. 1. Cap. 23. Aurel. Prudent. lib. 2. in Symmachum. Christus
purpureum gemmato textus in auro Signab^t Labarum.
, then every thing was as it should be; and the Christians ran joyfully under
those Ensigns, on which they saw that most Sacred NAME, which promised them
Triumph and Victory.

This was the Opinion which those Ancient Christians had of a Military Life;
which they did not think unlawful, no not under Pagan Emperors, unless so
Circumstantiated, as to require compliances which they believed sinful, and
opposite to the Laws of Christ. And so much I thought necessary to say* for the
satisfaction of those that bear Arms now under Christian Kings, and serve them
in their just and necessary Wars.

I shall add, that None did more Honor to the Religion of our Lord than those
Ancient Christian Soldiers, who never thought the Military Character was to
have a peculiar Latitude; and that Allowances, and Abatements, from Christian
Piety, and Morality, were to be made for Men of that Profession. They were not
only the best of Soldiers, but the best of Men. And the Roman Empire while it
stood, owed not more its frequent Successes over the Barbarous Nations, in its
latter Age, to their extraordinary Valor and Gallantry, than to their
admirable Sanctity and Devotion to God: To which God has often been pleased to
have so just a Regard, as to give Victory to Pagan Armies for the sake of those
Christian Soldiers that were in them: Doing even great and Stupendous Miracles
in their Favor; as when at the Prayers of a Christian Legion in Marcus
Antoninus his Army, Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 5. Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
Tertull. Apol. cap. 5.
he sent Thunder and Lightning which destroyed their Enemies; for which that
Legion was ever after called the Thundering Legion (...). Eusebius. ut sup. Dio.
Hist. lib. 55.
, and the Emperor who had commenced a Persecution against the Church, caused it
to cease immediately upon it; owning the Preservation of himself, and of his
Army, to those Christian Soldiers, whom he confessed to be in a peculiar manner
favored and beloved of God. Their Camps were not only Schools where were
taught all the Arts and Disciplines of War, but they were also Schools and
Nurseries of Virtue. In a word, there is no order of Men that has produced in
those first and better Times, a greater number of Blessed Saints, and Glorious
Martyrs Dionys. Alexand. apud Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 10. Hoc sciatis
velim viros and mulieres, MILITES and Privatos, cujusque, generis extitisse
quorum alij flag^is caesi, alij ignis incendio cremati, alij ferro percussi,
Coronas Martyrij adepti Sunt.
who have often gone to Death for their Religion, by whole Legions and Troops;
as the Thebean Legion mentioned before; Those 40 Soldiers that suffered in one
day, at Sebastia in Armenia, in the time of Licinius Sozomen Hist. Eccl. lib. 9
cap. 2.
, and innumerable Others; the Names of many of whom have been Enrolled, and are
preserved with Honor in the Annals and Histories of the Church * Laurentinus
and Ignatius, Milites and Martyrs. D. Cyprian. Epist. 34. ^ Besas, Miles and
Martyr, passus sub Decio. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. 6. cap. 34. * Marinus, Miles
and Martyr, passus regnante Ga i^no. Id. Hist. Eccl. lib. 7. cap. 14. *
Seleucus, Miles and Martyr, passas sub Dioclesiano. Id. Hist. Eccl. lib. 8.
cap. 21. * Juventinus and Maximianus, Milites and Martyrs, passi sub Juliano.
Theodoret. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 14. * Artemius, Dux Militum and Martyr,
passus sub eodem Juliano. Id. Hist. Eccl. lib. 3. cap. 17, etc.
: Having taught the World, by their Example, that to be at the same time
Soldiers and good Men, are not things incompatible; and that if all be not so,
the fault is not in the Profession, but in the Men, who, if they be bad, would
hardly have been better, although they had betaken themselves to any other kind
of Life.

Nay the Military Profession is so far from obstructing a Good Life D. Crysost.
Hom. 5. in 1. Ep. ^d Cor. Cap. 2. Perfectum Vitae tu^^itutum nihil laedit
Mili^^e Cingulum.
, that it has the most powerful Motives and Inducements to it: And if there be
any sort of Men in the World, that should live more Strictly and Regularly than
others, it should be Christian Soldiers. We (all of us) live in continual
Apprehensions of Death; but those that Fight in the Field of War have a nearer
prospect of it. This should make them live in a Daily Preparation for it, and
that dreadful Eternity that follows after it. If it be said, that such
Melancholy Thoughts as these would Damp their Spirits, and by making them good
Men, would make them the worse Soldiers, this is so far from being True, how
common soever the Mistake may be, that, on the contrary, none can be truly good
Soldiers, but those that are also at the same time good Men. For, to say
nothing of the Divine Blessing, which may with more reason be expected to
attend the Arms of those that have a Sense of God, and of the Duty they owe
him, whereas the most excellent Cause does often perish in the Hands of Evil
Instruments, (whereof I wish we of this Nation may not become a Woeful Instance,
and that the Looseness and Viciousness of our Armies, may not Impede those
Victories for which we so often Pray to God, and of which in those very Prayers
Liturgy. Prayer to be used in the time of War and Tumults.
we confess him to be the Only Giver.) I say, not to mention this, it is
Religion alone that Endows Men with true Fortitude and Magnanimity of Spirit,
and generally with all other Qualifications, and Ingredients, requisite to make
up a Brave and an Accomplished Soldier. It is Religion that makes one of that
Profession tender of the Cause that he Engages in, but firm and constant to it,
when he is once satisfied of the Justice of it; which distinguishes him from a
Vile Mercenary, who Fights for Bread, and cares not what Side he takes, nor
what Design he serves, so he be Paid. It is Religion that makes one of that
Profession discharge with Inviolable Fidelity the Trust reposed in him, as the
keeping of some Important Post, or GARRISON: While one that has shaken off all
Ties of Conscience, and Virtue, cares not what Prejudice the Public sustains
by his Cowardice, or Treachery, so himself be safe, and his own Ends secured.
It is Religion that makes one of that Profession, in all Enterprises, consult
still above all things the Glory of God, the Service of his King, and the Good
of the Country: Whereas one that is Acted by no Principles but those of
Passion, or Interest, and has taken up the Sword only that he may with greater
Liberty Indulge his Avarice, or his Lusts, postpones all other Considerations
to these, and provided these be Expleted, cares not how much God be
dishonored, the King ill served, and the Country oppressed. It is Religion
that makes one of that Profession Peaceable, and Obedient to those that have
Command over him; whereas Irreligion takes off from Men all Sense of Duty, and
has a Natural Tendency to make them Mutinous and Querulous: Or if he be called
to Act in a higher Capacity, and has himself a Command over others, Religion
will teach him to use them gently and kindly, not exposing them to evident
Peril without evident Necessity, pitying their Wounds, and resenting their
Wants; whereas Irreligion is the Mother of Tyranny and Cruelty, and he that has
lost all Sentiments of Piety, and true Goodness, will be the first to Rob and
Prey upon his own Men. It is Religion that makes one of that Profession bear up
with Invincible Patience and Constancy, under all the Toils and Difficulties of
War, by Training him up in the Practice and Exercise of Sobriety, Temperance,
and other Severe and Manly Virtues; whereas Luxury, and Voluptuousness, Soften
and Emasculate both the Body and the Mind; and a Man dissolved in Ease and
Pleasure, will never undergo Fatigues and Wants, like him, who has inured
himself to Hardships, by Voluntary Austerities, and Mortifications. It is
Religion that makes one of that Profession venture on the most hazardous
Undertaking, and rush into a Battle, with an undaunted Courage and Resolution,
because that being Armed with his own Innocence, and secure of the Love and
Favor of God, he knows that if he falls, while his Body is laid in the Bed of
Honor, his Immortal Spirit will be received among the Souls of all those
Ancient Heroes, and Worthies, who in their several Ages have sought the Battles
of God, and are now with him in the Mansions of Peace: Whereas the least
appearance of Danger must needs strike Terror and Amazement into a Wretch, who
having a deep load of Guilt to account for to God, and uncertain whether the
first Shot from the Enemy may not be a Minister of the Divine Vengeance sent to
dispatch him, must be the most desperate Creature living if this does not make
him grow Pale and Tremble, and does not prompt him to manage a life, which
gone, he knows he is lost and undone for ever.

And now therefore who cannot but wish that all of that Profession would
seriously apply themselves to become truly Religious and Good? Whereby they
would not only prove Brave and Excellent Men, admirably useful to all the ends
and purposes of War; but would also take off the Stain and Reproach thrown upon
the Profession it self, as if none but Men of Flagitious and Profligate
manners, were now fit to make Soldiers; and CASTLES and Armies were only
Sanctuaries for Thieves and Murderers. In short, it is an Honorable, Noble,
and Lawful Profession; but it is little beholden to those, who, by their ill
Lives, have foully Blemished the Ancient Glory and Reputation of it.

And thus I have considered the Persons in my Text called Soldiers, under which
Denomination, I said, we were to understand Men engaged in a Military Life as
their proper Calling; in contradistinction to those that bear Arms without
making it their particular Profession. I come now to consider,

2. The Duty incumbent on such; with regard, not to the time when they are
abroad in the Field, fighting against the Enemy (there are peculiar Duties for
that) but when they are Dispersed into GARRISONS, and Quartered upon the
Country, for the Safety and the Defense thereof. For, (as it has been
observed) the Soldiers in the Text were Soldiers in GARRISON. They (says the
Baptist) must do violence to no Man, that is, nor to their Friends, those among
whom they live, and whom they are sent to Protect; they must accuse no Man
falsely, but they must be content with their Wages, or their Pay.

Were we here to enquire into all the Duties and Obligations of Military Men,
it would carry us farther than the time would admit: But this Restriction in
the Text to those in GARRISON, will contract the Discourse into a less compass.

The chief use of GARRISONS inany Kingdom or State, is to secure its Frontiers
against the attempts of such potent Neighbors as are round about it: And the
more potent those Neighbors are, the greater care ought to be taken of those
GARRISONS that lie toward them.

Not long before that John began to Preach and to Baptize, the Emperor Augustus
(in whose time both he and our Savior were Born) had fixed the Bounds of the
Roman Empire. Judea (that Glorious Scene of almost all the great Actions
recorded in Holy Writ) was one of those Provinces that lay toward the
Parthians, a Stout and Courageous People, with whom the Romans had waged long
and bloody Wars Sext. Ruf. Fest. Bre^iariam passim.
with interchangeable Success; the Victory often alternating, as it does
betwixt Nations of almost equal Power, and Military Skill. About 80 Years
before they had given a notable defeat to Crassus, the Roman General Plutarch
in vita Crassi.
, whom they had cut in pieces, with the best part of his Army: And even in
Augustus his time, they had made Irruption into the Roman Provinces Appi^n in
Parthi^is Sext. Ruf. ut Sup.
, led by Pacorus, Son of Orodes their King, taking in Syria, spreading their
numerous Host over all Judea Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. 14. cap. 24, 25, 26.
and entering Jerusalem it self; where they made Antigonus High Priest in the
room of Hyrcanus, whom they deposed, and carried away into Parthia: And though
by the good Conduct of Ventidius Flor. Hist. lib. 4. cap. 9.
they were Repulsed, Pacorus slain, and the Provinces reduced; yet within a
very little while after, when Mark Anthony Id. lib. 4. cap. 10. Plutarch in
vita Antonii. Velleius Paterc. Hist. lib. 2. Eutrop Breviar. lib. 7
undertook an Expedition against them, he could effect nothing, and returned
with Dishonor. They had the Reputation of the best Horsemen in the World; and
the Romans dreaded their very Way of Fighting Terga conversi metuenda Parthi.
Senec.
which much resembl'd that of the Tartars at this Day. In a word, the Romans
had not a more Formidable Enemy, than that Warlike Nation, to encounter with in
that Age.

Wherefore the great design of those GARRISONS which the Romans had in Judea,
and other Provinces of the East, was to strengthen their line against all
impressions from the Parthians on that side: With whom because they always had
either certain War, or (which is worse) but an uncertain Peace, they took a
particular care of those GARRISONS; which served also to repress any Emotions
that might arise within the Provinces themselves. Now the Soldiers that came to
John's Baptism, belonged to those GARRISONS which the Romans had in Judea.

There is not a more unhappy Situation than that of Borderers, who lie betwixt
two mighty States that are in Hostility with each other. For as it exposes them
daily to the Enemies Incursions, and makes them sleep with their lives, as it
were in their hands; so it draws upon them the necessary trouble of Quarters
and GARRISONS; which tho composed of Troops that call themselves Friends, prove
often so great an Oppression by the Outrages they commit, that there is little
difference betwixt them and the worst of Enemies.

This was the Case of the Jews; who being seated on the utmost confines of the
Roman Empire in the East, and having a fierce Nation bordering upon them, were
sure upon every Rupture, to be the first that felt the Miseries and Calamities
of the War; a Nation that had once pierced into the very heart of their
Country, forced admittance into their Capital City, and violated what they
esteemed most Sacred amongst them, even the Holy Priesthood. But all that was
not comparable to what they suffered from the Roman GARRISONS. Not but that
they understood the necessity of them for their own safety, and the guard of
the Country; but the Soldiers of those GARRISONS demeaned themselves so ill,
Preyed so unmercifully upon the poor Jews, that they could hardly have met with
worse usage even from the Parthians themselves.

This was not unknown to John the Baptist, who, from his Desert and Solitude,
could hear the cries of the oppressed People; therefore, when the Fame of him
had drawn some of those Soldiers, out of the next GARRISONS to hear him, he
resolved to take the opportunity to remonstrate this to them. And first, he
prepares them by an excellent Sermon of Repentance, which draws from them this
Pathetick Question, What shall we do? intimating that his Discourse had wrought
upon them, and had produced in them a desire to be reformed. To this Question
he Answers (with respect to the Country) that they should, I. Do violence to no
Man. II. Accuse no Man falsely. III. Be content with their Wages.


Of these in their Order,
1. That they should do Violence to no Man; Violence is an extensive Word, and
may be used to imply any Injury or Force, offered to a Man in his Body or
Goods: But here I take it in a more limited Sense, for an Assault made upon his
Person: And that is the Violence forbidden here.

But is not Violence the Business of a Soldier? What does he wear a Sword for,
but to do Acts of Violence withal? Yes, when a Soldier is sent to fight against
the Enemies of his King, and Country, then let him, in God's Name, use his
Sword, and let him use it like a Man. Let him not put it up while there are any
that dispute him the Victory. God who allows his Calling, allows this in a just
War. But out of the Battle, I know no use that a Soldier has for his Sword,
more than another Man, unless to wear it for Decency, and as the Badge and
Cognizance of his Profession.

Had John the Baptist spoke here to Soldiers marching into the Field, to fight
the Enemy, he would not have said to them thus largely do Violence to no Man,
since he was not ignorant there could be no fighting without that. But because
he knew those to whom he spoke were Soldiers in GARRISON, who, if they did
Violence to any at that time, it must be to Poor, Peaceable, Innocent People,
their Fellow Subjects, among whom they were Quartered, therefore he says, do
Violence to no Man, meaning, not to such, and that is the reason the Words are
so generally expressed.

There is particularly a sort of Men, whose Profession has been always thought
so Harmless and Inoffensive, so useful for the supply of the common
necessities of the World. I mean that of Poor Country People, employed in
Tilling the Ground, that, even in an Enemies Country, and in the greatest heat
of War, they have used Grot. de fure Belli and Pacis lib. 3. cap. 11.. 11.
Suidas in Voce (...) Quod erga Agricolas optime se gereret ab omnib. maxim
laudabatur. Adeo enim ipsis parcebat ut Belisario exerci^um ducente, nulla
prorsus ^is unquam illis flurit. illutu.
to remain safe and untouched, at least in their Persons; and there have been
in all times, Examples of great severities in well Disciplined Armies against
those that have done them Violence. What a cruel thing then must it be, to see
these very Men Beaten, Wounded, nay and sometimes Murdered, not by Enemies
(which were Barbarous enough, and against the ordinary Rules of War, tho it
were even but so) but by Friends, by their Guests, by those that should be a
guard to them while they pursue their painful Calling?

It Is not only Cruel, but it is Base and Cowardly too: And a Soldier wrongs his
own Reputation, who being Armed, strikes an Unarmed and Defenseless Man.

It Is a Violence to Government. For the end of Government is Protection; and in
all Governments there is especial care taken of Quiet, Laboring, Industrious
People. Therefore Soldiers being the Ministers of Government, act against the
Interest, and Design of it, when they do Violence to these.

II. That they accuse no Man falsely. In the Original it is (...); Play not the
Sycophants. A Sycophant is he, who, by false and invidious Insinuations,
detracts from the worth or innocence of others; especially with Rulers, and
great Men, to whom he has Access; and the good or bad Opinion of whom, is of
great consequence to those whose Words or Actions he misrepresenteth. So that
Sycophancy is but another word for the worst, and more dangerous sort of
Calumny.

Never Age abounded more with Sycophants than that Senec. de Benef. lib. 3.
cap. 26. Sub Tiberio Caesare fuit accusandi frequens and publica rabies.
wherein John the Bapist lived. We often meet with them in the Historians of
that Age, under the name of Delators, or Informers Tacit. Annal. lib. 4.. 30.
de Tiber. Delatores, genus hominum publico exitio repertum, per praemia
eliciebantur. Xiphilin. in Tiber. p. 233. Sueton. in Tiber. cap. 45. and 61.
Id. in Caligul, cap. 15. Id. in Neron. cap. 44.
, and they were so great a Nuisance in those days, that it is none of the least
instances that is given us of Titus Id. in Tit. cap. 8.
and Trajan's Plin. Paneg. Trajani.
gentle and Moderate Reigns, that they banished them from Rome.

The Roman Soldiers in Judea are here charged by John the Baptist with some
fault of this Nature. Besides private Aspersions upon private Persons, they
criminated the whole Nation of the Jews: Not only deriding their Customs,
Manners, and every thing else wherein they differed from each other (as all
Nations and Countries in the World do differ in some things) but representing
them at Rome, and in the Emperor's Court, as a People that paid but an
unwilling Subjection to Caesar; though that cry of theirs at our Savior's
Crucifixion, We have no King but Caesar John 19. 15.
, shows they were very well pleased then with his Government. However, this,
among other things, made such Impression at Rome, that they incurred the
general Hatred; they were every where spoken against; they were called all the
ill Names imaginable Judaeus Apella-Gens recutita, etc.
; they were rarely mentioned without the addition of some Opprobrious and
Injurious Epithet; and the Government it self was so prepossessed against them,
that about 20 Years after, viz. in the Reign of Claudius Acts 18. 2. Sueton. in
Claud. cap. 25.
, they were by Imperial Edict forbidden to set foot in Italy.

There cannot be a worse Character fixed upon a Man than that of Sycophant:
Neither can a greater injury be done to any than to wound his good Name. But to
lay a Blot upon a whole Nation, or Country, is so much the worse, that it can
never be done without manifest Injustice; because, how culpable soever some
particular Persons may be, it is impossible but a very great many honest Men
suffer, and be involved in the Calumny. Not to say, that Men are generally so
Precipitate and Rash in their Judgments, that they seldom stay to be well
informed of a Country, ere they venture to report the Character of it.

But for Soldiers to do this, that is, to traduce Persons or Countries, is
still worse and worse; because, being Men of Honor, they must above all others
take care of doing any thing that is dishonorable and mean. Therefore (says
John to those Soldiers that Reproached his Nation) (...), Play not the
Sycophants: or, as our Translation renders it, accuse no Man falsely. He adds,

III. That they be content with their Wages. None ever gave greater
Encouragement to Military Men than the Romans; which we may justly think to
have been none of the least Causes of that vast height of Power, and Empire,
which that mighty Nation attained to in its time. It is the hope of Reward that
animates a Soldier. To those who by some Eminent Action Signalized themselves
beyond others, as if they killed an Enemy in single Combat, rescued a Citizen,
scaled a Wall, or mounted a Breach, they decreed different kinds of Crowns,
which were powerful Incentives to Noble Spirits that strove for Glory. But
besides such Rewards as were purely Honorary, they had others that were
Pecuniary, and Lucrative, which were also some times Extraordinary; as when an
Emperor on his Accession to the Throne, or a General on the day of his Triumph,
bestowed a Donative, or Largess on his Soldiers. The ordinary I call that
constant and daily Pay that was allowed to every Soldier alike for his
Subsistence.

That Pay has not always been the same among the Romans at all times, but has
vari'd; rising higher and higher, as that mighty State increased in Riches and
Dominion. I find that the Establishment made by Augustus, which stood in John
the Baptist his time, was to each common Legionary Soldier, ten Roman Pence per
diem Tacit. Annal. lib. 1.. 17. Sueton. in Aug. cap. 49.
, and to Officers proportionably; which they received without Deductions: their
Clothes and Arms being by a former Law Plutarch. in vita Gracch. Veget. de Re
Milit. lib. 2. cap. 19.
provided also out of the Public Revenue. And this was the Pay or Wages which
John the Baptist bids the Soldiers in the Text to be content with.

The word in the Original is (...), which may indifferently be rendered a
reward in Money, or an Equivalent in Necessary Provisions Suidas in voce.
. And this word is not unfitly used by John the Baptist on this occasion,
because the Roman Soldiers were often wont to receive their Pay, or part
thereof, in a certain Dimensum or quantity of Corn, assigned them out of the
common Stores or Granaries of the Empire Just. Lips lib. 2. Elect.
, which was a good expedient to keep them out of such vicious courses, as
having soon consumed their Money, would put them afterward on the necessity of
doing any ill things for their Subsistence.

It seems the Soldiers in Judea were not content with this Allowance, which way
soever it was dispensed to them; for that we cannot particularly know at this
distance of time. Some few years before there had been a Mutiny among the
Pannonian Legions about their Pay; alleging (as Tacitus Annal. lib. 1.. 17.
Denis in diem assibus corpus and animam aestimari.
tells us) that their lives were held too cheap, to be estimated only at ten
Pence a day. It does not appear that the Soldiers in the Text complained of the
smallness of their Pay; but that which John the Baptist charges them with, is,
the not being satisfied with so liberal a maintenance, and Preying upon the
Country as if they had no Pay at all.

It will be said that they wanted, when they did this; which yet can hardly be
supposed, considering the largeness of their Pay, as has been showed. If they
did, it could proceed but from one of these two Causes; either first, from the
Neglect or Fraud of those that were entrusted with the Payment of them, who
paid them not, or subtracted part of their Pay: or secondly, from their own
lavish and improvident way of living. It Is like they squandered away in an
Hour, and in one Debauch, what was intended, and might have been enough to have
kept them a Week. When that was gone, they were left to shift as they could;
and then the Country must be sure to suffer. A good Man will be content even
with little; because allowing himself only the Necessities of Nature, a very
Moderate stipend will suffice for these: But vice is a costly and chargeable
thing, and he that has a large Stock of Lusts to provide for, and is resolved
to deny none of them, needs a greater supply than (for ought I know) has ever
been allowed to Soldiers in the Nature of Pay. Such Men must of necessity be a
burden to any Country in the World that they come into.

Therefore these Words of John the Baptist bidding the Soldiers in the Text to
be content with their Wages, must be understood to contain a twofold
Injunction. First, to the Officers to have an especial care to see their
Soldiers well paid, and not suffer them to be cheated of that which was the
price of their Blood; to look that they were supplied with what was convenient,
and by no means to let them want. Soldiers, of all Men in the World must not
want, brave Men must not want. It dejects their Spirit, and abates that noble
Ardour from which spring all generous Emotions; and I am much deceived if any
great matters are to be expected from famished and naked Men. This care those
Ancient Captains renowned in History had of their Soldiers Ael. Spartian de
Avidio Cassio Jul. Capitolin. in Maximin.
; who have not disdained to inspect the the Arms, Clothes and other
Accoutrements of the meanest of them, to inter into their little Huts, examine
their Diet, see how they were Accommodated, have furnished them out of their
own Stores, nay, have tore their very Linen and Clothes Xiphilin. in vita
Trajani.
to bind up their Wounds. And this it was that reconciled them to their Love,
more effectually than the new Method that obtains now, which is, first to Prey
upon them, and then in recompense let them Prey upon others without fear of
Punishment. Not only to see that they received their Pay regularly, but to
dispense it them with Prudence, and by such Proportions as not to leave it in
their Power to want at any time by ill Management. When that was done, then not
to permit them to ruin the Country where they were in GARRISON by Plunder, and
free Quarter, not to wink at their Invasion of any Man's Property; but to
oblige them to live on their Pay, and not on the Blood, and Tears, and
Oppression of the People Flav. Vopisc. [Imperator Alexander Severus hac Mandata
Tribunis Militum dedit.] Si vis Tribunus esse imo si vivere vis, manus Militum
contine. Nemo segetes atterat. Nemo Ligna auferat. Nemo ovem alterius rapiat.
Annona sua miles contentus sit Non ex Lacrymis Provincialium vivat.
. Secondly, to the Soldiers, to study to lead Virtuous and Sober Lives, which
they would find to be an excellent way to live Cheap: Sobriety being a Frugal
and Parsimonious Virtue, whereas if they gave themselves up to that Beastly
Vice of Drunkenness (the common Bane of Men of their Profession) it would bring
on them this Inconvenience, among many others, that to have one good or merry
Day (as they called it) in the Week, it would force them to starve, or steal
all the rest. But they were not to imagine that Theft was a less Sin in them
than in other Men. There was not a particular Religion for Soldiers, but the
same common Law of God forbidding Wrong, and Injustice, concerned them equally
with all Men. Therefore they were to be content with their Wages. All this, and
much more is implied in these Words. And the Soldiers likewise demanded of him,
saying, And what shall we do? And he said unto them, Do Violence to no Man,
neither accuse any falsely, but be content with your Wages.

I come now to the Application.
Gentlemen,
I shall make no Apology for this Discourse, for though I am sensible that it is
not from the Pulpit that you are to learn what relates merely to Military Order
and Discipline; yet, as you are Christian Soldiers, as your Profession is
allowed in the Gospel, as there are peculiar Rules for it in the Book of God,
you fall under our Cognizance, and since John the Baptist, the first
Evangelical Preacher, has not doubted to admonish a GARRISON, it is evident any
Minister of the Gospel may still do the same, when he sees Occasion.

It Is hard to find always Comparisons that are exactly adapted to each other,
but I could not find a braver Nation to compare you to than the Romans, for
whatever Difference there may be in Extent of Dominion, I am sure that as to
true Courage and Valor, the English Nation is little inferior to them. The
French resemble the Parthians in this, that they are your Neighbors, your old
Hereditary Enemies, your Rivals in Empire, and a Nation that is become terrible
by its late Successes. We, like the Jews, deserve to be pitied by our
Situation, which in two Hours time may bring that dreadful Enemy upon our
Coasts; and though it be indeed a very great Honor to the English Monarchy, to
have such a GARRISON, like an advanced Guard, within view of the Enemy; yet to
us the Inhabitants of this Place, it must be a great Inconvenience, and must
expose us to continual Alarms We had one the very Tuesday seven night after the
Preaching of this Sermon, occasioned by the Appearance of a Fleet of above a
Hundred fail of the Enemies, who were suspected of some Design upon the Islands.
. We are always the First and Greatest Sufferers by the War. Our Danger is so
near, that it can be nothing but a particular Providence that has all along
preserved us. It Is true, we have a GARRISON for our Security! A GARRISON when
made up of well regulated Troops, commanded by a Brave, Wise, Just, and
Experienced Officer, is a Benefit and a Gain, as well as a Guard and a Defense
to a Country; but when otherwise, I think it is one of the greatest Evils that
can be fall it, and if it be not an open Enemy, it is at best but a false and
an uneasy Friend in ones Bosom. This is a Truth which we have learned, not
from Speculation, but from late and woeful Experience. Of all the Instances
mentioned by John the Baptist in the Text, there is not one wherein we have not
suffered in the highest Degree.

It were a Lamentable Story should one recount all that this poor Island has
endured, dating it only from the Present War, an Island which (I will boldly
say) deserved to be better used. It is with others Adjacent Guernzey, Alderney,
and Sark.
the Ancientest Flower in the English Diadem; and in this we have the
Precedence even of Kingdoms Scotland and Ireland.
, who are but a latter Accession. It is the Remainder of all those vast
Possessions which your famous Ancestors had on the Neighboring Continent,
whereof if History should fail to inform Posterity, we shall so long as we are
yours (which we hope we shall ever be) remain a Standing and Perpetual
Monument. It was your own Intestine The Civil Wars betwixt the two Houses of
Tork and Lancaster.
Dissentions, more than the Arms of your Enemies, or rather a Superior
Providence, which sets Bounds to Kingdoms as it does to the Ocean, that made
you repass your Channel. But while we are yours, your Enemies cannot boast that
they have Regained, or that you have Lost all. And when ever you shall think
fit to endeavor a Recovery of your Ancient Right, we are a better Title, and
Evidence of that Right, than the most Authentic Records that you have. Nay, we
are a step to that brave undertaking, and when you are here, you may be said to
have already a Foot in your Enemies Country. We have been most Faithful to You,
ever since our Union with you, nor could ever any thing tempt us to follow the
Defection of so many other Provinces to which you once gave Law. All attempts
of your Enemies upon us have proved but so many Instances of our strict
Adherence to you, and when they have thought to make an easy Conquest of Us,
they have seen themselves repulsed Jersey has been twice attempted by the
French since it was annexed to the Crown of England. Their first attempt was in
the latter end of the weak Reign of K. Henry VI. at which time they surprised
Mount Orgueil Castle, but could never make themselves masters of above half the
Island; Philip de Carteret, Seigneur of St. O en. Ancestor of Sir Phisip de
Carteret, maintaining himself in the other half, till with the succor he had
from England, he drove the French out of the Island, and recovered the Castle.
Their second attempt war in the Reign of King Edward. VI. and then they landed
at Bouley Bay, in the North of the Island, but by the Bravery and Churage of
the Islanders, were beaten back to their Ships.
and beaten from our Shores; our nearness to them serves but to increase our
Affection to you, and the more intercourse we have with that Faithless Nation,
the more we understand, and are pleased with our Happiness in being Yours; we
never had any Interests but Yours; have followed all your Fortunes; have
concurred with you in all Turns and Revolutions; and even amidst all your
Distractions, have ever stuck inviolably to you.

This has in all Ages advanced us to a very high Degree of Favor with our
Kings, who whatever they may have been in other Respects, have been generally
good, and Beneficent to us. I know not any that ever sat on the English Throne
since our Dependence thereon from whom we have not received some particular
Mark of Royal Bounty and Munificence, which I gladly mention, not only because
we do our Selves a very great Honor therein, but because I take it to be our
bounden Duty, at all Times, and in all Places, to express our humble and
thankful Acknowledgments. We have upon all Occasions, felt the benign
Influences of their excellent Government, and from them have obtained so many
gracious Concessions, so many ample Immunities and Privileges, that it is not
their Fault if we are not a most happy People. Some of them in their
Prosperity, have honored our Little Island with their Royal Presence K. John.
, while it has been a Sanctuary to others in Distress King Henry VII. then
Earl of Richmond. K. Charles II. and K. James II. then Duke of York.
. Who, when they could not set a Foot in any of their Three Kingdoms, possessed
by Conquering and successful Rebels, have found amongst us a safe Retreat to
their sacred Persons.

I must not Omit the strongest Bond that is among Men, that of Religion, which
ties us to you faster yet than any thing I have mentioned. We glory in nothing
more, than in being part of your excellent Church, the Church of England, so
universally conformed to amongst us, that there is not so much as one separate
Congregation of any Sect whatsoever in this whole Island. Our Clergy bred (most
of them) in your learned Universities, where they have imbibed those Principles
of Religion, and love to your Church and Nation, which they infuse into the
People.

The Language French.
seems to be the only thing that makes a Distinction. Could but this Difference
be removed, there would be none at all betwixt us and Englishmen in the
strictest Sense. Indeed, I have often admired that in the space of six hundred
years, and more, that this Island has been in the English Possession (for
that is the Date of the Conquest) the English Tongue has not prevailed in it. To
us it is really an infelicity, but to you I take it to be rather an Honor. It
shows the Grandeur and Amplitude of the English Scepter, better so, than if it
had, or should prevail; as the Scripture notes it for an Instance of that
mighty Empire which God gave to Nebachadnezzar, that, Sundry People, Nations,
and LANGVAGES Dan. 3. 4.
were subject to it. It Is the peculiar Glory of out Kings, that they have
Subjects who Pray for the Preservation of their Sacred Persons, the Prosperity
of their Arms, and victory over their Enemies in the very Tongue and Dialect of
those their Enemies.

I grant we make but a small Figure in the Map, and that may be apt to create a
contempt of us. We appear there but like a little Spot compared to the rest of
their Majesty's Dominions. But is it nothing that on this little spot are above
fifteen thousand Souls, all Protestants There has not been a Papist in Jersey,
Native and Inhabitant, for this hundred years and more.
, who in humble Obedience to their Majesty's and in the most dutiful Affection
to their Government, yield to none of their other Subjects?

Sometimes we are told that we are a Burden and a Charge, rather than a Profit
and an Advantage to you. But this is the voice of Men who measure the Interests
of Crowns and Kingdoms, by the narrow Rules of private Interest. I pray God,
you may never understand the Importance of this Place, by the loss of it.

And now let the World Judge, how much we have been wronged, when a rude and
insolent Soldiery, who were sent to be a Safety and a Protection to us, in this
time of common danger, have broke loose upon us, to the utmost degree of
Licentiousness; and have treated us not as Friends, and Men cemented to them by
so many close and indissoluble Engagements, but as Strangers and Foreigners;
and as though we had needed a GARRISON for a Yoke and a Curb, rather than a help
and a Succor to us. But blessed be God, the Case is altered, we begin to
breath after our Sufferings. Every thing seems to have put on a new Face
amongst us; and one may read in our Peoples looks how infinitely they are
pleased to see the command put into the hands of a Gentleman that knows how to
use it; and who by a just and necessary severity, has rescued us from
Oppression and Misery. Wherein he has done so excellent a service, that
whatever reward attends him from a Prince that knows how to value Men, we who
reap the benefit of it, must never forget it; and it is the least thing that we
can do, to express our sense of it in this public way.

I shall therefore expostulate no longer with you, but shall only entreat you,
by every thing in the World that is dearest to you; by the memory of your
glorious Ancestors, who have transmitted us to you as their old and undoubted
Patrimony, and an earnest of those just Pretensions they have left you to
pursue; by all your hopes of extending one day the English Empire to its former
Bounds on this side; by that constant and inflexible Faith we have born you in
your worst of times, and when almost any Condition seemed preferrable to that
of belonging to so Distracted a Nation; by the Sacred Ashes of our Ancient
Kings, who have been so Indulgent to Us, and who have all along considered Us
as their most Faithful and most Loyal Subjects; by that Holy Religion which We
profess in common with you; go on to live peaceably as you do now amongst us;
be Civil in your Quarters; make no false Representations of us; pity a People
exhausted by the Ruin of their Commerce, their great Losses, and the many
Pressures they have endured; so shall you draw our Affections, if possible, yet
closer to you; we shall study all the ways we can to oblige you; we shall be
mutually happy in each other; you shall acquire to your selves a lasting Memory
amongst us, and those that come after us shall mention you with Honor; and
when ever you quit this Station, and shall be called to meet Danger in the open
Field, we shall attend you with our most hearty Prayers to the great God of
Hosts, to go out along with you, to cover your Heads in the day of Battle, to
crown you with Victory here, and with an endless Triumph hereafter. Amen.

FINIS.

