A Voice out of Sion, UNTO ALL THE INHABITANTS OF THE EARTH: WITH A few Words
of the Dealings of GOD in Love with ENGLAND, whose Visitation in Mercy draws
near to an End.

ALSO, A WARNING unto all the Inhabitants of BABYLON, that they may haste and
flee out of her; because her Judgment is nigh, yea, unto all that live in
Wickedness, Sin and Uncleanness: For the Wicked must be turned into Hell, and
all that forget God.

By ROBERT FALKNER.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1663.

A VOICE out of ZION unto all the Inhabitants of the Earth: With a few Words of
the dealings of God in Love with ENGLAND, etc.
HEar, O Earth, and give ear ye the Inhabitants thereof, for the Lord has
spoken, yea, the mighty God has uttered his terrible Voice, saying, I will
arise, I will arise and shake terribly the Earth, that the Pillars thereof
standing shall fall, and never more to be raised again; yea, the lofty and tall
Cedars shall bend, and the sturdy Oaks shall bow, and the Rocks shall melt
before my Appearance, and the Mountains shall be removed, and the little Hills
shall tremble and flee away from my Presence; for, behold, I have taken to me
my great Power, and I will reign in Righteousness, and govern with Equity, and
I will exalt my own Name, and establish my Throne for ever; and I will raise up
the Tabernacle of David, and exalt the Mount of mine own House above every
Mountain; and the little Stone which I have cut out of the Mountain without
hands, shall fall at the feet of all Images, and shall beat them to pieces,
even as when a Potters vessel is broken that there remains not a sheard to take
fire from the hearth: and therefore, fear, fear, quake and tremble, ye
Potsheards of the Earth, that are taking counsel against the Lord and his
Anointed: for woe unto you that are decreeing unrighteous Decrees. Oh ye Judges
and Rulers of the Earth, who have judged for gifts and rewards which have
blinded your eyes, and have ruled for your selves and not for God; Behold, the
Lord has a Controversy with you, yea with the whole Earth, with whom he will
plead in his not displeasure. Oh England, England, I am in pain and anguish of
spirit for thee above all Nations of the Earth, because thou have been a
professing Nation, a Nation professing Christianity in the highest measure,
above all the Nations of the Earth, and now to see desolation coming upon thee,
it has filled my heart with sorrow, and this is the cry of my soul, O that my
head were a well of waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
stream and gush forth as the great Ocean, that all within her borders might be
washed from their corruption, and appear before the Lord in white garments: but
thus says the Lord, Rest thou in peace, for behold, I have opened my own
Fountain, and I have called, I have called, even unto thee O England, saying,
Wash thee, wash thee, make thee clean, put away the evil of thy doings; for it
is my delight to establish thee as a Queen amongst the Nations: but she hardened
her heart, and stifned her neck, though I called unto her by my Light and
Spirit in her; but yet being unwilling that she should become a desolation and
a hissing to all Nations, I manifested my self further, and raised up some in
the midst of her to bear a Testimony against her, and with these Instruments
did I mighty Acts, and brought the Mighty from their seat, and corrected and
chastised them in my Love, that all the Earth might know that I had a Love unto
her; and unto those Instruments I gave full power to subdue all Oppression,
Cruelty and Wrong; but Oh they abused my Power after I had done so wonderfully
by them and for them; and it was my purpose to have established them, if they
would have feared my Name, and obeyed my Voice, and performed their Engagements
which they made with me in their low estate, but they waxed fat, and kicked
against me, and forgot all their Promises which they made unto me, and did not
the thing which I required of them: then I raised up my Servants to put them in
mind of their Promises and Engagements which they made with me before the
People, which were, To ease the Land of all Oppression, Cruelty and Wrong; but
they would not hear: Then I sent my Servants again and again, saying, Repent of
this your Transgression, and do the thing which is just, or the Lord will bring
you down, and destroy your Powers, and lay your Honor in the dust. This was
often told them in Love, that all the Earth might know that I am a God that
delights in Mercy; for I sent my Servants rising up early, and sitting up late,
but they would have none of my Counsel, and my righteous Law they cast behind
their backs, and hardened their hearts, and stifned their necks, and grow as bad
or worse than they that went before them: and thus they grieved my good Spirit,
and wearied out my patience, until my long-suffering came to an end. And seeing
they would not take counsel of me, says the Lord, I gave them up to the
counsel of their own hearts lusts, by which they wrought their own destruction:
Therefore let the Earth know that I am a God that delights in Mercy, and yet my
Judgments are all just; and yet I am calling to thy Inhabitants, O England,
saying, Do justly, love Mercy, and walk humbly with thy God: And I have sent my
Servants yet again and again, with their lives in their hands, crying in thy
Streets, and testifying unto thee, that there is no Salvation, no Redemption,
no Sanctification, nor no Justification but in Christ Jesus; and in him is that
Fountain in which thou might have washed thy self from all thy pollution; He
is the Light of the World, and he has enlightened every man that comes into
the world.

O ye Inhabitants of England, had you believed in this Light, then you would
have known the Fountain which in thy own bowels would have gushed forth as a
River of Life to cleanse thee from all thy corruption: But O England, England,
thus faith the Lord, Thou have disregarded my Love, thou have forsaken me the
living Fountain, and have dug unto thy self broken Cisterns that will hold
no water; and thou have run up and down to change thy ways, and have not
regarded the needful thing: Oh how shamefully have thou entreated those my
Messengers of this my Covenant of Light and Life! how have thou stocked them
and stoned them, whipped them and beaten them, spoiled their Goods, and cast
their Bodies into Prison, and have threatened to take away their Lives, or rid
them out of the Land! O Nation be it known unto thee, for thus says the Lord
God, Had it not been for my Childrens Prayers and Supplications to me, for thee
O Land, I had made an utter desolation of thee ere this day; but for their
sakes have I been pleased to spare thee, that I might exercise loving kindness
toward thee, and that my long-suffering might lead thee to repentance; but Oh!
how do thou gainsay my Love, though it flow toward thee as a mighty stream?
and how does all manner of Wickedness and Cruelty abound in thy Palaces! O when
will thou begin to consider with thy self, and say, O thy wonderful Mercies
toward me! Oh when will it enter into thy heart to say, It is enough that I
have been spared unto this day, I will return, I will return? Oh! then the evil
which I intended to bring upon thee shall not come upon thee; for I am a God
exercising loving kindness, and with me there is Mercy, that I may be feared:
but O Nation, if thou go on as thou have done, oppressing my Life within
thee, and persecuting my People amongst you, then I cannot hold my Fury from
falling upon you; For, O consider, the Oppression that is upon my Children,
whom I have bought with the blood of my dear Son; for they are not their own,
but mine, and therefore have I exercised their Patience, and moved them to pray
for thee O Land, that thou might know that I am a God that delight in Mercy;
but thy sin, O Nation, has reached unto Heaven, and cried for Vengeance
against thee; and behold, the cry of my innocent Lambs has moved me unto
Jealousy, and my bowels are full, even ready to burst forth within me with a
terrible fire; for I am weary, I am weary with bearing the oppression of mine
own Seed, which I have planted in the Nobility of mine own Life, to be a holy
Nation unto me, with whom my Covenant stands for ever: and this is the cause
why my Controversy is with you, even because you have oppressed my own Life,
by making bonds and limits to limit the holy One of Isreal's Oh what art thou a
doing that art fighting against God, by seeking to destroy his Heritage! Can
thou stop the Sun from going its course, or the Lightning that it break not
through the clouds? can thou stop the Moon that it give not light to the
night, or hinder that there shall not be daytime, nor nightime, nor tide in
its season? If this thou can do, yet I am greater than all, who created them
all, and they are in my hand, and I can do with them as my pleasure is:
Therefore ye Inhabitants of the Earth, tremble before me, for my Controversy
is great with you, says the Lord God, and my purpose is to destroy the workers
of iniquity from the face of the Earth; yea, I will disanul the Covenant of the
Earth, and break the Bonds of Hell, and take the old Serpent, called the Devil
and Satan, and put him into the Lake of Fire, and seal him down that he go no
more out of his place. And now, O Beast that have received thy Power from the
Dragon, and have ruled in great Authority, and have killed the bodies of my
Saints, says the Lord God, that could not receive thy marks in their foreheads
or right-hands, nor the number of thy Names, nor worship thy Images: Oh Beast
thou must be taken alive with the false Prophet and cast alive into the Lake of
everlasting burning. And now O Babylon, thy destruction is near, for the Beast
that has long born thee is taken, and is in a chain ready to be cast into the
Lake; and now the hour of thy Judgment is come, and all the Vials of the Wrath
of God are ready to be poured forth upon thee; for thou have bewitched the
Nations with thy Sorceries, and has made all the Kings of the Earth drunk with
thy Cup of Fornications and Whoredoms, and thou have drunk the blood of my
Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, says the Lord God Almighty; and though thou
said in thy hea^^ thou were a Queen, and should see no sorrow; but now
behold, thy misery is coming upon thee, and thy torment is near thee, and now
thou must have double to drink of the Wrath of God, for all the Blood that thou
have drunk of his Saints, and into a bed of torments must thou go, yea, into a
lake of unquenchable fire, to be tormented night and day from the presence of
the Lamb.

Awake, awake, O ye Inhabitants of the Earth, and see to your standing, whether
you be in Zion, the City of the Lord, into which, no unclean thing can enter:
Or, joined to Babylon, the City of confusion, who is drunk with the blood of
the Saints. Haste, haste, out of her all ye that be in her, Oh! delay not the
time, but flee for your lives. Come out, come out of her my people, says the
Lord, for if ye be partakers with her of her sins, ye must partake with her of
her plagues: Therefore be all warned, O ye the Inhabitants of the Earth; For
the Lord has roared out of Zion, he has uttered his terrible voice, out of
his holy Mountain; yea he is risen to plead with all flesh, with fire and with
sword, for his own Seeds sake: Yea he will rain from heaven, showers of hail
mingled with fire. O Earth, with all thy Inhabitants, fear, dread, and tremble,
for the Lord is coming to judgment; yea the time is at hand, that the secrets
of all hearts must be judged by Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God and Light of the
world. The Just shall arise unto the Resurrection of Life; but the Unjust, to
the Resurrection of Condemnation. And this shall be the Sentence, Come ye
blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you: Or, Go ye cursed,
into everlasting burnings; prepared for the Devil and his Angels. For the
wicked must go into hell, with all that forget God.

Written in the dread of God's power, the first day of the 11th. Month, 1662.
by one who in the evening before, saw fire rain from Heaven, as he walked in
the street; by which God signified these things unto him, which must shortly
come to pass. Whose Name is called, Robert Falkner.

O Cain, O Cain, thou down into the pit must go,
Of horror and vexation, of misery and woe.
Because thou have sought to slay the Seed, in which God does delight;
T'expect a Sacrifice indeed, being offered in the Light.
Thou art that Cananite, wherever thou do dwell,
Which do despise the Light; thou must go into hell.
For Christ, who is the Light, is given for Salvation;
Against such as him despite, he is their Condemnation.
O Gog with all thine host, thou art but a running briar;
Though up and down thou post, thou wilt soon consume in the fire.
When God does once arise, to burn up briars and thorns;
And to consume the Beast, with all his pushing horns:
And Babylon the Whore her flesh, must burned be with fire;
Who has oppressed the poor, by forcing unjust hire.
Though she as Queen did sit, said, she should see no sorrow;
Yet now she must into the pit, of misery, woe and horror.
Therefore ye saints of the most high, aloud high praises sing;
Unto the Lord of Life, who is your only King.
Whose Throne in Righteousness, established shall be;
Ah, blessed thou for ever art, that do him feel and see.
For, with high renown, his own he will crown,
the Enemy shall be brought down:
And thou shall have rest, and no more be oppressed;
this is thy portion, whom God has blessed.

THE END.

