Libertas Ecclesiastica, OR, A DISCOURSE, Vindicating the lawfulness of those
things, which are chiefly excepted against in the Church of England, especially
in its LITVRGY and WORSHIP.

And manifesting their agreeableness with the Doctrine and practice both of
Ancient and Modern Churches.

By WILLIAM FALKNER, Preacher at St. Nicholas, in Lyn Regis.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1674.

IMPRIMATUR,

Jan. 23. 167^/^ Sam. Parker.

TO The most Reverend Father in God, Gilbert by Divine Providence, Lord
Archbishop of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropolitan, and one of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace,
YOur Grace being a Person of such singular Eminency in the Church of England,
I humbly crave leave to present to your hands this following Discourse, which
contains a Vindication of the Public Worship of our Church, from those
Exceptions which by Dissenters have been made against it. And the main Design
of this Treatise being to promote Christian Unity, by representing the evil
consequences of such unnecessary Discords and Schisms, and the great
unreasonableness of those pretenses, which have been alleged for their
Justification; it will not, I hope, be judged incongruous, that it should
address it self to your Grace, whose high Office in the Church tends to
advance the Unity thereof, and entitleth you to the public Patronage of Peace
and Truth.

I cannot doubt your Graces approbation of this design, which is at all times
useful, but more especially in this present Juncture of Affairs, if God please
to grant success, which is my earnest prayer. For as all good men who prefer
Truth and the sincere practice of Piety before their own prejudices, wills, and
passions, cannot but approve of such honest endeavors to rectify mistakes,
and compose the minds of men to peace; so all who are pious and wise cannot but
discern a greater necessity, and a more particular obligation at this time to
silence all these little janglings and quarrels, if they have any respect to
the main interest and concerns of the Reformed Profession.

And I hope, My Lord, that the late Alarm we had from our common Enemies, may
open men's eyes to see the mischief of rending the Church into so many Factions,
and may dispose them to receive just and reasonable satisfaction. And though
what has been excellently performed by former Writers upon this Subject be
sufficiently satisfactory, yet my labor herein may not be wholly useless,
considering the humor of this Age, which is more apt to read new Books than to
seek for old ones.

But though the cause I have undertaken deserves your Graces Patronage, yet my
own personal defects might justly have discouraged me, from presenting this
discourse to one of so high Dignity, and so great a Judgment; had not the cause
it self been so good, that it needed no Art and Colors to set it off, but is
sufficiently justified, when it is rightly represented and understood; and your
Graces Candor and Clemency so well known, as to encourage me to hope for a
favorable Acceptance; which is the only thing I beg in this humble Address
unto your Grace, favorably to accept of this small Present from him, who
unfeignedly prays for your Graces prosperity, and is entirely devoted to the
service and interest of Truth and Peace, and

Humbly honors your Grace with all due Observance, W. Falkner.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE design of this discourse being to remove or at least to allay those fierce
contentions about the external forms of worship, to which we owe all those
unhappy Schisms, which good men so heartily bewail, it was necessary in order
to this end to rectify those mistakes and prejudices, which abuse well-minded
men, who have not thoroughly considered things; and to correct those corrupt
passions, that quarrelsom and contentious humor, which perverts others.

To these two causes we owe most of our present disorders, and it is too
evident, what hand the latter of these has had in them, while diverse Persons
wanting a due sense of the evil and danger of these discords, and a due regard
to the Peace and Unity of the Church, have been too zealous and forward to
maintain and promote such dissensions, thereby to serve the Interest of their
own parties, and to oppose the settlement of the Church upon sure and lasting
principles: now I had no other way of dealing with these men, but to convince
them of the great evil of such contentions, and how much it is the duty of
every Christian to study Peace and Unity. For there is nothing more evident,
than that men's minds are strangely biased by their affections and Interests,
and clouded by passion, and therefore while they are so peremptorily resolved
upon their way, while they are so fond of their own Inventions, while they are
devoted to the service of a Party, and account those men their Enemies, who
should rule and govern them, and inform them better; there is no expectation,
that reason and argument should prevail with them.

And if those arguments, which I have made use of for this purpose, should be
effectual to calm the passions of men, and to work in them a Christian and
peaceable temper of mind, I can easily foretell the success of my following
discourse, the design of which is to rectify those mistakes and
misapprehensions, which some men labor under, which either concern the
particular Rites and offices of our Church, or the General rule of duty, or
Ecclesiastical liberty, by which the Church must be directed and guided in
matters of order.

The first has occasioned various exceptions against some Rites and
Ceremonies, and particular passages in our forms of Prayer, and I have spent
great part of this Treatise in answering such objections, by which I hope it
will appear, what little reason there is to disturb the Peace of the Church,
and to separate from our Communion upon such pretenses.

Concerning the General Rule, which ought ever to be observed in the Church
about matters of order, there are some, who will allow nothing (except some few
circumstances) to be determined by the Authority of the Church, unless it be
directly enjoined by a particular divine Institution; and for a more plausible
color they reject all such rules of order or regular administration, under the
terms of unscriptural conditions of Communion. But in answer to this I have
made it appear to be an unjust and unreasonable exception against the
established order of any Church, that there are some things determined and
appointed by the Authority of Superiors, which have always been accounted of
an Indifferent nature, and are indeed the proper matters of Ecclesiastical
Liberty: And I hope, I have abundantly proved to the satisfaction of all sober
inquirers, that prudent and well ordered Ecclesiastical Constitutions and
appointments for the promoting order and decency, and the advancement of
Religion and Piety, are very allowable and unblameable; nay that it is
impossible, that any public worship or service of God can be performed, unless
some things in those administrations, not particularly commanded by God, be
determined either by public Authority, or by common agreement, which makes it
necessary for all men either to relinquish this principle, or which is more
shameful, to contradict it in their practice.

I am not unsensible, what rewards such attempts, as this, commonly meet with
from men of distempered minds, and ungoverned passions: I have carefully
avoided all just occasion of offense, as hoping, that I may the more
effectually persuade, the less I anger them; but if nothing will secure me from
Invectives and Calumnies. I must be contented with my portion, and appeal to
the judgment of more candid and impartial Readers, and satisfy my self with
the Testimony of God and my own Conscience of the honesty of my intentions and
design in this work, leaving the success of it to the Divine Providence, with
my hearty and serious Prayers, that it may be for the public benefit of the
Church.

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS.
THE FIRST BOOK.
CHap. 1. The disagreements about Conformity are of great concernment. Sect. 1.
Of the effects of these Dissentions as to the dispositions of the People. Sect.
2. That these Contentions disadvantage Christianity, and gratify Popery and
Irreligion. Sect. 3. Of the dangerous loss of the Churches Peace and Unity by
this Controversy, and of the Sin of Schism. Sect. 4. Some false Conceptions of
Schism refuted. Sect. 5. Of the duty of Obedience to Rulers and Governors, and
the due Exercise of the Ministerial Function, which is herein concerned. Sect.
6. A Proposal touching due considerateness, and the design of this Treatise
manifested. Chap. 2. Of the solemn League and Covenant. Sect. 1. Of an unlawful
Oath in it self, and that that Oath was such, with respect to its Matter, and
Form, and Imposition. Sect. 2. That the Covenant cannot oblige any Person to
endeavor any alteration of the Government of the Church, proved by four Rules.
Chap. 3. Of the Declaration and Subscription referring to the Liturgy. The
common use of such acknowledgments, etc. the true sense of declaring unfeigned
assent and consent. Chap. 4. Of the Liturgy and the ordinary Service appointed
therein. Sect. 1. The Lawfulness, Antiquity, and Expediency of Set-Forms. Sect.
2. Objections against Set-Forms answered. Sect. 3. Of the Composure of the
Prayers in our Liturgy; chiefly of Responsals and short Prayers. Sect. 4. Of
the Doxologie, Athanasian Creed, and some particular expressions in the Litany.
Sect. 5. Considerations concerning the public reading the Apocryphal Chapters.
Sect. 6. The Objections from the matter of the Apocrypha discussed Sect. 7.
Considerations about the Translation of the Psalms used in the Liturgy. Sect.
8. Of Holy Days or Festivals. Chap. 5. Of the particular Offices in the
Liturgy. Sect. 1. Of the direction for Communicants receiving the Lords Supper.
Sect. 2. Of some other things in the Communion Office. Sect. 3. Of the saving
Regeneration of Infants in Baptism, and the grounds upon which it may be
asserted. Sect. 4. The Doctrine of the ancient, and diverse Reformed Churches
herein observed. Sect. 5. The Objections against the saving Regeneration of
Infants in Baptism considered. Sect. 6. Of the Notion of visible Regeneration
in Baptism. Sect. 7. Of Sureties, and some other things in the Office for
Baptism. Sect. 8. Of the Office for Confirmation, and that for Marriage. Sect.
9. Of the Communion of the Sick, and the Office for Burial.
The Second Book.
Chap. 1. The lawful Use of some Ceremonies in the Christian Church asserted.
Sect. 1. What we are here to understand by Ceremonies. Sect. 2. The first
Argument for the lawfulness of Ecclesiastical Rites, from the liberty therein
allowed to the Jewish Church. Sect. 3. Ecclesiastical Constitutions concerning
external Rites, warranted by the Apostolical Doctrine and Practice. Sect. 4.
The Practice and Judgment of the Primitive, and many Protestant Churches
concerning Ceremonies. Sect. 5. The ill consequences of denying the lawfulness
of all Ecclesiastical Rites and Constitutions in things indifferent. Sect. 6.
Some Objections from Reason and from the Old Testament examined. Sect. 7. Other
Objections from the New Testament cleared. Chap. 2. Of Ecclesiastical
Appointments and Constitutions under some special Considerations. Sect. 1. Of
external Rites considered as significant. Sect. 2. Of Ecclesiastical
Appointments, considered as imposed and enjoined. Sect. 3. Of Ecclesiastical
Constitutions about things scrupled. Sect. 4. Of Ecclesiastical Rites, which
have been abused in any corrupt way of Worship. Chap. 3. Of devout and becoming
Gestures in the Service of God. Sect. 1. Of the Gesture at Prayer, Praise, and
Christian Profession of Faith. Sect. 2. Of standing up at the Gospel. Sect. 3.
Of the fitness of Kneeling at the Communion: and the gesture at the Institution
of that Sacrament considered. Sect. 4. Of the Communion-gesture observed in the
Christian Church, both in the purer and the more degenerate times thereof.
Chap. 4. Of other particular Rites appointed in the Church of England. Sect 1.
Of the Surpless. Sect. 2. Of the sign of the Cross in the Office for Baptism.
Sect. 3. Of laying on hands in Confirmation. Sect. 4. Of the Ring in Marriage.
And the Conclusion.
Libertas Ecclesiastica. The First BOOK.
CHAP. I.
Showing the disagreements about Conformity, to be of great concernment.
SECT I.
Of the effects of these oppositions, as to the dispositions of the people.
1. THE discerning the weightiness of any matter under present circumstances,
does not only depend upon the direct inspection into the thing it self, but
also upon a more comprehensive view of it, as it takes in all its necessary
consequents and attendants. If the Sea bank be broken, and carried away by an
overflowing rage of Waters, the loss would be fondly estimated, by considering
only the value of so much earth as would make it up: and it would be some
degrees below common folly, to imagine that the advantage of respiration in
man, is a thing wholly inconsiderable, because the matter of it is only a
little ordinary air: for according to that of Damascen, (...), a small matter
is then no small matter, when it brings in a great consequent.

2. Nor can we easily find a more full instance hereof, than in the present
subject of Conformity. For the discovering how great the good or evil is, which
depends thereupon, is not to be concluded, chiefly from the bare eying the
things required and appointed, many of which are in their own nature things
indifferent; but from observing its necessary attendants, which are of very
high consequence and great concernment. Wherefore I shall first take an
account, what great and manifold evils flow from these dissentions, and
oppositions, whereby this will appear to be a matter deserving serious
consideration, and that the maintaining such dissentions, unless they proceed
upon necessary and justifiable grounds, (which I shall examine) is upon many
weighty accounts utterly disallowable, and greatly condemnable.

3. From these contentions does spring much want of Christian love, and that
kindness of affection, which our Lord requires, and by many cogent arguments
enforces upon his Disciples; and instead thereof we may hear many
contemptuous, scoffing, and scorning expressions, which are an evidence of a
frothy and airy vanity and haughtiness of mind, unsuitable to the gravity and
humility of the Christian Spirit. Yea, hence much discourse of many men
religiously disposed, which might be well improved to a pious proficiency in
the Christian life, runs up into the wilder branches of contention; and that
zeal which might be well employed, is often misspent in cherishing the flames of
passionate heats, and heart-burnings, accompanied with too much bitterness, and
becomes that (...) which St. James so sharply censureth and condemns, Jam.
3.14, 15.
as being manifestly opposite to those religious practices unto which
Christians are directed from above.

4. This opposition has also too much promoted many sinful prejudices in the
spirits of Men: hence some have their minds unreasonably prepossessed, with so
much averseness toward, and disesteem of the public administrations of Gods
service, as indisposeth them for a devout performance of that worship, and
hinders the vigorous exercise of Christian Graces in their joining therein, to
the decay of piety. It occasioneth others to be neglectful in their attendance,
even upon the holy Sacramental Institutions of our blessed Savior; and this
same sin of prejudice sometimes rules so far, as to promote rashness of
judgment and great censoriousness of others, contrary to the Gospel rule, and
therein blinds men's minds, and hurrieth their passions into great excesses.
By all which things God is displeased, and Christian Charity is violated, but
the greatest hurt befalls themselves, by their slighting the advantages of a
Religious life, and either frequently neglecting, or negligently performing the
public duties of Gods worship, and not entertaining the means of their
Salvation; which includes also a want of due respect unto God and his grace.

5. And what strange apprehensions this Sin is prone to raise of the worthiest
men, may be best discovered in some particular instances. Hereby they who could
not but admire the Works and Doctrine of Christ, did both reject him, and
causelessly censure him, as breaking the Sabbath, blaspheming God, being an
Enemy to Caesar, and a greater friend to Publicans and Sinners than was
allowable, and at last cried out, Crucify him, Crucify him. Act. 14.8.19.
Hence also the same persons who so excessively admire Paul and Barnabas at
Lystra, being possessed with prejudice by the Jews persuasion, were well
pleased that they should be stoned to Death, and thereupon they rejected that
Doctrine which the Apostles preached.

6. Upon the like ungrounded dis-affection, Bas. Ep. 75.
St. Basil met with no better reputation at Neocesaria (the place of his
Fathers Family) than to be branded for an Heretic: Naz. Cann. de Vita sua.
and his great Friend Gr. Nazianzen at his first coming to Constantinople (the
City being in an uproar against him) was stoned by them, who when they
understood him better, being freed from their furious passions, yielded him, as
his great worth deserved, an high and honorable respect. And the influence of
this evil temper carried so strong a bias to pervert the judgments of the
Donatists, that St. Austin himself was misreputed by them, as a seducer and
deceiver of Souls; Posidon de vit. Aug c. 9.
and they exclaimed against him both publicly and privately, that he was a
Wolf, who should be slain for the preservation of the flock. And all this was
only because that famous man kept and defended the Communion of the Church,
which they rejected, he truly judging that a duty, which they erronesously
condemned as a sin. Thus this uneven glass of prejudice, when placed before the
minds of men, mis-representeth even what is comely and amiable, as if it was
monstrous ugly and deformed.

SECT. II.
Showing these contentions to disadvantage Christianity, and to gratify Popery
and Irreligion.
1. It is manifest that the open appearance of such, and indeed of all other
open contentions in the Church, have constantly abated the honorable esteem of
Christianity in the World, amongst them who do not profess it; and upon that
account they ought as much as is possible, to be avoided by those who value the
interest of Religion. Ep. ad Corinth p. 2.
Clemens the Fellow Laborer of St. Paul took notice, that in the dissentions
fomented at Corinth, about no matters of Doctrine, but only of Order and
Government, the hot distractions of a few heady and self pleasing persons, (as
he styles them) occasioned the name of that Church, to be greatly reproached
and evil spoken of; which was otherwise honorable, renowned, and worthy to be
loved. And Socrates averreth, Socr. Hist. Eccl. lib. 4. c. 5.
that the controversies (necessary on the Churches part) about Arianism were
attended with so great a mischief, that the Christian profession it self, was
from thence openly derided in the Theaters, even under the Government of a
Christian Emperor: and Constantine himself observed, Eccl. Hist Eccl. l. 10 c.
5.
that the opposition of the Donatists, at its first taking root, did bring
forth such dangerous fruit, that they who had their minds estranged from this
most holy Religion, had thence an occasion given them to scorn and deride it.
And the reflection upon the strange proneness to disagreement among Christians,
occasioned that reproachful expression against the Christian name, related of
Solomon the Turkish Emperor, who when it was told him, that the Christians
would unite together against him at the last; he lifting up his hand, and
stretching out his fingers replied, That there was no more ground to fear, that
the Christians should ever unite, than to fear that those singers should grow
together.

2. Nor is it hard to show, that such differences among Protestants, do gratify
the interests and desires, and comply with the designs of the Papists. Contz.
Polit. l. 2. c. 19.
It is the known Maxim of their great Politician, Bella haereticorum, pax
Ecclesiae, which in his language expresses, our discords to be their security:
And Bishop Whitgift in Queen Elizabeth's days, Letter to the Council in Fullers
Hist. l. 9. Contz. l. 2. c. 18.
expressed it to be a thing notorious, that the opposing Uniformity, was in
England the Papists advantage, and the Protestants disadvantage: and which way
their interests and endeavors at this time move, may be discerned by an
observing eye without the help of a Telescope, their hopes being founded in our
dissentions.

3. Upon these dissentions also they much insist, to dissuade persons thereby
from the Protestant profession; though this is indeed no other argument than
what the Gentiles of old made use of against Christianity, and is both long
since sufficiently answered by Clemens Alexandrinus, Strom. l. 7.
Origin against Celsus, and many other Fathers on the behalf of Christians, and
has lately been well returned upon the Papists themselves. However the
influence from these divisions is so considerable, though the argument from
them be not valuable, Polit. lib. 9. c. 21.
that Contzen relates it as the complaint of a Protestant Writer of good
account, Papistae funestis Evangelicorum dissidiis absterrentur a Doctrina
Evangelicorum, ceu haeretica, Satanica and seditiosa; That by the lamentable
discords of the Protestants, the Papists are frighted from the Doctrine of the
Reformed Churches, as if it was Heretical, Satanical, and Seditious: and in the
same place he speaks his own thoughts. We, says he, can not approve the
cause of the Protestants, which always some part of themselves, and sometimes
the chief and most numerous part does detest.

4. Nor are their endeavors ordinarily wanting, to blow up the Coals of
contention, that they may be advantaged by the smoke. Letter to the Lord
Treasurer in Fuller, ubi supra.
That they did animate some dissenters from Conformity in the Queens days, was
asserted by Bishop Whitgift, upon his own certain knowledge. And that in these
last thirty years and upwards, they were promoters of our divisions, is more
than probable from the informations given to the Archbishop, V. Biblioth. Reg.
p. 42.
1640. by Andreas ab Habernsfield a Bohemian of noble descent, and from many
particular passages concerning our late discords published by Mr. Prinne, and
Monsieur du Moulin, together with diverse credible relations of known Romanists
in the meetings of diverse Sects. Mr. Baxter long since declared, that he began
to have a strong suspicion, that the Papists had indeed an hand in the
extirpation of Episcopacy, Grot. Relig. Sect. 66.
and cites Bishop Bramhal's words against Meliterius. There was a Bishop in
the World (losers may have leave to talk) whose privy Purse and subtle Counsels
did help to kindle that unnatural War in his Majesty's three Kingdoms.

5. Agreeably hereto it was observed their Policy about two hundred years
since, to endeavor to extinguish the sparks of light in the Bohemian Church,
by dividing them asunder; Comen. Historiola, Sect. 36.
and as Comenius relates, admiscebant se personati quidam, qui Papae causam
promoturi, dissentiones mutuas promovebant. Bulleng. adv. Anabapt.
and Bullenger (as he is cited by Bishop Whitgift in his exhortation before his
Answer to the Admonition) declared, that the Anabaptists in Switzerland, and
the parts of Germany, were animated by the subtle Papists.

6. Yet if any will not so much as suspect, that these seeds of division, are
either secretly sown, or watered from these hands; considerate men have found
cause to conclude, that they expect to reap an harvest by them. This has not
only been expressed by some of themselves, and discerned by others in the
Churches of England, Bohemia, and Switzerland, but the same has been also
apprehended in all other Protestant Churches. Hubertus Languetus, a man of
great authority, and at that time the Duke of Saxonies Ambassador, resident in
the Emperors Court at Vienna (as Comenius, who relates the words of his
Epistle, declares) writing to Andreas Stephanus a Bohemian Bishop, declared
what his observation had discovered, almost an hundred years since; says he,
the Pope fears nothing more than our consenting and joining in Unity; -- sed
sunt inter nos insani quidam Theologi, etc. But there are amongst us some
furious Divines, who reject all right Counsels, and thereby perform a work
advantageous to the Popes interest.

7. And even Beza in the life of Calvin declares concerning the controversies
in Saxony about adiaphorous rites, as the Surplice, etc. that Calvin did at
first dislike Ph. Melanchthon, (who persuaded to Conformity) but afterward he
discovered that there was no reason so to do. For at that time it did not
appear (says Beza) with what spirit that evil Genius, and the whole Troop of
the Flacians (who disdained Conformity) were hurried on, which afterward caused
so many troubles, and still do hinder the work of God, non aliter sane, nec
minus suriose and impudenter, quam si ab ipso Romano Pontifice magnas
stipendiis esset conducta: with no less impudence and sury, (says he) than if
they had been hired by large salaries from the Pope of Rome. Praef. in Apol.
Catech.
And this contentious spirit of Flacius Illyricus (who was in some other
respects a man deserving commendation) has gained him this Character from
Vrsin, that he was one, qui per complures annos, praestantissimis atque veris
Christianis, and Orthodoxis viris obtrectando, and multas non necessarias
altercationes excitando, plurimorum conscientias, and passim Ecclesias, in
Germania turbavit; Who for diverse years, by his discrediting worthy and true
Christians, and Orthodox men, and by stirring up many unnecessary contentions,
was a troubler of diverse Consciences and Churches, all over Germany.

8. Nor is it hard to discover, that these dissentions about our public
service, are made an occasion by some others (I might say by many others) who
are more careless than scrupulous in matters of Piety, for their gross
neglecting the worship of God, and the duties of Religion: as the disputes
about the Lords Supper, have in several places apparently caused a great
carelessness, of attending on that great Ordinance. Letter to the Council, ubi
supra.
It was Bishop Whitgifts observation concerning our former times, that in King
Edwards time, and the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's, before the heat of these
contentions, the Gospel mightily prevailed and took great increase, but since
this schism and division, (says he) the contrary effects have happened. And
indeed no other can be well expected, because hereby is manifestly wanting that
forcible motive, from the general joining in the service of God with readiness
of mind, and with one consent, which might persuade them who are otherwise
careless of Religion, to be more serious, by making them ashamed of their
negligence.

9. And doubtfulness of Religion in some, and profaneness of life in others,
are the woeful ordinary consequents of such differences. When the Donatists, who
neither erred in the Faith, nor appeared vicious in their lives, made a great
breach in the Church, about matters of discipline; Optatus notes, Opt. adv.
Parm. l. 5.
that while they contended that their separation was lawful, and the Orthodox
Church decryed it as unlawful, the common people were doubtful, and at a stand
in the practice of Religion. Inter vestrum licet and nostrum non licet, nutant
and remigant animae populorum. And that Apostolical man Clemens, expresses the
fruits of the divisions in the Corinthian Church, about their Governors, to be
these: (...), your division has perverted and turned aside many; Ep. ad Cor.
p. 61.
(...), it has discouraged many and made them despond; (...), it brings many
into doubtfulness, and us all to grief and sorrow.

10. And besides diverse others ways mentioned in the following Sections,
whereby Religion is disadvantaged by these oppositions; it is upon this account
also apparently hindered, because these discords do often divert many Ministers,
from the more directly profitable parts of their employment; and make it
necessary for them to spend much time, in satisfying these scruples, and
answering objections, with thoughtfullness of the ill consequents of these
dissentions; while they have other work enough to do in the worship of God, the
edifying his Church, and the opposing other designs of those Enemies who seek
to undermine it. This is like the discovery of a fire breaking forth, or inward
mutinies appearing at that time, when there is much necessary work to be done
at home, and many conflicts to be prepared for both at home and abroad; which
must needs put some considerable obstructions to those proceedings.

SECT. III.
Of the dangerous loss of the Churches Peace and Unity by this controversy,
and of the sin of Schism.
1. That upon matters referring to this controversy, the Peace and Concord of
our Church does much depend, and that it is and has been thereby evidently and
extremely hindered, is so apparently visible, that it needs no proof, and has
been on all hands generally confessed and complained of. Now though it be every
Christians duty, to reject that Peace which is inconsistent with Piety, yet
there can be no discharge given to these great duties of Peace and Unity, where
they may be practiced consistently with godliness and truth. To be truly
Religious, is to enjoy a healthful state of a sound mind, where there is no
lethargick stupidness, but an inward and vigorous life, which is not attended
with distempered heats and inflammations, but with a calm and sedate composure
of a sober spirit; for the fruits of righteousness are sown in peace, Jam. 3.18.

2. This duty is so considerable, that the Holy Ghost seems scarce in any
thing else, so pathetically to command and urge our practical obedience, as
about the Churches Peace, and Christian Unity. If there be any consolation in
Christ, Phil. 2.1, 2.
(says the Apostle) if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the Spirit,
if any bowels and mercies: fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, being of
one accord, and of one mind. Yea, so generally is this duty pressed, that there
is scarce any Book of the holy Scripture, chiefly of the new Testament, but
does particularly enjoin or recommend it.

3. If we value the favor and presence of God, even that is no where so much
to be found, as where Christian Peace and Unity are most pursued. Wherefore St.
Paul commands, 2 Cor. 13.11. Be of one mind, live in peace, and the God of
love and peace shall be with you. And the same Apostle declares, that the
Church becomes an Holy Temple, Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
and an habitation of God, by being a building joined and united in Christ, and
fitly framed together, (...) (and some have not amiss observed, that in the
framing of that Greek word, there is contained a treble band of Unity. The
Jewish Doctors observed, that the Shecinah or Divine presence did dwell with
the (...) the meek and quiet spirits, but flies from the (...) them who were
wrathful and angry. Nazianz. Orat. 12.
Nazianzen makes it a considerable Character of one, who is (...), near of God
and to what is Divine, that he is a man who embraces peace, and hates
discord: Ign. Ep. ad Ephesians. p. 20. and 25. Edit. Voll.
and Ignatius expresses the great profitableness of being (...) in unspoted
Unity, that thereby they may always have Communion with God, and prevail
against the power of the Devil.

4. If the true exercise of the Christian life and duty be considered, St. Paul
declares the divisions and discords of the Church of Corinth, to be an
evidence that they were carnal. 1 Cor. 3.3. and to be the cause why their
assembling to the Lords Supper, was not advantageous, but hurtful to them. Chapter
11.17, 18. and that the benefits of true Christian growth and increase are to
be expected in Christian Unity, Cyp. de Unit. Eccl.
Ephesians. 4.16. Chapter 2.21. Col. 2.19. And in those words of our departing Savior,
Hill. in Ps. 119.
Joh. 14.27. Peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you, the ancient
Fathers have conceived, the great blessing of peace given by Christ to his
Church, and the duty of peace required in it to be chiefly contained. Basil.
Mor. Reg. 50. Amb. de Joseph. c. 13.
To this sense, St. Cyprian, Hilary, Basil, Ambrose, Chrysostom, and
Theophylact expound that place, (some of them including also the tranquillity
of the Christian mind, and the perfect peace of the life to come) And from that
Text St. Augustine concludes, Sermon. 59. de Verb. Dom.
that he cannot come to Gods inheritance, who does not observe Christ's
Testament; and he can have no concord with Christ, who will be at discord with
a Christian.

5. That the want of peace becomes the decay of piety, may be also
sufficiently confirmed by particular instances. Ep. ad Cor. p. 3.
Clemens observed concerning the Corinthian Church, that while they enjoyed
peace, they had an unsatiable desire to do good, and received a plentiful
effusion of the holy Spirit, they were religious in their supplications to God,
and harmless toward one another: but upon their discord, righteousness, and
peace, was banished far from them, they all (who embraced divisions) forsook
the fear of God, P. 5.
and became dark sighted in the Faith, and walked after evil affections. And
Nazianzen took notice, that Religion had one flourished in the Church, and
calculating the season when its decay began, Naz. Orat. 21.
he says, (...), etc. that from the time this contradicting spirit as a
terrible Disease infected the Church, thence forward its beauty and glory did
decline. And there is another Country not unknown to us, where like effects may
be observed; and after peace was lost, injustice and unrighteousness, like a
mighty torrent, did at once bear down all before it; heretical blasphemies were
frequently belched forth, against all the fundamental Articles of the Christian
Faith; and all manner of vile affections were professedly served, under the
ranting and other names, of pretendedly Religious Sects.

6. Upon this account Christian peace was deservedly esteemed, and honored in
the Primitive Church: to which purpose, the judgment and practice of that
excellent spirited man, Gr. Nazianzen, is above other worthy our observation.
He disswadeth from that peace which is evil and sinful, Orat. 12.
but by no means allows any discharge to this great duty in other cases: and
declares that his little Church, where he was Bishop before he went to
Constantinople, continuing in Unity and concord, when discord and much
overspread the Christian World, was reputed to be as the Ark of Noah, which
alone escaped the universal deluge, and where Religion was entirely preserved.
Ruff. Prol. in Naz. Orat. 49.
And that good man (as both Ruffinus and himself relate) when the Church was
like to be embroiled upon his account; cried out in the words of Jonah; Naz.
Cann. de Vit. sua.
If this tempest be for me, take me up and cast me into the Sea, and the
disturbance shall be at an end. And his readiness by all effectual means to
promote Peace, together with his eloquent discourses to that purpose, had such
an influence upon the concord of the second General Council, and the Churches
good, Baron. Annal. An. 381. n. 55.
that Baronius thinks, that thereupon the very place where that Council sat,
and these speeches were made, did bear the name of Concordia in after times,
which was an evidence how highly Concord was then valued. Indeed it becomes a
builder to repair and cement the breaches in the Church, which is the House of
God; but he who would widen and increase them, goes the way to make the whole
to fall, and it may be that part may be first in its ruins which he least
desires.

7. Besides this, the dreadful ruins of Kingdoms and Countries, which are
sometimes the consequents of Church divisions, are enough to awaken and deeply
affect them, who are not senseless and past feeling, to beware thereof. He who
reads the History of the Turks, and of the Eastern Empire, may see that the
Christians State divisions, founded upon, or fomented by discords in the
Church, laid the foundation on which the Turks erected their Dominion in those
places; which was the rooting out their public Christian profession. And the
last words of the Old Testament acquaint us, that the continuance of
dissentions, provokes God to smite the Earth with a Cherem, or a dreadful
Curse which includes an irrecoverable devoting: Prol de Bell. Jud.
and Josephus relates that the divisions of Jerusalem and the Jewish Nation,
exposed them to the desolation brought upon them by the Romans, (...). Bar. An.
303. n. 29.
And it is observed by Baronius, that the dissentions in Africa raised by the
Donatists, were the occasion of the great calamities there sustained; first
from the Vandals, and after than from the Arabians; to the destruction of the
Country, and the almost final ruin there, both of the other Christians, and of
the Donatists themselves.

8. Amongst plenty of other instances, it becomes us to be most affected, as
we were most concerned, with the much Christian blood, unchristianly shed in
England, as a sad consequent of these contentions. We made our selves an
example to Foreigners, who took notice, that Apud Anglos, integro seculo de
Ecclesiae regimine controversia, violenter agitata est, ad status usque publici
convulsionem; that the violent motions and disturbances in England about
Ecclesiastical controversies, wrought us into a convulsive and distracted
State. And we who are nearest home, ought to be, if we be not, most sensible
and apprehensive of this, which others at a distance could not but observe with
some amazement. The Lord grant that we may at length learn to mind the ways of
Peace, and discern the danger and guilt of needless running into divisions.

9. The breaking the Churches Peace is peculiarly sinful, when without any just
and necessary grounds, contentions run so high, as to appear in open Schism and
separation, which has been long designed, and is too much practiced by many
opposers of Conformity. And though it be and must be asserted, that separation
is both lawful and necessary, and therefore free from the sin of Schism, where
Communion, upon a right understanding, cannot be kept without sin; yet even the
Writings of many Non-Conformists as well as of others, do express and aggravate
the sin of unnecessary separation, and the Canons of the ancient Church declare
very severely against it. Can. Ap. 31. Conc. Carth. etc. c. 100.
Besides Conc. Ancyr. c. 18. Gang. c. 6. Antioch. c. 5.2. Carth. c. 9. Trull.
c. 31. Such separation is condemned as ambition and tyranny, in the Canons
called the Apostles; as a destructive Sacrilegious sin, in the African Code; as
a sin which excludes from the Kingdom of Heaven, by Ignatius; Ign. ad Philad.
Cont. Helv. c. 22.
and it is censured to enclude a contempt of true Religion, by the Helvetick
confession.

10. It is a known and approved sentence of Dionysius Alexandrinus, Eus. Eccl.
Hist. l. 6. c. (...).
That to suffer Martyrdom (...) rather than to divide the Church by Schisms, is
not less glorious then to be a Martyr for resusing to offer Sacrifice unto
Idols. Cyp. de Unit. Eccles.
And S. Cyprian asserteth that the sin of breaking the Churches peace by
Schism, is in diverse respects more heinous than the sin of those lapsed
Christians, who in the time of persecution, yielded to offer Sacrifice to
Idols. Because the former bewailed his miscarriage, and by repentance sought
for pardon from God, and communion with his Church, his straights and dangers
were the occasion of his sin, and though he miscarried himself, he did not
persuade others to do the like, and he might afterward be honored as a
Martyr; whereas the latter was swelling and pleasing himself in his sin, did
disturb, oppose, and reject the Church, his sin was his, of his own free and
voluntary choice, and he also beguiled and ensnared others. And all this was
expressed by both these ancient Writers with peculiar reference to the Novatian
Schism, which them made a breach in the Churches Unity, about matters of
Discipline without denying any Articles of the Faith. Ibidem.
And S. Cyprian proceeds so far, as to declare, that if the man who sows
discord in the Church, should lay down his life in the defense of the name of
Christ, the stain of his sin could not be wiped out (that is so as to render
him honored in the Church) by the stream of his blood; but as he goes on,
inexpiabilis and gravis est culpa discordiae nec passione purgatur. (...). adv.
And the same thing is by Optatus urged against the Donatists, Parm. l. 3.
and is approved by diverse others; as being grounded on the words of S. Paul,
If I give my body to be burned, and have not Charity, it presiteth me nothing.
And from hence we may discern, that in those Primitive times, when the vital
heat of Piety within, was able to prevail against the fiercest flames of
Persecution without, this duty of minding the Churches Unity, had a mighty
commanding force upon the Consciences of Christians, and they accounted
unnecessary divisions and Schisms, to be unchristian practices and dreadful
sins.

11. Nor can such separation be otherwise accounted of then a great evil, which
general experience manifests, ordinarily to eat out Christian love; and does
most directly and openly oppose that Christian Unity, which (as the following
Section will evidence) the Gospel commands, the relation of Membership in the
Christian Society requires, and our blessed Savior earnestly and
affectionately recommended; and has naturally such other dangerous attendants,
as have been above observed to be the result of the breach, or want of the
Churches Peace. This sin is to the Church what Sedition is to the State, the
most manifest and direct means to hinder its Government, and to destroy that
Society which is best preserved in true Unity; and of which as Christ himself
has, so every Christian ought to have a tender regard. It is to the body of
Christ what disjointing is to the body of man; it hinders the actions of the
body, and the usefulness of the members to each other; it weakneth the whole,
and causes pain and anxious grief to those other members which are not
senseless, and is ordinarily accompanied with swelling tumors in the part
ill-affected, and out of order.

12. And as it self is contrary to Gods Commandment, so its influence promoteth
all manner of sin, and is called by Ignatius (...) an original of evils. Ign.
Ep. ad Smyrn.
For besides the evils above mentioned which accompany this sin, as it
includes a breach of the Churches Peace; it is apt to prevail with the
Separatist to so much impiety, as to place much of his Religion in that which
is his sin; viz. his unwarrantable separation; and it is often, if not
ordinarily, attended with so great uncharitableness, as to be pleased (with
respect to the interest of their party) in hearing, if not speaking evil,
concerning others who withstand them. It promoteth prosaneness and
disadvantageth Religion in others, by rendering censures and admonitions of the
Church, when they are administered, the less efficacious upon the offenders; who
are the more ready to conclude, that it is no great shame or danger, to be
excluded from that Society of Christians, from which many who profess Religion
do exclude themselves. And upon this and other easily discernable accounts, it
is a probable occasion of remisness in the exercising discipline, which would
be more enforced and enlivened by a more general Union; whereby also diverse
obstacles and impediments would be removed. Athan. Synops. in 1. Ep. ad Cor.
Thus Athanasius was of opinion, that the Corinthian divisions were the cause,
why the incestious person was not rejected.

SECT. IV.
Some false Conceptions of Schism refuted.
1. But because there are some notions, or rather misrepresentations of this
sin of Schism, designed to excuse many from the guilt thereof, whom the rules
of Christianity do envolve under it, I shall endeavor to discover the
insufficiency of such Plasters, either to cover or cure so great and dangerous
wounds, as the deep rents made in the Church, to which they are applied.

2. A first false Conception of Schism, A first Notion.
is the natural result of the New England Independent Principles of
Church Communion. They assert expressly, Ans. to 32. Qu. quo. 4.
that Baptism neither makes nor admits any to be members of the Church; and
call it the opinion of Papists and Anabaptists that we enter into the Church by
Baptism. But they assert the foundation of Church-Society to be laid in their
Church Covenant, which is a particular contract among themselves, binding
themselves to God and one to another, to live in Christian Society with that
particular Congregation, to which they join themselves by this contract. Apol.
for Chur. Coven. p. 3, 5, 15.
And this Church Covenant is they say, the Constitutive form of a Church, and
joining in it is that which makes a particular person a member of a Church.
And from hence it may be easily infered, that there can be no duty of holding,
and therefore no sin of Schism in withdrawing, or neglecting Communion, where
they have not made this engagement by that particular Covenant.

3. But this notion of the Union and Communion of the Church, does confine it,
to such strait limits, as to exclude in a manner all Christians of all ages
from Church Society, but themselves; and is thereby uncharitable and no
stranger to Schism, and can not consist with the full and due sense of the
Churches Catholicism: for the ancient Church did never account the obligation
to Christian Communion, to be so narrow a thing, as only to respect a
particular Congregation, and therefore never framed any such particular
Covenant. This is also directly contrary to S. Paul, who as an argument to
Union and against Schism, says 1 Cor. 12, 13. By one Spirit we are all
baptized into one body: and teaches us that we are baptized into Christ. Romans
6.3. and thereby are planted together in the likeness of his death, v. 5. and
that they who are baptized into Christ, do put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. Which
Scriptures do sufficiently express, that by our Baptism as we undertake the
Christian life, so we thereby are admitted to be members of the Church or body
of Christ, and are engaged as members to Unity therein, and to continue in
Communion therewith. Whereas if this notion was admitted, the grounds for the
being and Union of the Church, which the Scriptures lay down, together with the
Apostolical and Primitive practice, must be accounted as insufficient, and the
necessary support of its being and Union, must be derived from this late
invention. All which things are sufficient to manifest the error of this
opinion, and to show that there may be a sinful breach of the Unity of the
Church, among them who never entered into that Church Covenant.

4. A second Notion. Dr. Owen of Love and Church Peace, c. 3.
But one of that way of our own Nation, treating of Schism and separation,
acknowledges Baptism to give Relation to, or entrance into the Catholic
Church visible; but still owneth a particular contract or joint consent among
themselves, to be the only bond for external Ecclesiastical Communion in a
particular Church, or (as he expresses it) to be that wherein the Union of
such a Church does consist (which will be hereafter further considered). N. 19,
20. Dr. Owen's Review of Schism, chapter 8, 9.
And he gives us this representation of Schism, That the sin of Schism does
not consist in the want of, or breach of external Unity by separation, but in
the want of internal Unity by needless divisions of judgment in a particular
Congregation, as (...) (he says) is used 1 Cor. c. 1.11. Hence these
assertions are laid down. 1. That the departing of any man or men from any
particular Church, as to the Communion peculiar to such a Church is no where
(in Scripture) called Schism, nor is so in the nature of the thing it self. 2.
One Church refusing to hold that Communion with another which ought to be
between them, is not Schism properly so called.

5. But if we here consider the matter or thing it self, we must enquire
whether Christian Religion does allow needless separations in the Christian
Church. And surely he must have strange thoughts of the earnest commands and
frequent arguments for Christian Unity, who supposes them to regard only an
inward Unity, and yet to allow of open breaking and dividing, and visible
falling into pieces. Is this to think either honorably or reasonably of the
designs of Christ, to suppose that he should express his Church to be one body
compacted and joined together, Ephesians. 4.16. intending that its real members might
be daily parting asunder by disclaiming the communion of each other? or that
the whole Church should be as one building fitly framed together, Ephesians. 2.21.
but with free allowance, that its parts should be at such a manifest distance,
as never to come so near one another as to own their communion? And when our
Savior prayed for his Church, which should believe through his Apostles
Doctrine, as a consequent upon their believing, that they may be one in us that
the world may believe that thou have sent me, Joh. 17, 20, 21. Cyp. de Ovat.
Dom. Christoph. in Joh. 17. Hom. 81. (...).
It is manifest that that Union of the Church, which should tend to convince
the World of Christianity, and engage them to the Faith of Christ, must,
besides the inward Unity of faith and love, include an open and professed
holding communion with each other; which is the most visible testimony of their
Unity, and the want of which has occasioned them who were strangers to
Christianity, to decry and loath the Christian Religion, as appears from what
is abovementioned in the second Section. Hier. in Ephesians. 4.
And when S. Paul requires to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of
peace, it has been reasonably of old thence inferred, that separation and
breaking the Churches peace, ought to be rejected, because it opposes and
loses that Unity of the Spirit, Cypr. Ep. 52.
which Christians should maintain, by renouncing fellowship with the Church of
Christ.

6. And it is manifest that needless withdrawing or not holding communion, with
that particular settled Church where we abide, with appearance of causeless
distaste toward it, or the way of its communion, was vehemently and with a
pathetick zeal condemned in S. Peter himself, withdrawing and separating from
the Gentiles; which action included a blameable forbearance, of manifesting his
allowance and approbation, of their way of Christian life and serving God. Gal.
2.11.14. And the manifold cautions against divisions often expressed in the
Scriptures, do especially condemn such separation, which is the highest
attempt, and most open profession of dividing: and as this separation is
expressly condemned in the holy Scripture, so this is that thing which is so
greatly condemned by the ancient Canons above named, and that even under the
term and name of Schism. And it is of no small moment to observe, that the
Primitive Church, who received the holy Commandments of the Gospel from the
Apostles, did always understand the precepts of peace, to extend mainly to the
duties of external communion; especially considering, that whereas the Churches
peace can only be broken by Church contests, which are managed either by words,
writings, or open actions of discord, this latter way of expressing them by
actions of separation, and open rendezvous of parties, is of all other the
highest and most considerable.

7. But if the use of the word (Schism) be here considered, it includes much
of needless strife about words, to deny (...) or Schism, signifying division or
renting asunder, to be a fit expression for rents and separations in the
Church; when it has been so used in the common Ecclesiastical custom of
speech, and is that which is according to the direct and proper import of the
word. And if S. Paul accounted the bandying into parties and factions at
Corinth, though without separation (which some account to be their case) to be
Schisms, because their Unity was thereby opposed and hindered; much more must
separation which is the highest appearance of parties, and breach of Unity,
(and was probably the true state at Corinth) be so accounted of.

8. Dr. Owen of Evang. Love and Church Peace, c. 5.
And whereas the same person has of late purposely undertaken to espouse the
interest of separation from the present Church of England, and to defend it
from the charge of Schism, the pleas and pretenses made in behalf thereof, will
now fall under our enquiry.

9. A third Notion. Its first Plea. P. 167, 171, 172.
One principal Plea is, That where things or observances unscriptural, are made
the indispensible condition of Communion, there to refuse submission to such
things imposed, and to with hold Communion from that Church, is no Schism but a
discharge of a duty. And that we may understand what he means by such
expressions, as Unscriptural conditions of Communion; he tells us in one
place, P. 171.
We do not dispute the lawfulness or unlawfulness of the things themselves; P.
177.
and in another place, that it may be at present granted, that the manner or
modes of the performance of Gods worship, with rites and ceremonies for order
and decency, may be lawfully appointed (or as it pleased him to call it
instituted) by the rulers of the Church; yet (says he) this will not help in
our present enquiry, unless it be also granted, that what may be lawfully
practiced in the worship of God, may be also lawfully made a necessary
condition of Communion. And he says in another places, P. 205.
It is required in this case, not only to produce a warranty from the Scripture
for the use of Liturgies, but also for making the constant attendance on them,
a necessary condition of Communion. Wherefore his sense is, that withholding
Communion becomes lawful and a duty, where any appointments for orderly
ministration, and the fit and decent performance of Gods service, (though
lawful in themselves, but not particularly expressed in Scripture as conditions
of Communion) are so determined, that they must be submitted to and complied
with, by them who embrace actual Communion with that particular Church.

10. But this is both false in it self, and would render all settled
Church Communion utterly Unlawful, and would make separation the Universal duty
of all Christians, in every Christian Assembly in the World, not excepting them
of the Congregational way. For the Scriptures have not injoined the particular
time for Sacramental and other administrations, nor the place for public
Assemblies, nor in what method, Prayer, Preaching, Sacraments, Psalms,
Chapters, Hymns, with other thanksgivings and services are to be performed; nor
has it determined us, either to, or against any particular lawful form, or
external rite, as making them either universally necessary, or sinful; but
these with diverse other things of like nature, are left to the rules of
Ecclesiastical Liberty and Prudence. Now it concerns him who made this
exception, to discover how there can possibly be any orderly Christian
Assemblies, and unconfused performances of Religious services, where such
things as these are not determined; as where their Prayers and Services are
neither performed with nor without a form, etc. And to the common apprehensions
of other men it is very manifest, that unless there be a compliance or
submission to such determinations, by the members of the Church, they can not
actually communicate in these administrations, unless they could communicate in
what they will not yield to join in. Yet these things with us are not made the
conditions of communion, any other way than the submission to lawful
determinations (of those things which must be one way or other determined) is
necessary for them who will join in such an orderly Society.

11. And they who urge this objection do themselves make their determinations
of these things (besides some other things peculiar to their way) as much a
condition of Communion in their Congregations, as our determinations are with
us. They may possibly stamp a divine authority upon those usages of their own,
which really have it not; and urge such things for laws of God which he has
not established: but this being much of the same nature, with teaching for
doctrines the commandments of men, can never render their communion the more
acceptable. And I suppose this following discourse will sufficiently manifest,
that the divine authority does neither enjoin their way of service without all
forms and other rites, nor disapprove of ours. And now the arguments brought in
that Treatise to make good this exception, will concern themselves to answer as
well as others, and may be easily solved. For 1. P. 173.
When Christ gave Commission to his Apostles to baptize all Nations and teach
them to observe whatsoever he commanded; he thereby enjoined all his doctrines
and precepts to be received and obeyed of all men, and especially of those who
embrace the Christian baptism; but he does not thereby forbid rules of decency
and order, which are required in the Scripture, to be received in the Communion
of Christians. And 2. Lib. 2. Chapter 1. Sect. 3. and Chapter 2. Sect. 2, 3.
the Apostles practice and 3. their doctrine (with a particular consideration
of the fourteenth Chapter to the Romans) will be evidenced in this Treatise, to
give both allowance and direction for Ecclesiastical constitutions of order.

12. The fourth argument is from this instance of fact. P. 191.
When Victor Bishop of Rome excommunicated the Asian Churches, for not
observing Easter at the same time with the Roman Church, this his action as
fixing new bounds to Church Communion, was then disliked much by others, and
especially rebuked by one of the most holy and learned men then living, (which
was Irenaeus). Ans. Well might Victors actions be censured by Irenaeus, which
was not only a directing and retaining that as a sixed rule of order for his
own Church, Eus. Eccles. Hist. l. 5. c. (...).
which was then the Roman Custom and practice, and which Irenaeus and the
French Churches (as well as many others) did allow and judge requisite, in that
very Epistle to Victor: but it was the obtruding that which was no Apostolical
command or institution, to be so far Apostolical, as to be thereupon a doctrine
and practice, necessary to be received in all parts of the Christian Church,
and that all other whole Churches who received it not, were not to be owned in
the Communion of the Catholic Church: Ibid. c. (...).
and upon this account he undertook to excommunicate the Asian Churches (...)
as being Heterodox or erring from the Faith. But our Church can be charged with
no such practices as these were, for it declares it self thus; B. of Com.
Prayer of Ceremonies.
In these our doings we condemn no other Nations, nor prescribe any thing but
to our own people only: which words with other to the same purpose, are
prefixed to our Liturgy. His fifth argument is, P. 194.
that hence it would follow, that there is no certain rule of Communion amongst
Christians, fixed and determined by Christ. To which I answer, that in all
doctrines of Christianity nothing can be required as necessary for Communion
with any Church, but what Christ has determined: yet even here every error in
judgment or miscarriage in practice, does not forfeit the right of Communion;
and concerning defaults, they who have the power of the Keys which is managed
with Ecclesiastical Prudence, Albasp. Observat. l. 2. Obs. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
are allowed to consider of times and other circumstances: whence the Church of
God has unblameably used sometimes greater and other times less severity about
the same crimes. But that there should be different prudential rules of
external order, in the communion of different Churches, has generally been
allowed and acknowledged in the ancient Church, and pleaded for amongst the
reformed Churches.

13. P. 171, 202.
Indeed it is in the same Treatise urged, (as a thing included under this
exception of Unscriptural conditions of Communion) that Ministers are required
to express their approbation of the things injoined; (as the Liturgy, Articles,
and Book of Ordination) by their subscription or declaration. But besides, that
these things are not intended for conditions of Christian communion, but
requisite for regular administrations, and the preservation of order: it is but
reasonable, that they who insist on this Plea, before they blame us, much more
before they separate from us upon this account, should themselves consider
whether they would be willing to receive any persons to be Ministers of their
Congregations, who do not some way or other express their allowance of their
way and order: and particularly whether they would entertain him as their
Minister, who is resolved to perform all ministerial actions according to the
order of the Liturgy. If they be willing to entertain such a Minister and
Ministration, they must thereby justify our way of order and communion, by
their submitting to the same terms of enjoying Church Communion. But if they
will admit no person to be a Minister in their Churches, (as indeed they will
not) before they are satisfied that he approves, and will continue in the way
and order of their Churches; while they herein blame our Church, they should
consider those words of the Apostle, Romans 2.1. Thou art inexcusable, O man,
whosoever thou art that judge, for wherein thou judge another thou
condemnest thy self, for thou that judge do the same things.

14. But of the lawfulness of things as enjoined in the Church for order sake,
which is the main thing considerable in this exception, and which has been
diverse times sufficiently justified, Bishop Whitgift Tr. 2. Hccles. Folit. l.
3. Lib. 2. c. 2.
by Bishop Whitgift, Mr. Hooker, and many others since them, I shall treat in
another place more particularly; and it will be sufficient here to add, that
God who has appointed Rulers in his Church to guide and command, has also
made it a duty to obey them who have the rule over us.

15. Its second. Plea.
Another Plea for separation from the Church of England, is, That the joining
in communion therewith, requires a consent to omit and refuse known duties
commanded by Christ. P. 216. P. 218.231.
For the proof of which, he gives two instances. In his first instance he
claims to every Minister of a particular Congregation, by the appointment of
Jesus Christ, the whole immediate care of the flock, so that no part of
discipline should be exempted from his office, or care ( p. 219.) and this he
says by Consormity they must renounce ( p. 229.) Which Plea for separation or
rejecting Communion, is as much as to say, that no Minister may lawfully
communicate and exercise his Ministry in any Church, where this kind of
Congregational Independency is not the fixed Government; or where the Episcopal
Power and Authority above Presbyters in all or any public acts of discipline,
is preserved. An assertion which favors of great rashness, in rejecting all
those manifest evidences produced by diverse, on the behalf of this Episcopal
Government and Jurisdiction, with such an height of confidence, as professedly
to disclaim the lawsulness of Ecclesiastical Ministration and Communion, with
those who in practice embrace them. Yea this is such a position as would have
engaged all Christian Ministers, to have renounced the Communion of all the
ancient Churches in the Christian World, in the times of the most eminent
Fathers of the Church, by this new way and method of the Churches Peace and
Unity. And therefore instead of a charge against our Church, he has herein
done it this honor, to mention that as a chief matter of exception against it,
in which it is conformable to the purest ages of Christianity.

16. Conc: Nic. c. 5. Conc. Ant. c. 6.
The Councils of Nice and Antioch (which are part of the Code of the Universal
Church) expressing a manifest distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, do
declare the disciplinary proceedings of Church censures to be under the Bishops
ordering and authority; and before them S. Cyprian did the same, Cyp. Ep. 10,
65.
both concerning excommunication and public disciplinary absolution; and
Ignatius frequently required that nothing should be done without the Bishops
Authority: to which agree the Scripture expressions concerning Timothy, Titus,
and the Apocalyptick Angels. And that the ancient Churches and the authority of
their Bishops were not confined to single Congregations (as some would have us
believe) is apparent, 1. Conc. Neoc. c. 13. Conc. Ant. c. 8. Conc. Sard. c. 6.
Athanas. Apol.
besides the instances from the Roman and other Churches in Scripture, 1. From
the frequent mention of Country-Presbyters and Religious Assemblies, in such
places for which no Bishops were appointed. 2. From the multitude of Presbyters
in one City; it not being credible that 46. Presbyters for the City of Rome in
Cornelius his time, 2. Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. (...). Photii Nomo can. Yet.
1. c. 30. Justin Novel. Constable. ^.
60. at Constantinople, (with a greater number both before and after Justinians
Constitution) and a numerous Company in other Churches, should be designed,
with a Bishop and many Deacons for the service of God in a single Congregation.
3. Because the greatest Cities in the World with the parts adjacent, when
Christians were most numerous, had but one regular Bishop: and he who can
imagine that in the most flourishing times of Christianity, there were never
more Christians in those Precincts, than made up a single Congregation (though
diverse Churches were built at Jerusalem and other places) may as well conceive
the same of the present London Diocese. And though there be some expressions in
some ancient Writers, as Tertullian, and S. Hierome, which many have thought to
assert, the ancient exercise of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by a Bench of
Presbyters of equal authority, (which would be too large a digression to be
here considered) yet even that notion also must fall under the heavy censure of
this exception.

17. The other instance concerns private Members, P. 141.142.
and the whole Church being abridged and deprived of that liberty to discharge
their duty, which by the law of Christ they are to provide for. Among these
duties he names reproof, admonition, and exhortation (as if these things were
not allowed in our Church, which is an intimation that needs reproof) and
also withdrawing from them that walk disorderly, and putting such obstinate
offenders from among them. Now this instance also is built upon the bottom of
Independency, groundlesly supposed to be a divine institution. Decl. of Faith
and Ord. of Congr. Chapter Par. 2. Se. 4, 5, 7. Answ. to 32. Quest. qu. 14. and 15.
For the Independents allowing the Ministers the principal care about the
discipline of the Church, do assert an authority and power of
Church Government, to be seated in all the members of the church, together with
their Officers; yea that the members of the Church may censure their Officers;
and some of them, as they of New England express it, that the Keys are
committed to all believers, who shall join together according to the ordinance
of Christ. And Dr. O. who gives somewhat more authority to Ministers, than many
others of them do, yet declares his non-admittance of our discipline, p. 256.
upon this account as one, as being in the hands of merely Ecclesiastical
persons, or such as are pretended so to be. This late device, of discipline
being exercised by an authoritative power of all the members of the Church, is
claimed here as necessary for embracing Communion; but this is not only
contrary to the Church of England, Gillespy Gov. of Chapter of Scot. Part. 2. c. 1.
and Postscript. Jus. Div. Reg. Eccles. Par. 2. c. 10.
with the ancient Churches, and to the French, Dutch, and other reformed
Churches abroad, but it is also directly opposed and refuted by the
Presbyterians, both of Scotland, and England: and this also is a general
argument, for separation from all Christian Assemblies, of the Primitive and
Reformed Churches, except a few of themselves.

18. But as under the former instance, he insisted much upon the great
usefulness of administering Church Discipline, which if rightly stated, and in
its due measures, we heartily admit; so here he reflecteth upon the defects of
exercising discipline among us, urging that upon such defects, as by the design
of his discourse he represents ours to be, P. 244, 245.
pious men may without the least suspicion of the guilt of Schism, forsake the
Communion of that Church, and if they have a due care of their own salvation,
they will understand it to be a duty. But what he intimately charge upon the
Church of England, speaking of the Church where wicked persons are admitted
without distinction or discrimination unto the Communion of the Church, and
tolerated therein without any procedure with them or against them: if this be
generally understood of all wicked persons as those words without distinction
or discrimination to import, it is untrue and slanderous. But if this be meant
only of diverse particular persons; it is acknowledged that a more vigorous
execution of discipline (which I have in the former Section noted to be hindered
in the effects thereof, and not helped by divisions and separations) is
desirable, and would be advantageous to the Church. Yet here we must observe,
1. That some men's rigor would make the rules of Communion overstrict and
severe, which was the ground of the Schism of the Novatians, and Donatists, and
as some have anciently related of the Meletians also: and it is not desirable
that the Churches authority should be acted by such heats. 2. That real defects
in this particular (though they are not to be approved of) are no sufficient
ground for separation, since such blemishes were mixed with the beauty of the
Apostolical Churches themselves, as is manifest from almost all the Apostolical
Epistles, and particularly from the first Epistle to the Corinthians, in which
diverse miscarriages were taxed, and yet unity was strictly commanded, and
dividing severely rebuked. Yea this very discourse at sometimes will not own,
P. 126.
that this thing solely of it self is sufficient to justify a separation; and
the Congregational Churches in England, in the Declaration of their Faith and
order, affirmed, Of Institution and Order of Churches, Sect. 21.
the Church Members upon offenses taken by them, having performed their duty,
(private admonition and relating it to the Church) ought not to disturb any
Church Order, or absent themselves from the public assemblies, or the
administration of any ordinances upon that pretense, but to wait upon Christ in
the further proceeding of the Church.

19. Last Plea.
Another thing only touched in that discourse, (but which is the main ground of
mis-apprehensin) is, that there is (says he) no Evangelical obligation to
local (or external) Comunion, P. 256, 257.
with any particular or parochial Church of this Nation; because every man may
relinquish it by removing his habitation: which plea flows from want of a
right sense of the Church Catholic. For every Christians obligation to keep
Communion with the Church, is founded in his being visibly a member of Christ's
body, which includes his visible fellowship with the whole Church, which he
enters upon by Baptism, and from hence he stands obliged to communicate,
with that regular fixed part of this Church, where he resideth, and from which
he has no warrantable or necessary cause of separation. In this respect our
Parochial Assemblies are of like nature with the Jewish Synagogal Assemblies,
unto which they were not obliged by any special Synagogal-Covenant, but partly
from Gods general command of their assembling themselves together; and partly
from their Religious profession and circumcision, engaging them to Communion
with the whole Church of the Jews, and thereby to their Synagogal-Communion.
Hereupon under that dispensation, it was the practice of our Blessed Savior,
(whose example should not be over-looked by us) to attend upon these Synagogal
Assemblies, and the Religious worship of God celebrated therein, as appears,
Luke 4.16. At Nazareth where he had been brought up as his custom was, he went
into the Synagogue on the Sabbath day.

20. And can it enter into the heart of any Christian to imagine, that the holy
Apostles, who in their travells could not be fixed in any particular
Congregation, did not stand bound by the duty of Christian Unity, to join
themselves in Communion, with the particular fixed Churches or Assemblies of
Christians where they came, (as S. Peter at Antioch, S. Paul at Jerusalem, and
diverse other places) though such Churches were founded by some of the other
Apostles? And upon this account of the Unity of the body of Christ, the
Primitive Christians when they went abroad into other Regions, and distant
parts of the World, did with a Religious care seek the Communion of the
Churches where they came, and not to make separate Assemblies. Yea this is a
thing so far acknowledged by our English Independants themselves, (though they
can talk at another rate where it serves their interest) that in their public
Confession of Faith at the Savoy, they say, Conf. Chapter 27. Sect. 2.
All Saints are bound to maintain an holy fellowship and Communion, in the
worship of God, which communion though especially to be exercised by them, in
the relations wherein they stand, whether of Families, or Churches; yet as God
affords opportunity, it is to be extended to all those, who in every place
call upon the name of the Lord Jesus.

21. But the conditions required in any particular fixed Christian Assembly,
embracing the Christian Faith and Worship, in the place of our residence, to
make it our duty, upon the account of the Christian Unity to join therein, are
these two. 1. That our communicating therein does not oblige us, to join in any
action or profession which is sinful. This is acknowledged on all hands, and
needs no further proof; because the Christians duty, of keeping in Communion
with Christ himself does require it. 2. That the Assembly we join in does not
maintain an unwarrantable separation, from the Communion of the established
Church; for here to join in Communion, is to join in separation, and is like
Barnabas and the other Jews, joining with S. Peter, Gal. 2.14.
who all walked contrary to the truth of the Gospel, in withdrawing from the
Communion of the Gentiles at Antioch: and the communicating with such a
separating Assembly, would be a breach of that Apostolical command, of avoiding
them who cause divisions, Romans 16.17. And we may observe, that the joining in
needless separations, being a sin against the commands of Christ, which require
Christian Unity and Communion, can not be warranted by any authority upon
earth, because that authority can not dispense with the commands of Christ, but
ought to be subject to them; and therefore as S. Peter's practice and
countenance, Theod. Hift. l. 4. c. 22. Aug. Ep. 166.
did not excuse Barnablas and the other Jews; so neither could the indulgence
of Valons the Emperor or his Predecessor, execuse the different Sects by them
tolerated, from being guilty of Schism and the breach of Christian duty, in
their divisions, and separations.

22. Another notion of Schism there is, A fourth Notion of Schism.
which condemns separation where ever Communion is lawful; but assumeth, that
wherever any thing unlawful or strongly suspected, Mr. H. Tract of Schism, p.
2, 5, 8.
is required in order to Communion, there to hold Communion would be to join in
conspiracy, and separation is then both lawful and necessary. Concerning which
notion (granting that separation is necessary, where any thing unlawful is
required in order to Communion) I can not admit for truth, that if any thing
suspected be so required, separation becomes lawful thereby. For if by
suspected, be meant whatsoever the person, who makes the separation, does
suspect as evil; by this rule, he who through carelessness of enquiry, or
prejudice and want of Charity, is needl^sly suspicious about any form of
service, or way of Church-Administrations, will be allowed to separate, and to
be therein free from Schism, or sinful breach of Unity, only because he is void
of charity and wanting in due Christian care.

23. Nor can it possibly be true, that if some thing be enjoined, which diverse
persons who appear to be Religious, and are supposed to have considerable
abilities of judgment, do upon professed enquiry, both suspect and condemn,
that they may lawfully separate, and not be guilty of Schism, if their
judgments herein be erroneous and ungrounded. For though diligent enquiry where
it is impartially made, is in this case an excuse from the degree of the sin,
or from the precipitant or designed breach of Charity or Unity; yet where it is
so ill managed, as to take up with an error, and practice upon it; it can not
render that practice allowable. For this would justify almost every party,
which in judgment holds an error, for separating from that Church, who
either in her open practice, or in her public service, requires a profession
of that truth which they oppose: and they must be excused from Schism, only
because they acknowledge not the right rules of Religion; and neither
Donatists, Novatians, or Anabaptists, could then be blamed for their distance
from the Church, provided it be founded in their distance from and disowning of
the truth. Yea if any persons be Arians, Futychians, or Nestorians, Vbi supra
p. 9, 10.
in opinion, (all which the author of this notion over-officiously excuses
from all Heresy, and says they were at the worst but Schisms) they must also
according to his notion, stand excused from Schism, in separating from the
Church, which holds the true doctrine and openly in her service requires a
profession of it; concerning the person of the Mediator.

24. This would set up the power of an erring judgment, above the will of God,
to discharge persons from what is Gods command, and would else have been their
duty, ( viz. Communion) and to give them authority to do that as a lawful
action, which to others who err not is a grievous sin, ( viz. separation from
that Church which holds the truth, merely because it does profess it) as if
the crrour of man could render necessary duties, and divine commands, to be of
no obligation. For though their error may (till it be removed) entangle them
in sin, in joining with the Church, because this encludeth a practicing what
they judge unlawful; it can not justify them from sin in separating from it,
but this error (as all other erroneous judgments do, where good and evil are
mistaken for each other) does in their practice every way ensnare them under
sin, until it be cured. Lib. 2. c. 2 Sect. 3.
But of the principal design of this notion, I shall give a further account in
considering things under scruples.

25. From what has been hitherto discoursed, it appears, that the
consideration of Schism, will make it necessary for him who undertaketh
separation, to be sure that he acts upon unerring grounds, and not upon
mistakes: because to make separation from a Church, which (however it be
misunderstood and causelessly censured) requires nothing in it self absolutely
unlawful, to be believed, professed, practiced, or joined in, is to be guilty
of the great sin of Schism.

SECT. V.
Of the duty of obedience to Rulers and Governors, and the due exercise of the
Ministerial function, which is in this case concerned.
1. The opposing Conformity if managed upon insufficient grounds, has
ordinarily involved the person opposing under the sin of disobedience, and want
of subjection in things lawful to Christian Governors and Rulers, and their
Laws and Constitutions; which ought to be obeyed, not only for wrath, but for
Conscience sake. It is their duty in their places to show themselves the
servants of God, and to promote his glory, and to that end by their power and
authoritative commands, to take care for the promoting and preserving the
Order, Peace, and Unity of the Church of God: and toward both Ecclesiastical
and secular Rulers, the divine Precepts do very plainly require our obedience.
Indeed if any thing any time commanded be really sinful, the instructions given
in the Church of England will direct us to believe undoubtedly, Hom. of
Obedience. Part. 2.
that we may not obey Kings, Magistrates, or any other, though they be our own
Fathers, if they would command us to do any thing contrary to Gods Commandment.
But if the things be lawful which they command (as in this case I hope to make
appear to men of unprejudiced minds) it is a sin of no low degree to disobey;
and the duty of obedience is so considerable, that the Compilers of the
Strasburgh Confession of Faith, Conf. Argent. c. 23.
expressed it to be Inter primi crdinis bona opera, in the highest rank and
order of good works.

2. Nor can this obedience be thought a matter inconsiderable, which was
enjoined of old in the first Commandment of the second table; Phil. de Leg.
Spepiailb.
and as Philo observed, encludeth part of the first table, and part of the
second, having directly a respect both to God in his Vicegerent, and also to
man. And this is earnestly pressed upon us in the Gospel doctrine, as a means
whereby we may bring honor to Religion and Christianity, by S. Peter. 1 Pet.
2.12, -- 15. and as a necessary practice to express true conversion, from the
state of sin to the life of God, by S. Paul Tit. 3.1, -- 5. who also warns
against this sin, with respect to the danger of damnation thereby. Romans 13.2.
And this obedience to them who are over us, in things lawful and under their
authority, is of so high and necessary a consequence, that without it there can
be no peace, nor any regular and unconfused state, in any Family, City, Realm,
or Church: this being the practice of the grand Maxim for the upholding order
in all Societies of the World, which is evident by its own light, and is a
principle of the law of nature.

3. Another effect of these disagreements about the established order of our
Church, has been this; that diverse Ministers have declined the orderly,
regular and public exercise, of their Ministerial sunctions. And considering
the weightiness of their Commission, with the greatness of their charge and
account, and the exceeding advantage to the Church, yea to the honor of Christ
and the salvation of men, by their labors where they obtain success, together
with other their own concernments; it becomes them to be well assured that
they have had a warrantable plea to justify those proceedings. It was not
without cause accounted a great miscarriage and default in Novatus, Eus. Hist.
Eccless. l. 6. (...)
that before he openly became the head of a dividing party, he was over-forward
for want of a due zeal to Religion, to have relinquished the office of
Presbyter, to which he was ordained, and to betake himself to another kind of
life.

4. The ancient Church showed its great dislike and distaste, of any Ministers
declining the orderly execution of his Ministry, by determining that if any
Bishop, Can. Ap. 36. Conc. Antioch. c. 17.
Presbyter, or Deacon, being ordained did not undertake his Ministration, he
must be separated from the Christian Society, and deprived of Ecclesiastical
Communion. And with equal severity they condemned that Minister, who refused
the regular work and place of his Ministry, Can. Ap. 58.
and him who undertook the place but minded not the work and duty, behaving
himself negligently in not attending the care of the people.

5. From what I have expressed hitherto, we may take a short prospect of the
evils flowing from these contentions, which are such as these; the prejudicing
men against the holy administrations of Gods service, the promoting wrath and
strife, and the quenching Christian love; the being a stumbling block to the
weak, hardening the careless, and being an occasion of much irreligion, grieving
the godly, and every way gratifying the Churches Enemies, and hindering its
welsare and the growth of piety; the hurtful disturbance of the Churches Peace,
and endangering the Kingdoms interest, and the promoting of dangerous and
dreadsul Schisms: nor is the disobedience to Magistrates, and the deserting the
Ministerial charge unconcerned herein. And all these things (if God in his
mercy put not a stop to them, by directing men's minds to a right understanding,
and turning their hearts into a more peaceable and amicable frame and temper)
may provealso very dangerous and hurtful in the next Generation, to the
dishonor of God, the discredit of Religion, and the ruin of many thousand
souls: which sad consequences plainly enough show these unhappy contests,
rather to gratify the designs of the destroyer, than of the Savior; and to be
fruits growing from a root of bitterness. Full. Church Hist. l. 7. p. 401.
In these respects I think he was not far from the mark, who called this
disagreement about Conformity, the saddest difference that ever happened in the
Church of England.

SECT. VI.
A proposal concerning due considerateness in this Case; and the design of this
treatise manifested.
1. After I have showed the sad fruits of these dissentions, I must still
acknowledge, that I doubt not but that there are dissenters, who act out of
true principles of Conscience; and design to walk in piety to God, and in love
and peace toward men: to such persons though they be of different judgments,
(yea though some of them too far indulge their passions) I profess an hearty
respect and brotherly love, considering that wise and good men are liable to
mistake and err, still retaining this as a testimony of their integrity, that
they are willing to be informed, and in practice to embrace what is their duty,
when it shall be so evidenced.

2. S. Cyprian who was a great promoter of Truth, Piety, and Peace, and wrote
some tracts purposely to correct the fierceness, of them especially who were of
his own opinion (viz de bono patientiae, Cyp. in Conc. Carth. and Epist. ad
Jubaian.
and de zelo and livore) for want of better information, but with openly avowed
dislike of breach of communion, lived, and for what appeared to S. Austin died
also, in that error about baptizing Heretics. Aug. Ep. 48.
But had he rightly understood the truth, he would no doubt have rejected his
error, as those Bishops who were of the same opinion with him are related to
have done, Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. 3. Hieron. adv. Lucif. Pamel. in Vit. Cypr.
both in the Eastern Church and in the African, whereupon the Church enjoyed
peace, and was filled with exceeding abundant joy: and Pamelius thinks that
S. Cyprian himself lived to do the same.

3. And the women who out of love, but in their error, came to anoint Jesus,
designing it as a rite belonging to his burial, when they ought according to
his doctrine, (which they did not yet understand) to have believed that it was
the day of his resurrection, meeting with Jesus himself who expressed his
favor unto them; were forthwith ready to have their mistakes discovered, and
with joy upon conviction to yield both their judgments, and thereupon their
practices to be rectified. Erring acts from mistake of judgment, are herein of
the same nature with other infirmities of Christians, in that the being of them
is consistent with the true nature of Christian life; whereas the willful
persisting in them, and the designed promoting of them against evidence, is
contrary thereto. For that is for men to resolve not to deny themselves, or to
submit to God; but to oppose his mind and will if it be contrary to their own.

4. Wherefore I must entreat my Reader if he be a person dissatisfied about the
matters treated of in this discourse, that he would make a stand, and give me
leave to propose, what his own interest will engage him to admit, That before
he proceeds any further, he would seriously resolve himself these two things.
First, whether with reflection upon what has been said, he would not be
heartily unwilling to stand charged in the sight of God, with being any way
sinfully instrumental unto so much hurt, as is consequent upon being
unwarrantably engaged, in these contentions and oppositions? Secondly, whether
he be resolvedly willing to lay aside all prejudice, and designed serving any
opinion or party;and to aim impartially to keep a good conscience, and in
judgment and practice, to entertain all evidences of truth, in this enquiry
about Conformity?

5. If any man should answer either of these two things in the Negative, he
must be a man of an irreligious Spirit willing to ruin himself, and of a
pernicious Spirit ready to destroy others; and whilst he remains thus
strongly prepossessed, he is never like to be advantaged by this discourse, or
any other of the same subject; but it is most necessary for him to become
better instructed, in that chief principle of Christian practice, to which he
is yet a stranger, viz. The great necessity in order to salvation, of minding
uprightness to God, and the doing his will, above gratifying his own
affections, or the pleasure of any other men. But as to him who answers these
two things in the affirmative, I only entreat him to proceed in the remaining
part of this discourse, with the same frame and temper of Spirit.

6. I come now to examine the matters themselves, to which Conformity
refers, which from the premises, appears to be of very considerable use,
and tends to the resolving diverse cases of Conscience, and (if God please to
vouchsafe so great a mercy to us) to promote the Churches peace and Unity, the
Ministers comfortable discharge of his duty, the common advancement of
Christianity, and the Protestant profession, and the particular edification of
Christians. In order to the contributing somewhat toward these excellent ends,
I have undertaken this discourse, beseeching the God of wisdom and knowledge to
guide and lead me, that I may clearly understand and manifest what is truth,
and that he would so move on the hearts of others, that they who err by mistake
may attain to a right judgment, and that those who act out of any spirit of
opposition, may have their hearts reformed, and be made willing to mind their
duty.

7. And because among the other things required of Ministers who conform, many
dissenters have expressed themselves to be most dissatisfied about the clauses
concerning the Covenant, and some who have undertaken to make a Surveigh of
these things, Surveigh of Grand Case, Case 6.
(though they may be mistaken in the measure of their ground) have declared,
that this is the great mountain in their way, to be removed by the Faith of
miracles; I shall in the first place take that into consideration, and manifest
that there is a ready, safe, and direct passage, without any great difficulty
or need of miracles, over that which only appears to them to be a mountain;
if we be willing to walk in the plain paths, to which we are directed by the
Scripture rules.

8. And whereas in the other particulars expressed, there is nothing more (if
so much) disliked and opposed, than what is contained in the Liturgy, and
particularly the Ceremonies; I shall endeavor in the remaining part of this
Book, to give a true account of these things, the right understanding whereof,
may be very conducible toward the Churches peace, and the general good.

CHAP. II.
Of the Covenant.
SECT. I.
Of its being an unlawful Oath.
1. THE acknowledgment to be made by Ministers, concerning the Covenant, being
no permanent Constitution, may require the shorter discourse. Yet it is needful
that so much be said as to manifest that while it is for the present continued,
and until it shall be withdrawn and abated, it ought not to be an obstacle to
any, in the entrance upon Ecclesiastical administrations (or civil offices.) To
this end I shall first consider the Oath it self, that it was n it self
unlawful; and then its obligation so far as that is concerned in this
acknowledgment.

2. Now an Oath may be accounted unlawful in it self, with respect to the
wholesome laws of the land: and upon this account any Oath especially concerning
public affairs of Government, is unlawful in it self, where either the matter,
or the constitution and framing, is unwarantable according to the law. That the
Covenant (and its Imposition) was in this respect unlawful, will be easily
admitted by all impartially considering persons, who cannot be supposed to
acknowledge, that whatsoever (either for, or against their own interest)
obtains in any wise a vote in the two Houses, but is not assented to, but
disallowed by the King, has a sufficient legal and warrantable constitution.
13. Car. 2.1.
And accordingly by the highest authoritative way of resolution, this Oath is
declared Unlawful, by a public Act in our Statute Laws.

3. And its not having a legal Constitution (besides what respects the
particular matter thereof) is sufficient to render it unlawful in it self,
according to the law of God, which establishes order, commands obedience to
Government, and subjection to all wholesome humane laws. For by the law of God
the Oaths of Subjects against the will of their Rulers for altering matters of
Government must be declared to be unlawful, as not being according to the rule
of righteousness. And it is not the matter only which makes an Oath or Promise
Unlawful in it self, but all other necessary ingredients or attendents, may
have the like effect and influence; as the consideration of the person who
takes the Oath, with respect to his capacity and authority, and many other
such like things, which the Canonists have expressed in this distick; Sayr.
Clav. Reg. l. 5. c. 3.
Sit jusjurandum licitum decerne; notato Quis, cui, quid, per quid, ad quid,
cur, quomodo, quando. Martin Margarit. Decret. Filiuc. Trac. 25. n. 204.
Agreeable hereunto Filiucius a Casuist makes an express distinction, between
pomissio illici^a ex part materiae, and promissio illicita per seipsam;
telling us that a promise made by a Son against the prohibition of his Father,
may be a lawful promise as to the matter of it, but yet it is an unlawful
promise in it self, as encluding in it self an unlawful thing; that is
disobedience to his Father.

4. But touching the matter of the Covenant being unlawful, I might note, that
that clause expressing them who take the Covenant to be of one reformed
Religion, and that they had before their eyes the glory of God, and the honor
of the King; was either not so true, or not so well known concerning one
another, as that they might safely express it in a warrantable Oath. And what
concerned the doctrine, worship, discipline and Government of Scotland and
Ireland, was that which could not be understood, as the matter of an Oath
should be, by ordinary persons in England who were required to take it. And
that clause, declaring that this Covenant was made according to the commendable
practice of these Kingdoms in former times, did not only require them who took
it to be well skilled in History, but also declares former open combinations
of Subjects by Oath, against the mind and will of their Prince, to alter the
affairs of Government, to be commendable practices: which is to assert what is
contrary unto truth.

5. And how much it was in the matter of it Unlawful, by its designed tendency
to promote a civil War (even against the King) may also be considered. For
though the King was known to oppose this Oath, yet the Covenant engaged them
who took it, according to their places and callings to assist and defend all
those that entered into this League and Covenant in the maintenance and pursuing
thereof. And also that they should all the days of their lives coniinue therein
against all opposition. And that this phrase according to our places and
callings, was not understood nor intended in the Covenant, and by the
contrivers thereof, in the due limited sense (though many private persons did
so take it)is manifest by considering what kind of assistance to each other was
by them practiced, before, at, and after the taking the Covenant; and also
because the taking this phrase in such a strict restrained sense, would have
been utterly inconsistent with what is joined therewith, viz. the assisting and
defending all those that enter into this League and Covenant, in the
maintaining and pursuing thereof, to continue therein against all opposition,
and not to be withdrawn from it by whatsoever persuasion or terror: since all
this was against the Kings known command and open Proclamation.

6. As this Covenant had respect to the affairs of the Church, it appears
unlawful upon a double account. 1. That endeavor, intended in the Covenant for
the alteration of Doctrine, Worship, Discipline, and Government, was in the
nature thereof an Unlawful endeavor: for thereby Subjects did undertake of
themselves, though without legal authority, and without and against the Kings
consent, to alter, oppose, and expel what was established by the Laws of the
Land. To this purpose the Covenant it self in the beginning thereof declares,
that after other means of supplication, remonstrance, protestation, etc. now at
last they enter into a League wherein (Art. 1. and 2.) they engaged themselves
to this endeavor. Wherefore that endeavor cannot include such means as
supplication to the King, etc. Which are called other means than what they then
designed. And according to this sense, the Assembly, Pref. to the Directory.
notwithstanding the Kings prohibitive Declaration, declared, that to give
public testimony of their endeavor for Uniformity in divine worship, which
they promised in the Covenant; they resolved to lay aside the former Liturgy,
and agreed on the directory. Ordin. Jan. 3. 1644.
And the then two Houses without the Kings consent and against his Declaration,
proceeding, as themselves there expressed, according to their Covenant to
reform Religion, did undertake by their ordinance to abolish the Book of
Common Prayer, and to repeal all statutes which enjoined it, and to establish
the directory: and in like manner they proceeded in their other Ordinances of
Oct. 9th 1646. for abolishing the name, title, Ordin. Oct. 9. 1646.
style, and dignity of Archbishop and Bishop, Nov. 16. 1648.
and of Aug. 29. 1648. for establishing a new way of discipline and ordination
And in the two several ordinances for abolishing Bishops, and selling their
lands, there is a special provision to this purpose, To save and preserve all
other rights, titles and interests, other than the King's, and his Heirs and
Successors, the Archbishops, and Bishops, etc. Which words carry an appearing
indication of some conviction, that those endeavors against Episcopacy were
not every way lawful and according to right.

7. The matter of the Covenant was also Unlawful, as it designed the
extirpation of Church Government by Archbishops and Bishops. For to engage the
rooting out of all Episcopacy, which ever since the Apostles times has been
established in the Church, and under which our own Nation received its
reformation, is to Covenant, to abolish that, which (after all Books of
controversy hitherto written) may fairly plead for a divine institution; and
no man (how confident soever) can be sufficiently secure, that he does not act
against the will of Christ, while he designeth to reject it; and therefore an
Oath to this end and purpose cannot be a lawful Oath. Conc. Chalc. c. 18 Con.
Trull. c. 34. Aurel. 3. c. 21. C. 11. q. 1. Conspirationum.
With what indignation such actings would have been looked upon by the
Primitive Christians, may appear by the Canons of the ancient, general, and
Provincial Councils, wherein all combinations by Oath (though they were not so
high as this of the Covenant) whether by Clergy or Laity against their Bishops
were in the highest manner, and with the greatest severity condemned and
censured.

8. I know that some have written that the Covenant did not intend wholly to
abolish but to regulate Episcopacy. Surveigh of the Grand Case, p. 44.
But other Covenanters have earnestly opposed this, and tell us that the
Government is to be extirpated, not by mutation, mutilation, limitation, or
regulation, but utter abolition, una cum stirpe evellere. And that Parliament
by whose ordinance the Covenant was taken, when they set upon this extirpation,
did design the taking away even the title, style, name and dignity of Arch
bishop and Bishop. And as this restrained interpretation (which was the sense
of diverse particular persons) makes somewhat a violent exposition, of the
extirpation expressed in the second Article, so it directly clasheth with the
first Article, whereby the Church of Scotland (over-looking the Bishops there)
under its Presbitery, which professed a great opposition to every little
appearance of any fixed Episcopacy, was made the Idea, according to which, the
Church of England must be reformed. Bishop Spotswood Hist. of Chapter of Scotl. l.
3. p. 159, 160.
Now in Scotland according to their form of Church Policy, 1560. they had
Superintendents or Bishops, who were to use Episcopal power in many things,
were chosen and approved by the Ministers, and were subject to the censures of
the Ministers and Elders, and were not required to have Episcopal Ordination:
and yet even these Superintendents, Ibid. lib. 6. p. 311.
in the modelling their Presbitery (after the new form of policy was introduced
1578.) were rejected, and disclaimed and exploded in the Assembly at Dundee,
1580. as having neither foundation, ground nor warrant in the word of God.

9. And thus having taken a short, plain, and direct view, of diverse things in
the Covenant, in must needs seem exceeding strange (unless the interest of
parties, or prejudices, have the chief and principal influence upon some men's
scruples that diverse persons, who profess themselves extremely scrupulous,
concerning the lawfulness of other things which are very justifiable, should be
as far in the other extreme confident asserters of the lawfulness of this Oath,
without any scruple, and even to impatience of all contradiction.

SECT. II.
That no man is obliged by this Oath to endeavor any alteration fo the
Government.
1. Though some phrases in the Covenant, which had respect to the King, were
truly declared by himself to be dubious and dangerous, and were to such
purposes made use of by some violent Spirits, yet I shall presume it now
granted, that no man is by that Oath obliged to endeavor any alteration of the
Government in the State. But I shall here undertake to manifest, that there
lies no obligation from the Covenant upon any person who took it, to endeavor
any alteration of the Government in the Church, though he might intend this in
his entering upon that Oath. And this I shall evidence by propounding four Rules.

2. The first Rule is, That Superiors just rights may not be violated. But if
the voluntary Vows or Oaths of Inferiors, made against the consent and command
of their Superiors, concerning things belonging to their Government (which is
the present case) did bind them to prosecute what they did so undertake; then
must it be acknowledged lawful, that the Superiors right and authority be
taken away, without his own consent, and that the duties of Obedience, the
divine Ordinances of Rule and Dominion, and together therewith all peace may be
rooted out of the World. This will be manifest by considering the Oath of a
Servant, that he will not do such business as he thinks his Master intends
for him; of a Child, that he will have none of those orders, nor servants in
his Fathers family, which his Father approves; or of an Army, that they will
not engage in a Battle, or undertakeany march though they be thereto commanded.
And like to these is the Oath of a Subject, to determine matters of public
Government, against the law, and the mind of his Sovereign. And if other
inferiors should in the like case as forwardly make contrary vows; if these
should also be supposed to necessary obligation against their superiors right,
this would perpetuate endless quarrels between these parties, and banish
subjection from them both.

3. And a very great consent of Writers, of different persuasions in other
things, ight be produced, to show that such Oaths of Inferiors cannot be
obligatory: as Bishop Saunderson de Oblig. Juram. Praelec. 4. sect. 5. and
Prael. 7. Sect. Conf. Aug. cap. de Vot. Monach.
6. Aquinas 22ae q. 89. a 9. ad 3m Grot. de Jur. Bell. and Pac. l. 2. c. 13.
Sect. 20. Perkins Cases of Consc. l. 2. c. 13. q. 3. Ames. Cas. Consc. l. 4. c.
22. n. 26, 30, 35. and the Augustane Confession. Thus God appointed, that if
the Father declared against the vow of his Daughter, or the Husband against the
vow of his Wife, that vow should be void and of none effect. Number. 30.3, 4,
Phil. de leg. special. ad praec. 3m.
etc. which was as Philo Judaeus observes, because they were under the
dominion of others, and might vow things incommodious to them.

4. But the King who has in this Realm the chief Government in matters
Ecclesiastical, as well as in others, did disallow and openly declare against
this Oath, by his Proclamation of Oct. 9. in the 19th year of his Reign, which
may be seen in the Bibliotheca Regia, Judic Acad Oxon. p. 8.
being many years since therein reprinted, and was long before urged to this
purpose, by the University of Oxford. After this among otehr large concessions,
the King declared, that he could not consent to the Covenant, both from Newport
in the Isle of wight, Sept. 29. 1648. and from Holmby, May 12. 1647. Wherefore
the King did several times manifest his disallowing the Covenant, and even with
particular respect to its endeavoring the alteration of the Government in the
Church, as may be collected from the view of his own words: and thereby any
intended obligation from this Oath, to alter this Government, became
thenceforth void to all his subjects, agreeably to the like case. Number. 39.9,
10, 11, 12, 13.

5. A second Rule is, That the doctrine of Christ should be the guide of our
practice. Now it was the tradition of the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 15.4, 5,
6. and Mar. 7, 10, 11, 12. That though God commanded the honoring the Father
and Mother, (which encluded the providing for them things convenient) he who
had made a vow not consistent with this duty, ought not to relieve them against
his vow. And though there be some variety in the critical exposition of the
words of the Evangelists; diverse taking the (...) in S. Matthew, and the Corban
in S. Mark, for the gift or thing devoted it self; Lect. Var. l. 1. c. 4.
Petitus for Josephus ( Ant. l. 4. c. 4.) accounts Corban to be the name of a
votary, who had vowed only to mind the Ministry of God; Grot. de Jur. B. and P.
l. 2. c. 17. Coce. in Gemar. Sanh. c. 7.
others as Grotius, Cocceius, and some of our own Writers, after Masius, most
probably esteem Corban to be the form of a Vow or Oath, which the Jews express,
(...); yet in all these different ways of resolution, there is a sufficient
agreement, concerning the substance and sense of the Pharisaical doctrine. But
this their doctrine our Savior condemns, as a transgressing the Commandment
of God by their traditions, Mat. 15.3. and making the Commandment of God of
none effect. v. 6. etc.

6. Now the same command, Honor thy Father and thy Mother (and diverse precepts
of the Gospel) does enjoin obedience to Governors and Rulers. And our
Sovereign and our Laws do establish the present Government in the Church, and
thereby do require subjects to submit to it and receive it; and therefore
according to the doctrine of Christ, no Vow or Oath ought to be accounted to
disoblige men from this duty of obedience, which is enjoined by the Commandment
of God. Second Paper of Proposals 1661.
And the pretense made by some, that they are far from thinking that the
Covenant obliged them to resist authority, but yet it does undoubtedly oblige
to forbear their own consent to what they there renounced; this would agree
well with the intent of the Pharisees tradition, while the Son might tell his
Father, that he acknowledged his vow could not oblige him to do his Father
wrong; but yet he was bound that in these present circumstances he might not
consent to yield him relief. But such things are of a direct contrary tendency
to the doctrines of Christ.

7. A third Rule is, That every obligation of an Oath of contract, cease by
the mutual content of the contractors; and therefore, had the Covenant been
every way warrantable, the obligation by contract therein, to endeavor the
alteration of the Government of the Church, would have ceased, by the
Parliaments of all these three Nations disclaiming any such obligation. 22ae q.
89. a. 9. ad 2m. De J. B. and P. l. 2. c. 13. Sect. 18. De Obl. Juram. Prael.
7. Sec. 8. De Consc. l. 4. c. 22. Sect. 37.
And that such an Oath cease to bind, when we have the desire or consent of
them to whose concernment it has particular reference, is asserted by such
Writers as treat of this matter, as Aquinas, Grotius, Bishop Saunderson,
Amesius, and diverse others; and this has been also admitted and insisted upon,
by some chief defenders of the Covenant, particularly by Mr. Henderson, in his
first Paper to the King. And the reason hereof is evident, because every
person, society, or community, may recede from their own right and privilege.
Thus after the two spies had made a general Oath to Rahab, to preserve her and
her Fathers house alive (which was a privilege she obtained) by agreement
between her and them it was resolved, Jos. 2.12, 13, 17, -- 21.
that this Oath should not bind, if either she or her Fathers family, were not
within the doors of her house. And thus if any two Kingdoms should by Oath
engage, to trafick in some commodities with none other but among themselves
only; if this contract be afterward judged prejudicial to both their
interests, and the public authority on both sides yield to have it altered,
and quit all claim of any such peculiar right of trade, the obligation of that
Oath is thereby dissolved.

8. That the Covenant was designed to be an Oath of contract, between diverse
subjects of these Nations appears, because as it is all along styled the
solemn League and Covenant, so in the beginning thereof it is declared, We the
Noblemen, Barons, etc. determined to enter into a mutual and solemn League and
Covenant: and a mutual League cannot be otherwise, than an Oath of contract.
And whereas this Oath in the sixth Article thereof, is styled their Union and
Conjunction, and in the end of it, it is called an association and Covenant,
all this does intimate, that its obligation was intended toward one another.
Wherefore since any obligation from the Covenant to alter the Government, is
disclaimed and rejected by the Parliaments of England and Ireland, and also by
the rescissory act (as I find it termed) in Scotland, it must hereby become
void, though it had been otherwise binding.

9. A fourth Rule is, That what the general judgment of the best Christians of
all ages have condemned as sin, ought not to be admitted. But they have all
acknowledged it a sin, that an Oath so far as it is against any right, should
be persisted in as being obligatory. And it is as reasonable to doubt, of
ordinary travelers knowing the road they have long used, as to question
whether the most eminent Christians since Christ, did ever arrive at the
understanding of those plain duties of Religion, which are of frequent practice.

10. When Novatus made a Schism in the Roman Church against Cornelius, he, in
delivering the Holy Sacrament, gave to his followers this Oath; Eusebius. Hist.
Eccl. l. 6. c. (...).
Swear to me by the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, that thou will
never leave me, nor return to Cornelius: and yet both S. Cyprian and other
Catholic Bishops every where, judged these men bound to return, and condemned
their continuance with Novatus, in the breach of Peace and Unity. Evagrius
relates, Evagr. Hist. l. 6. c. 6.
that when Mauritius the Emperor sent Philippicus to command his Army, they
bound themselves by Oath, not to own him for their Commander: but when the
Emperor persisted in his purpose, and sent a Bishop to treat with them, they
were at last satisfied, that they ought to receive him, notwithstanding their
Oath. And when Anacletus was set up to govern the Roman Church, Vit. S. Bern.
lib. 2. c. 5.
in opposition to Innocentius the second, some persons told S. Bernard, that
they could not receive Innocentius, because they were bound by an Oath to hold
to Anacletur against him. But S. Bernard answered, insanire eos qui rem
illicitam Sacramenti patrocinio constare existimant; that it is a madness to
think, that any thing not lawful of it self can be defended by their Oath;
Spelm. Conc. Brit. in leg. Alf. 1. Novel. 51. Dig. l. 2. Tit. 14. Jurisg.
whereas (said he) such disorderly agreements, under whatsoever pretense of
Religion they be established, are to be accounted void, and by the authority of
God to be dissolved.

11. That nothing otherwise unwarrantable can become a duty by any Oath, was
declared in the Ecclesiastical laws of Alfred, and by the Councils of Basil.
Sess. 4. of Lerida Can. 7. and of Toledo. 8. Can. 2. and in several places of
the civil Law; Cod. l. 9. Tit. 8. Constable. 2.
and by all our Protestant Writers, treating of the vow of single life, in the
who have not the gift of continency. And this is so agreeable to all rational
principles, that it was received among the ancient Roman laws, Phil de leg.
special. C. 22. q. 3. and 4. lib. 2. Tit. 24. cap. 12. and 19.
before the Empire became Christian; and is likewise declared by Philo the Jew.
And in the Canon Law, Gratian resolved by diverse ancient authorities, that an
Oath against the duty of obedience being sinful, cannot oblige: and the like is
asserted in the Gregorian decretals; both which are in this matter received
with good approbation by Protestant Writers.

12. Now I shall not think it necessary to answer objections, but shall content
my self no note, that whatsoever objection may press some one of the rules
abovementioned, does still leave the main design secure, unless all these rules
could be invalidated. And such objections as carry an appearance of proof, that
an Oath may oblige to what otherwise would not be warrantable, have this
manifest indication of mistake, because they tend to uphold this monstrous
position, that men are bound to observe Gods commands and their duties no
longer, than till they shall please to make an Oath against them.

CHAP. III.
Of the Declaration and Subscription referring to the Liturgy.
1. SOme open acknowledgment or subscription, not only to doctrines, but also
to other rules and Ecclesiastical Constitutions, has been a thing very usual
in the Christian Church; and in matters lawful and orderly, has been thought
desirable to promote Peace, and continue well established order therein; and
the expediency thereof stands recommended, by the wisdom and ordinary
practice of the Church.

2. In the Council of Nice, Conc. Nicen. c. 8.
the returning Novatians who were received in the Clergy, were required by
subscription to testify, that they would conform to the Catholic practice, and
the Constitutions and Decrees of the Catholic Church. The ancient Custom of
subscribing to their Synodical Constitutions, Conc. Carth. gr. c. 93. Conc.
Carth. 2. Can. 13.
is evident from diverse ancient Councils: which was also practiced in the
Carthaginian Territories, where such who acted contrary to their profession or
subscription, were sharply sentenced. And in the Constitutions of Justinian,
according to some Copies, he who was to be ordained Bishop, besides his
subscribing to the doctrine of the Faith, and his Oath against Simony, was
required to read the offices of the Church, for the holy Communion, and with
the other Prayers of the Church, Novel. 123. edit. Haloand
those also appointed for Baptism. And he who (as he was required) did testify
his allowance of these Prayers by reading them, might as well have testified
the same, by any other vocal acknowledgment or subscription.

3. Among the Protestants, the practice of subscription to such things (as also
that which is more solemn, an acknowledgment by Oath) has been frequently
admitted. In Poland, after the consent (chiefly touching the Lords Supper) was
established in the Synod of Sandomir, 1570. between the Churches of those three
Confessions, the Bohemian, Augustan, and Helvetian; Syn. Torun. 2585.
it was concluded in another following General Synod, and attested by the
Super-Intendents, Ministers and Patrons of the several Confessions, that none
should be admitted into the Ministry, or received into their Churches as a
Minister, unless (among other qualifications) consensui subscribat, he
subscribe to the consent, and behave himself accordingly. Which provision
contained a prudential care, that a due decorum should be kept, even in the
Agenda of Religion. The French Church requires a subscription to their
Liturgy; and the like may be observed in diverse other places.

4. In the Bohemian Church, after the time of their ordination, which was
performed, manuum Episcopalium impositione, Ratio Discipl. c. 2: Sect. 4. and
5. p. 32, 34.
the Ministers were solemnly admitted to their particular ministration by their
Visitor, who amogn other things, committed to them their liber Ritualis,
containing their form and rites of worship, of the performance of which they
were to take care, and to which among other offices of their Ministry, they did
at their Ordination oblige themselves by a Religious Oath, both to God and his
Church. Ratio Canon. Examine. in Bucer. Script. Angl.
They who entered into the Ministry at Strasburgh, after its first reformation,
did by Oath undertake to keep in the Communion, and obedience of the Church and
its Governors, according to the law of God, and their Canons, Statutes, and
Ordinances. And it is related from the laws of Geneva (where an established
Liturgy is one of their Constitutions) that all they who were there received to
the Ministry, must oblige themselves by Oath, to observe the Ecclesiastical
Ordinances, ordained by the Councils of that City. In the Hungarian reformed
Church, they who enter the Ministry, do by a very solemn Oath oblige
themselves, to the observations of the Ecclesiastical Canons, Eccles. Augl.
Vindic. cap. 31. in fin.
and to the performing due obedience to the Bishop, and other Superiors in the
Church, as may be seen in their Oath, as it is fully exhibited by Mr. Durell,
from their Synodical Constitutions.

5. The Subscriptions or Declarations required amongst us (besides what for the
present concerns the Covenant) are, an acknowledgment of the Kings just
authority, to secure the Government; of the Articles of Religion, to preserve
truth of Doctrine; and of the Liturgy and Book of Ordination, to maintain order
and Uniformity: to which end also tends the Oath of Canonical obedience,
wherein such obedience to the Bishop and his Successors, is engaged in all
lawful and honest things: which must needs be blameless, unless it could be
accounted a sin, to resolve to do good and honest things, in a way of order. Of
these, I shall in this discourse treat of what concerns the Liturgy, which is
chiefly opugned; and therefore requires the principal consideration, for the
vindicating our Communion in the worship of God, and the manifesting the
unlawfulness of the breach thereof.

6. Some declared allowance of the Liturgy, has since the reformation been
ordinarily required in this Church. Art. 35.
The Articles in the time of King Edward the Sixth, contained an approbation
both of the Book of Common Prayer, and of Ordination. In Queen Elizabeth's time,
the allowance of the use, and the Subscription to the Book of Common Prayer,
was required by the Advertisements, Advertism. 7. Eliz. Can. 1571. c.
concionatores. Tract. 21. c. 1.
and Canons, and defended by Bishop Whitgift. Since Queen Elizabeth, the same
has been performed, in the Subscription according to the 36th Canon, and in
the Declaration and Acknowledgment, in the Act of Uniformity, which in seense
much agrees therewith.

7. The subscription required by the thirty sixth Canon, is grounded upon the
Constitutions of the Convocation, confirmed by the authority of the Kings broad
Seal, according to his supreme authority in causes Ecclesiastical, and
according to the Statute, 25. Henr. 8. And so the Canons of the Church did of
old frequently receive a confirmation, by the Emperors sanction under his Sea;
which is a thing of so great antiquity, that Eusebius relates concerning
Constantine, the first Christian Emperor, (...), that by his Seal, Eus. de
Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 27.
he ratisied the determinations made by the Bishops in their Synods.

8. That Article in this Canon, which refers to the Book of Common Prayer,
does enclude an acknowledging three things. First that that Book contains
nothing contrary to the word of God: which is intended to be manifested in the
following Chapters, touching the things chiefly opposed. The second will be
consequent thereupon, viz. that it may lawfully be so used. The third and last
clause, is a promise to use the form prescribed in that Book, in public Prayer
and administration of the Sacraments, and none other: the lawfulness of which
promise, does evidently follow from the former clause, and its sense is of the
same import, with those words of the acknowledgment, required in the Act of
Uniformity, viz. I will conform to the Liturgy of the Church of England, as it
is now established.

9. But some especial doubts have been peculiarly entertained, concerning the
sense of the Declaration in the Act of Uniformity, in giving unfeigned assent
and consent, to all and every thing, contained and prescribed, in and by the
Book of Common Prayer, etc. But while our Government does require the use of
this form, both the intended sense (being the same with that of the two former
clauses concerning the Liturgy, in the Canon abovementioned) and the expression
thereof, may upon equitable and impartial consideration, appear clearly and
fairly justifiable. To which purpose, the true sense of assenting and
consenting, and the things to which this has respect, is to be enquired after.

10. Wherefore it is first to be considered, that as to assent, when referred
to things asserted, is to own the truth of them; so when referred to things to
be done, ordered or used, it is to allow that they should be put in practice:
in which latter sense, assenting is one and the same with consenting. Now the
Act of Uniformity, both immediately before this Declaration, and in diverse
other places, refers this unfeigned assent and consent, to the use of the
things in that Book contained and prescribed; and thereby directs us to this
ordinary sense of the word Assent: as does also the nature of the things to be
assented to, which for the main part are Prayers, Thanksgivings, and Rubricks,
which being no assertions or propositions, are to be used, but not properly to
be believed. This notion of assenting in the same signification with
consenting, is according to the frequent use of assensus in the Latin (as when
things are agreed unanimi assensu and consensu, and the marriage of Children is
declared, Littleton C. of Tenant in Dower.
that it should be de assensu and consensu parentum; and we read of dower de
assensu patris, in our English Law Books) and the same might be evidenced by
various English Examples. But this Declaration being required by our Statute
Laws, it may be sufficient to observe, that this is a very common sense of the
word assent, in our English Statutes.

11. 25. Ed. 1. c. 1: Pref. to 18. Ed. 3. and to 2. Ric. 2. and passim.
Thus from King Edw. I. will King Henry the seventh (and sometimes after) our
Statute Laws are often declared to be assented unto; or to be made with the
assent of the Lords, etc. But from Queen Elizabeth's time downwards, the Laws
are often expressed to be enacted by the King or Queen, with the consent of the
Lords, etc. and sometimes with their assent and consent, (as 1. Jac. 2. and 21.
Jac. 2.) In the same sense par assent, assensus, and such like expressions, are
frequently used in our most ancient Statutes, in their Latin and Frence
Originals. As in St. de Carl. Ordinat. Forest. c. 6. St. Lincoln. Westminster. 4.
Exilium Hug. le despenser. Ordin. pro ter. Hib. And about common assa^s, the
word assent is three times in one paragraph used in this sense, concerning the
recovery of any land, 14 Eliz. 8.
by the assent and agreement of the persons, to whom the reversion shall
appertain. Nor does the using these two words of assent and consent, in the
same clause, require such a sense of this Declaration, in which they must
differ from each other: since variety of words even in the most soleum
acknowledgments, is often used, not to express the difference, but to determine
the certainty of sense; according to that Rule, Ex Reg. Juris.
Quae dubitationis tollendae causa inseruntur, jus commune non laedunt. Thus in
the Oath of Obedience or Allegiance, I A. B. do truly and sincerely,
acknowledge, profess, testify, and declare, that our Sovereign Lord is lawful
and rightful King, -- Where all these words connected by conjunctive Particles,
do only serve more expressly to manifest the same thing:

12. And since the consideration both of persons and time make it evident, that
this assent to be given, cannot contribute any thing, to the authoritative
ordering and constitution of these things, (which were before established by
authority) its most proper and natural sense, must import a consent to, or
allowing of the use of these things, which is the sense, unto which the
expressions in the Act of Uniformity, do also plainly direct. Wherefore such
things only as are to be used (being both contained and prescribed) as all the
Prayers, Hymns, directing Rubricks, Calendar, and the Whole frame of the
Liturgy, come within the compass of this Declaration. But some things
occasionally declared, and not prescribed, are not contained under it. In the
Preface.
For instance, these words, That this Book as it stood before established by
law, did not contain in it any thing, which a godly man may not with a good
Conscience use and submit to; though they be true and considerable, yet if they
were encluded under this Declaration, then even such things as were thought fit
to be altered, must be still in some sort assented unto; which is both contrary
to the end of such alterations, and to the proper sense of the words of this
Declaration.

13. And even such persons who conceive some things or expressions prescribed,
either in the Phrases of Common Prayer it self, or in the pointing of the
Psalms, or in the Translation of the Psalms or other Scriptures; not to be
suitable to their own desires or apprehensions (yet to be free from fin, and of
such a nature, as that the whole remains useful, to guide the exercises of
Piety) those persons may safely and with a good Conscience, make this
Declaration of assent, with respect unto other weighty considerations, of
submission to Authority, promoting Peace, Order, and Unity, and the edification
of the Church, in the united exercise of a right religious worship. Even as
such learned men, who may judge even our last translation of the Bible, not to
have fitly expressed the sense of some difficult places, may yet both
unfeignedly assent, and earnestly persuade to the diligent use thereof, as
knowing it to be of excellent advantage, to the pious and humble Readers, for
their profitable learning the Gospel Doctrine, and the will of God.

14. Wherefore by this Declaration is given such an open vocal approbation of
this Book, required by Law, as agrees in sense with the subscription enjoined
by Canon. And the intend thereof is, to express such an unfeigned allowance or
consent, to all things contained and prescribed in the Book of Comon-Prayer,
with the Psalms, as that they may warrantably and with a good Conscience be
used, as they are established by authority: the truth of which will appear more
manifest upon a particular enquiry.

CHAP. IV.
Of the Liturgy and the ordinary service appointed therein.
SECT. I.
The lawfulness, antiquity, and expediency, of public forms.
1. PVblick Prayer is acknowledged by all Christians, to be a chief part of the
worship of God, who has said, My house shall be called an house of Prayer for
all people. But since God has not expressly declared in his word, whether the
ordinary public duties of Christian Prayer, should be performed with or
without a form, the determination of the sit practice in this case must be
made (not without regard to the authority of Governors) by a respect to the
rules of order, edification, and the glory of God, and an eye unto approved
examples, from which considerations, I shall produce diverse evidences, of the
requisiteness of a set form for the public offices of the Church, both from
Reason, and from example and authority.

2. The reasons are such as these. 1. That hereby a fit, true, right, and well
ordered way of worship, in addresses to God, may be best secured to the Church,
in its public service of God, that neigher God nor his worship may be
dishonored; their being many easily discernable ways, of considerable
miscarriage, in the public offices of the Church, even by them who err not in
the doctrines of Religion. 2. That needful comprehensive petitions, for all
common and ordinary spiritual and outward wants, of our selves or others, with
fit thanksgivings, may not in the public supplications of the Church be
omitted; which (considering men as they are) can no other way be either so well
or at all assured. 3. That the affections and hearts of pious and religious men
may be more devont, and better united in their presenting their service to God,
where they may consider beforehand, what particular Prayers and Thanksgivings
they are to offer up, and come the more ready and prepared to join in them.
This is an advantage of which many are deprived by a bad temper of mind, either
sucked in by prejudice, or swallowed down by carelessness.

3. 4. That such difficult parts of Church Offices, as Baptism and the Lords
Supper, the matter of which requires great consideration, that they may be
clearly and aright expressed, (as both Conformists, and many Non-Conformists
acknowledge, and is evident from the many disputes about them, by men neither
of mean parts, nor dangerous designs) may by a more considerate care in the
composure of a form, be so framed, that men of greatest understandings may with
readiest assent entertain them, and that they may be sufficiently vindicated
against the boldest opposers. 5. To be an evidence to other Churches and future
times, after what way and manner we worship God, and that both the matter and
expression of our service to him, is sound and pious, in our general and common
worship. And this may be a full testimony that such a Church both receiving the
true faith, and expressing a right way of worship, is both a true and in its
measure a pure and incorrupt Church.

4. The Arguments from example, which in general countenance the lawfulness or
expediency of a form are two, which will require a larger Declaration. The
first is from the practice and example of Christ, who directed his Disciples
the use of the Lords Prayer, as a set form: and that from thence the custom of
the Christian Church, De Eccles. Offic. l. 1. c. 9.
in composing and using set forms did take its pattern, is reasonably asserted
by Isidorous Hispalonsis. That the Lords Prayer was delivered as a form is so
manifest; that (was it not for the violent force offered to men's minds, by
prejudice and contentious opposition) it could never have been questioned. And
it may be sufficiently proved. 1. From the command given by our Savior Luke
11.2. When ye pray, say Our Father, etc. and the expression in S. Matthew, Mat,
6.9. (...) pray sc, or on this manner, is the same with that, when the form of
Aaronical benediction was enjoined. Numb. 6.23. On this wise (in the Septuagint
(...)) shall ye bless. But the blessing there directed has been generally
acknowledged, to be a constant invariable form of Benediction under the law,
Luth. Tom. 3. f. 10. Prec. Eccles. Form. Genev.
and as such was used in the German Reformation by Luther, and in that also of
Geneva. 2. From the ground of the Disciples request. Luke 11.1. Lord, teach us
to pray as John also taught his Disciples. That it was ordinary for the Jewish
Teachers to compose forms for their Disciples is observed by Dr. Lightfoot, on
Mat. 6.9. and the frequent yea constant use of forms in the Jewish Church shall
be hereafter manifested, and if this be referred to the words of S. Luke now
mentioned, it is not to be doubted, but that John the Baptist, according to the
custom of the Jews, delivered a form of Prayer to his Disciples, and that what
John did herein, was both approved, and the like practiced by our Savior, who
directed the use of the Lords Prayer to his Disciples at two different times.

5. 3. From the manner of the composure of the Lords Prayer, which is not
propounded as a general direction to pray, that Gods name may be hallowed, and
that his Kingdom should come; but it is dictated by Christ as it should be
expressed by us in our persons, Our father, hallowed be thy name, etc. 4. The
ancient Christian Church near the times of Christ, did acknowledge and use it
as a form. S. Cyprian is very large to this purpose; Cyp. de Orat. Domin.
says he, Christ consulting the salvation of his people, etiam orandi formam
ipse dedit, himself delivered them a form of prayer; and then exhorts that we
pray as our master taught us, that the father when we pray may own the words
of his Son; and says he, when we have Christ an advocate, let us express the
words of our advocate; and how much more effectually shall we obtain what we
ask in Christ's name, if we ask by his Frayer. Tertullian before him declared,
Tertul. de Orat. c. 1. etc. 9.
Christus novam orationis formam determinavit, Christ appointed a new form of
prayer, and he says, that whilst the Christians used other Prayers this was
not omitted, praemissa legitima and ordinaria oratione quasi fundamento. And
before both these the words of Lucian in Trajan's time, Lucian. in Philopat.
about reciting the Prayer beginning (...), does intimate the ordinary use of
this Prayer among Christians. From these testimonies I suppose it evident, that
the Lords Prayer was used as a form in the ancient Christian Assemblies, and
that we have good reason thus far to receive, what some hundred years after was
delivered by S. Gregory, Gr. Ep. l. 7. c. 63.
and from him by diverse other Writers, that the Apostles themselves did always
at the Consecration of the Eucharist, make use of the Lords Prayer. Wherefore
the Lords Prayer being thus delivered as a form, does enclude an approbation of
the like composures of Prayers among the Jews, and an allowance of the same
among Christians, for whom this was intended. And that path where we follow our
Saviors steps cannot be the way of error.

6. The other argument from example, is from the ordinary practice of the
Church both Jewish and Christian. Concerning the Jewish Church, I might
instance in the eighteen Prayers, composed for its ordinary use from the time
of the Captivity, which are often mentioned by the Jewish Writers, and in their
forms of Prayer for the Passover, De Emendar. Tempor. l. 6. p. 573.
of which Scaliger thinks that there is as much reason to be confident, that
the particular Prayers recorded in the Talmud (which he calls their Digests)
were the ancient forms used by the Jews, as that the Roman Digests exhibit to
us the true determination of the Roman Lawyers. But I shall rather insist on
the Jewish Church making use of set forms of Prayer, from the very times of
Moses, and so downwards; which is no new opinion but is ordinarily received;
and it has been observed by diverse learned men, that the Samaritan Chronicle
speaks of a Book of Prayers, used by the Jews at their Sacrifices, from the
time of their Legate Moses, until that day. And besides the testimony of that
Author (which I urge no further than other proof may be made) let these two
things be considered.

7. First, That it is certain from the Scriptures (and often expressed by Philo
Judaeus) that the Jews did use Prayers with their Sacrifices and oblations. The
whole multitude were praying without at the time of incense, Luke 1.10. and the
Apostles themselves went up to the Temple, at the hour of Prayer, which was the
ninth hour, Act. 3.1. Which was the time of the evening Sacrifice; Mr. Mede
Disc. on Ezr. 6.10.
and Mr. Mede has well proved that Sacrifice if self is a rite of
supplication. And that the use of such Prayers was as ancient as Moses, is
manifest from Lev. 16.21. Where Aaron was commanded to confess over the live
Goat, the iniquities of the Children of Israel. Secondly, That there are plain
evidences in the Old Testament, of such forms used upon many occasions. Besides
the forms of Prayers and praises in the Book of Psalms, enjoined for constant
use unto the Levites by Hezekiah, and the Princes, 1 Chr. 29, 30. and besides
diverse other Hymns and Songs, and such commands for a form of words, as Joel
2.17. Hos. 14.2. there is an express form of Prayer appointed by God, to be
used at the Offering the Heifer for expiation of uncertain murder, Deuteronomy. 8.21.
and a form of confession at the offering up their first fruits, Deuteronomy. 26.3, 4,
5, 6, 7. and a form of Prayer at the presenting the third years Tithe, Deuteronomy.
26.13, 14, etc. and some other such like. Whence it is evident, that forms of
Prayer were by Gods appointment used, from the beginning of the Jewish Church.
Yet if no such thing could have been proved, and if their original had been
from John the Baptist, and the direction of our Savior, this alone might be
sufficient to recommend them unto Christians.

8. In considering the general practice of the Christian Church, it must be
acknowledged, that in that extraordinary case (which reaches not the ordinary
condition of the Church) when the miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost were
communicated; both Prayer, prophesying, and singing were frequently thereby
performed, as is evident from 1. Cor. 14. And I yield it most probable (though
even Protestant Writers do herein differ) that the ancient Roman, Jerusalem,
and Alexandrian Offices, were called the Liturgies of S. Peter, S. James, and
S. Mark, because of their certain early use in the Churches where they
presided; though it is not certain that they were composed by them, this being
mentioned by no ancient Writer of the first Centuries. Nor do I doubt but the
Liturgy or Anaphora of S. John, and that of the twelve Apostles are
suppositious, which with the former are related by Gabriel Sionita, Gab.
Sionit. de Ritib. Maron.
to be exhibited amongst the Syriack Offices: for of these we have no mention
in any ancient Ecclesiastical Writer, unless the words of Epiphanius, Epiph.
Haer, 79.
expressing all the Apostles with S. James the Brother of our Lord, to be (...)
(that is, chief Dispensers or Stewards of the Christian Mysteries) might
allowably be racked, to speak them all Composers of Liturgical forms, Allatius
de Liturg. S. Jacob.
according to the violence offered to those words by Leo Allatius. But if it
can yet be proved, that at least since the ceasing of the frequent distribution
of the miraculous gifts of the Spirit, the Church of Christ has in all Ages
used and approved forms, this will be as considerable a testimony in behalf of
Liturgies, as can reasonably be required.

9. That forms of Prayer were of use in the Church, about 1300 years since, is
acknowledged by them who plead most against them, from Conc. Laod. c. 18.3.
Carth. c. 23. and Conc. Mil. c. 12. and that they have continued from that time
downward, cannot be denied. In the fourth Century, there is frequent mention in
some parcels of Liturgy, in the Writings of the Fathers: and there are so many
testimonies that S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, and S. Basil were framers of
Liturgies, that I do not see how any can rationally doubt of the truth thereof.
But that these Liturgies have undergone diverse alterations in succeeding Ages,
is both apparent, and is very reasonable to be imagined. And he who shall
compare the Greek Copy of S. Basils Liturgy, with the Syriack or its version,
both which are represented together by Cassander, Cassand. Liturgy.
will find them so vastly different from each other, that he must either
conclude great alterations to have passed upon them, or that they never were
originally the same. But from these I shall now look back, into the more early
times of the Christian Church, where for the most part, I shall only briefly
mention the testimonies, which have been fully produced by others.

10. It is not probable, Eusebius. de Laud. Constant. autemed.
that Constantine the Emperor would have composed (...), godly Prayers, for
the use of his Soldiers, if such forms had not then been used in the Christian
Church: De Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 19, 20.
Eusebius accounting this an admirable thing that the Emperor should be (...),
a teacher of the words of Prayer. But Eusebius in another place, giving a
particular account of some expressions suited to the Soldiery, in those set
forms of Prayer, which he calls (...) the constituted Prayers; does a little
before that declare Constantines own practice, that he would take Books into
his hands, either for contemplating the holy Scriptures, or for the expressing
with his Court (...) the Prayers that were constituted and appointed: and this
Eusebius there calls his ordering his Court (...), according to the manner of
the Church of God: and this is a manifest evidence of forms in the Christian
Church in his time. Orig. Hom. 11. in Jerome. Cont. Celsum l. 6.
Origin manifestly cites a piece of the usual Liturgy, an hundred years before
Constantine saying, Frequenter in oratione dicimus Da omnipotens, da nobis
partem cum prophetis, etc. We frequently say in our Prayers, Give, O Almighty
God, give us a part with the Prophets, etc. and in his Books against Celsus he
declares Christians to use (...) Prayers which were ordained or constituted.
S. Cyp. de Orat. Dom.
Cyprian sufficiently intimates the use of some forms in the Carthaginian
service in his time, by describing the entrance or beginning thereof, the
Priest saying sursum corda, lift up your hearts; and the people answering
Habemus ad Dominum, We lift them up unto the Lord. And the that considers,
that Tertullian plainly intimates a form of abrenunciation in Baptism, De Cor.
Mil. c. 3. and that they had set Hymns then appointed for particular times and
hours, upon their stationary days, Albasp. Observe. l. 1: c. 16.
as Albaspinus interprets him, Adv. Psych. c. 13. will think it not
improbable, that what he mentions of the particular heads of Prayer, in the
usual Assemblies of the Christians, should have reference to some constant
forms by them used: Tert. Ap. c. 39.
and their use is favored by the expressions of (...) and (...) in Justin
Martyr, and Ignatius. And many have thought, V. Dr. Hammond in 1. Tim. 2.1.
that the Apostle had a special eye to the composure of such forms of Prayer,
agreeably to what the Baptist and our Savior prescribed to their Disciples, in
commanding Timothy the Governor of the Church, that (among the things which
concerned his behavior in the Church of God, Chapter 3.15.) first of all, prayers,
intercessions, supplications, and giving of thanks, be made for all men, etc.
For though the Phrase (...) may either signify that Prayers be put up to God,
or that they be composed, in this place it may well intend both. And it is
thought by S. Augustine, Aug. Ep. 59.
that these various words of the Apostle, Prayers, Supplications,
Intercessions, and giving of thanks, did direct to a comprehensive fullness of
all such Prayers, in the fixed models of the public service of the Church,
when the Communion was administered, and that the public offices of the Church
were accordingly composed, De Vocat. Gentium l. 1. c. 4.
and the same sense is also favored by Prosper.

11. Since the reformation, the Saxon and other Lutheran Churches have their
Liturgies, the Bohemian had its Liber Ritualis, and the Palatinate its Agenda
(as Vrsin styles it) by which the right order of its public administrations,
Vrsin. Praef. in Apolog. Catechis.
might be vindicated from the Calumnies of detractors. And the Churches of
France, Holland, and others, have their forms for the public service of God.
And after the Order at Geneva had established a form of public service for the
Lords day, with some appearance of a liberty of variation (which some relate
not to have been so manifest in their practice, as in their rule; which was
Dominico die mane haec ut plurimum adhibetur formula) I say after this was
established at Geneva, Calv. Ep. 87.
Calvin who composed it expressed his judgment to be for the strict use of set
forms, in his Letter to the Lord Protector in England: Wherein he writes to
this purpose. For so much as concerns the form of Prayers and Ecclesiastical
rites, valde probo, I much approve, that it be determined, so that it may not
be lawful for the Ministers in their administrations, to vary from it. And this
he judges necessary for these reasons, that it may be an help to the weakness
of some, that it may be a testimony of the Churches consent, and that it may
slop the desultorious levity of those who are for new things.

12. And these very expressions of Calvin, are cited with great approbation by
the Walachrian Classis of Zealand, in what they wrote in the time of our late
Wars, to the Assembly at London, and they further declare their great distaste
against them, who condemn the use of forms, in these words; Consid. Contr. in
Angl. c. 7. qu. 2.
Durum putamus omnes illas pias Ecclesias condemnare, quae ab Apostolicis and
primitivae Ecclesiae temporibus, usque ad hodiernum diem, cultum Dei publicum
ex praescriptis certisque formulis celebrarunt, -- pr^inde hominum illorum
praecisam singularitatem arguimus, qui omnes praescriptas formulas ex cultu
divino eliminant. Say they, We account it grievous, to condemn all those holy
Churches, which from the Apostolical times, and the primitive Church, unto this
day, have celebrated the public worship of God out of prescribed forms, --
Wherefore we blame the precise singularity of those men, who would cast out all
prescribed forms from divine worship: So they. And indeed it must be a rash
sentence to condemn forms of Prayer as evil and sinful, which were embraced by
the ancient Church, while it retained its soundness, and before the corruptions
and distempers of the Church of Rome took place, and by the Protestant Churches
since their recovery there from. And in the determining what is expedient, or
inexpedient, he had need have strong foundations to erect his high confidence
upon, who will oppose his own judgment, with some very few persons besides,
against the concurrent judgment and practice of the Church of Christ, in so
many several Ages and Nations, and against the determination of God himself
under the Old Testament, and our blessed Savior under the New.

SECT. II.
Objections against set forms answered.
1. What is opposed against the former Section, must be here considered, both
concerning the antiquity, lawfulness, and expediency of set forms. It is
acknowledged, that public Prayer even at the Celebration of the Holy
Communion, was at the beginning of Christianity, performed by the extraordinary
and wonderful effusion of the gifts of the Holy Ghost, when also prophesying
and singing were performed by the same. But some attempt has been made to
prove that there was no ordinary use of forms of Prayer in the three first
Centuries, and that they were not established till the end of the fourth
Century.

2 To this purpose Justin Martyr is first produced, Apol. 2. prope fin. p. 98.
who declares concerning his time, that at the Communion (...): the chief
Minister sends forth Prayers and Thanksgivings according to his ability, or
rather, with all his might. Now all the proof here depends on the use of the
Phrase (...), which the Objectors understand, according to his ability in
composing a Prayer. But this is a sense not consistent with the use of the same
Phrase in another place of the same Apology, where he discourses also of their
Prayers at the Eucharist, p. 60.
and speaks of all Christians (who were not all to compose Prayers according
to their ability for that service) that they were (...) praising God with
Prayers and Thanksgivings with all their might; that is, with the greatest
intention and fervency of heart and spirit; and this is properly the sense of
(...) as may be evinced from the use thereof in other places, and from the use
of like expressions referring to Prayer.

3. It was Nazianzens exhortation, Naz. Orat. 3.
Let us being cleansed in soul and body, (...) with all our might sing that
song, which the Israelites sung when the Egyptians were destroyed; where the
(...) implies affectionateness and earnestness of mind in the use of a set form
of words. Lex Rab. in (...)
Buxtorf notes it as an expression used among the Jews, that he who shall say
Amen (...) with all his might (which answers to (...)) the Gates of Paradise
shall be opened to him: but here could be no variety of expression, but (as he
interprets it) by this Phrase is meant, omni intention and devotione, a
joining with all earnestness of intention and heartiness of devotion. Linw.
Prove. l. 3. Tit. 23. Sect. 1.
About 450. years since was framed an English Canon, requiring the daily
public Prayers and service to be performed religiously, prout Deus dederit,
and again, prout Deus inspiraverit (which are Phrases as plausible and pregnant
as (...)) and yet these Phrases were used concerning the set diurnal and
nocturnal offices, requiring that they should behave themselves therein with
Religious devoutness, according as God should give them ability, and breath by
his spirit. Wherefore this citation from Justin Martyr, though managed (...),
or with the utmost might, will prove nothing but the weakness of the attempt of
the Undertakers.

4. Another place objected is from Tertullian, Apol. c. 30.
who says the Christians did pray, sine monitore quia de pectore, without a
monitor or prompter, because from their heart. The sense of these words of
Tertullian has been variously apprehended by diverse learned men; some judging
that they intend praying by heart (as we call it) and therefore by a form;
others that they expressed the readiness of Christians to put up hearty and
devout supplications to God, Bishop Bilson, of Christian subjection. Part. 4.
from the Religious inclinations of their own spirits, and some very worthy men
have thought that sense of these words, which is closed with in the management
of this objection, not to be improbable concerning Tertullians time. And it is
not much of be wondered, if some obscure Phrases of so dark a Writer as
Tertullian be either not well understood, or sometimes misunderstood; among
this number I account this Phrase, which I suppose to refer to an ancient
custom in the Primitive Church. But

5. In answer to this objection, it might be sufficient to observe, that sine
monitore, can in no propriety of speech be construct, without a form; since the
Monitor must needs be a person not a Book, whose words were to guide and direct
others. Now I suppose they who object this place, would not from hence infer,
that in the public Prayers of the Church, there was no Minister who expressed
the words of Prayer, with which the rest joined in affection. This is indeed
most properly to pray sine monitore, but this could not be practiced in public
Prayers, save only in the use of a known form, in which they should all
conspire with one heart and voice: and according to this sense (in which it is
most fairly understood, if it be referred to the public Prayers of the Church)
this place is a considerable testimony for the use of set forms.

6. But it seems to me very probable (which I leave to the consideration of
others) that these words peculiarly concern the Stationary days of the ancient
Church. These days were the fourth and sixth days of the Week, in which the
Christians attended the public Assemblies of the Church, Albasp. Obs. l. 1.
obs. 16.
beginning very early in the Morning, and continuing till three a Clock in the
Afternoon, and these were accounted the chief days of Christian supplication
and humiliation, and the observance of them was esteemed the most effectual
means, to obtain Gods blessing and favor. On these days, besides their joining
in public Prayers which Tertullian intimates to be performed about the hours
of nine, twelve, and three, a considerable portion of the days was allotted for
their exercising themselves in private Prayers, and inward and fervent
supplications, humbly performed upon their knees, with fasting and tears in the
place of public Assemblies; with regard to what was needful either to
themselves in particular, or to the public welfare of the Church or Empire. Of
the ordinary use of these retired, but solemn supplications and devotions in
the Christian Church, there are (as I suppose) diverse sufficient testimonies.

7. Tertullian (who in his Book De Oratione, De Orat. c. 13.
has peculiar respect to their Stationary days) speaks hereof; Quid amplius
referunt isti qui clarius adorant, nisi quod proximis obstrepant? imo prodendo
petitiones suas quid minus faciunt, quam si in publico orent? Cyp. de Orat.
Dom. v. Pamel. in Cyprianum.
And S. Cyprian requires them who are gathered together in the Assemblies with
the brethren, and do celebrate divine Sacrifices with Gods Priest, that they
would avoid indigested and tumultuous speaking, and sets before them the
example of Hannah, who prayed not by loud petition, sed tacit and modeste,
intra ipsas pectoris latebras precabatur. That there were such Prayers used in
the Jewish Church, appears from the example of Hannah, and of the Pharisee
and Publican. To understand this Phrase of Tertullian concerning such Prayers
in the Christian Churches, is most agreeable to the literal sense of these
words, sine monitore quia de pectore, and to zephyrus thus paraphrasing upon
it. We do not conceive Prayers dictated by a Priest, but all the Christian
Assembly, as if we all conspired together, to express our desires with sighs
and groans, out of the very seat of our minds and spirit. So that he
understands this place, of that inflamed devotion kindled from a fervency of
inward heat, which needed not the help of the wind without to blow it up; or of
those active desires which received not their efficacy from the breath or voice
of another, but from the inward motions of the soul.

8. After these are produced, the Council of Laodicea Can. 18.3. Conc. Carth.
c. 23. and Conc. Milev. c. 12. as if they gave the original to set forms of
Prayer, when they only established some sanctions concerning them. The
Laodicean Canon enjoineth the use of these services Morning and Evening. The
Canon of Carthage in one part of it requires that quascunque sibi preces
aliquis describit, whatsoever Prayers any one shall transcribe for himself, he
shall not use them till he has conferred with the understanding brethren. Now
tramcribing (properly here intended) supposes a form, and care is taken by
this Canon, that no Copy for the public use of the Church, (which could then
be only had by transcribing) should be received until it was carefully
examined. V. Medes Christian Sacr. Sec. 3.
The other part of that Canonrequireth, that at the Communion (where Christ's
offering up himself to the Father is commemorated) their Prayers should always
be directed to the Father. This does not suppose that there were no forms then
in use, but might well be intended either to put a stop to what was then
entering, or to regulate what was amiss in any of their set forms, especially
considering that in the vast territories of the Carthaginian jurisdiction,
various forms of Prayer were about that time used; some of which were composed
by Heretics, as is evident from S. Augustine, Cont. Don. l. 6. c. 25.
who was a member of that Council. The Canon of Milevis declares against the
use of any other forms, than those established by the Council: but we may as
well conclude from our Act of Uniformity, as from any of these Councils, that
it gave the first Original to forms of Prayer, because they are thereby
established. And thus having viewed these chief objections, I may well conclude
that the evidence for the great antiquity of set forms remains inviolable.

9. The argument against the lawfulness of set forms, because they limit the
use of gifts, needs not much consideration; since it is manifest, that by the
will of God, bounds and limits were to be set even to the use of the
extraordinary gifts of Gods spirit, that the Church might be edifyed. 1 Cor.
14.26, 27, 28, 30, 33. Whereas now no such miraculous emanation of the Holy
Ghost can be pretended; nor does the establishing a form for the public
Offices of the Church deny the liberty in due place of using other Prayers,
according to the practice of our and the ancient Church.

10. It is further objected, that forms of Prayer are disadvantageous to piety
and devotion, and the Non-Conformists often plead experience as a testimony, that
they are the cause of much deadness in men's spirits, and the hindrance of the
lively exercise of Religion. Here on the other hand, others by experience
assert the advantage of set forms to promote devotion, when attended without
prejudice, and with a Religious design of joining in Gods worship. To discern
the truth in this difference, it may be useful to consult the judgment of such
persons as are least partial in this Case, and yet are able to make a true
estimate of damage or advantage; and then especially to consider the evidence
of reason which may be produced.

11. The Leyden Professors declare concerning set forms, Synopl. Purior. Theol.
Disp. 36. Sect. 33.
non tantum licitas sed and valde u^^les esse contendimus, We defend against
any persons that they are not only lawful, but exceedingly advantageous and
this they assert not only because every Christian cannot fitly conceive new
Prayers upon every occasion, but because in great Assemblies, attentio
auditorum per usitatas formulas non parum juvatur, the attentiveness of the
hearers is not a little helped forward by usual forms. Consid. Contr. Ang. c.
7. q. 2.
The Walachrian Classis of Zealand, do in like manner declare public forms to
be lawful, and profitable for the helping and directing the attention of the
auditors, and the preserving Uniformity: and that in good forms of Prayer,
Christians may pray with a humble sense of their wants, with holy affection,
desire, zeal, faith, and a Religious acting of the heart to God, suitable to
their own cases, nobis expertis certissimum est, is a thing (say they) most
certain to us who have experienced it.

12. But the surest way of trial, whereby forms of Prayer may be manifested to
bring no disadvantage to the Church of themselves, is from considering several
arguments to that purpose, as 1. because (as I have showed) God himself
prescribed a constant form of Prayer for the Jewish Offerings, and a form of
Priestly blessing; and our Savior directed the Lords Prayer as a form, and
presented a form of words for the administering Baptism: but it must be at the
least a great misapprehension and sin, to think that the holy God and our
blessed Savior, should command and enjoin what is of its own nature a
hindrance to godliness, Piety and true Religion, and a disadvantage to the
Church. De Orat. Dom.
S. Cyprian said well, what Prayer can be more spiritual than that which was
given to us by Christ, by whom the holy Spirit himself was sent? 2. Because it
is generally acknowledged that the singing Psalms of Prayer or praise, may be
advantageously performed in a set form of words, and the holy Scriptures are
not the less edifying nor the less applicable to our selves because they are
contained in a set form of words, and both in reading the Scriptures and in
Prayer our hearts ought to be religiously moved toward God though in somewhat
a different manner. 3. Because all the ages of the Christian Church from the
first Centuries, have used them as an advantage to Religion; and it is not at
all probable, that such excellently devout and judicious men, as the fourth and
fifth Centuries abounded with, should be so stupid and dull spirited, as not
any of them to discern between the helps and hindrances of religious devotion,
in matters of most ordinary practice. Wherefore though many men's minds may be
most pleased and delighted with variety of expression, there is no prejudice to
piety from a set form, further than this is caused by prejudice against such a
form, or by want of a Religious temper to join in it. Here I shall note what
Mr. Baxter observes (though he yield not so much use of forms as I plead for.)
He says, Disp. of Liturgy Prop. 10.
the constant disuse of forms is apt to breed a giddiness in Religion, and it
may make men Hypocrites, who shall delude themselves with conceits that they
delight in God, when it is but in these novelties, and varieties of expression
that they are delighted: and therefore he advises forms to fix Christians and
make them sound. And the arguments in the foregoing Section do evidence the
benefits of their constant use.

SECT. III.
Of the manner of composing the Prayers in our Liturgy; chiefly of Responsals
and short Prayers.
1. Coming now to a particular consideration of that form of Prayer enjoined in
this Church, I shall wave such things where the force and matter of the
objections is cut of, by the alterations authoritatively made in the new
establishment of our Liturgy; and beginning with the Prayers themselves in the
daily service, there are two things especially to be treated of concerning
their general frame and contexture. The first is that the people are required
to bear a part in this service, not only in that they are by voice to join in
the Confession and Doxology, but that several Petitions are required to be
expressed, by the united voice of all the Assembly. This is condemned by the
Non-Conformists, Except of Presbyter p. 4.
who say that the Minister is appointed for the people, in all public services
appertaining to God, and that the people hereby seem to invade that sacred
office; the Scriptures making the Minister the mouth of the people to God in
Prayer, and intimating the peoples part to be only to say, Amen.

2. But since our Savior condemns the teaching, or receiving for doctrines
the commandments of men; we may not embrace that as a Scripture doctrine, where
the Scripture delivers no such thing. Indeed under the law there was a
special command of God, that whatever legal Sacrifices were offered to him
(some few extraordinary cases only excepted) that service was to be performed
by the hand of the Priest; but there is no constitution under the Gospel, that
spiritual Sacrifices of Prayer, thanksgiving, or the expression of a contrite
broken heart, may be offered up to God in no other way than by the mouth of a
Minister, though it be in a public Assembly. And what they assert is
(sufficiently to other men's understandings) contradicted by themselves, who
allow the people liberty by their voices to join in singing those Psalms which
contain both Prayers, praises, and Confessions.

3. The truth is, all such Prayers as have particular reference to the
Consecration, and Administration of the Sacraments, and to the Ministerial
absolution and benediction, ought to be performed by the Minister alone (though
it be in a private place, and upon a particular occasion) because these things
enclude the power of the Keys. But as for others the rules of order and
edification will direct, that Prayers and Confessions which are considerably
long should be expressed by one, that the rest may the better understand and
join in them; and the authority of the Ecclesiastical office, and its order and
degree in the Church, will require this to be performed by some in the
Ministry. For this we have the examples of the Scripture times, to which
agrees the practice of the following ages; De Eccles. Dogm. c. 30.
and the author under S. Aug. name says, that those who are of authority in
the Church, tota fere Ecclesia secum congemiscente postulant and precantur, do
put up their requests and Prayers almost all the Church joining with their
sighs and groans. Yet this practice does no way disallow the peoples vocal
joining, in short Ejaculations or in other generally known Petitions, since
this may be of good use to unite their affections more firmly, to quicken their
minds into a greater fervency, and to fix their spirits in a more diligent
attending to the service they are about, and more particularly to express their
joining therein, whereby they may both incite others, and use their tongues as
instruments of Gods glory.

4. Indeed S. Paul speaks of him who occupies the room of the unlearned,
saying Amen, at their blessing or giving of thanks. 1. Cor. 14.16. But the very
phrase of blessing and giving of thanks, makes it probable that this Text is to
be understood as Mr. Thorndike expounds it, of the Consecration of the
Communion. And at that time the people did ordinarily answer Amen, and nothing
more, as appears from the early testimonies of Justin Martyr, and Dionysius
Bishop of Alexandria. 2. But if this sense be not admitted, this Text of the
Apostle does neither mention, nor in the context more nearly refer to Prayer
than to singing, in which latter the peoples bare saying Amen is not contended
for, nor allowed as a constant rule for the Churches practice, though it was
probable the usual method in the Christian Assemblies in those Apostolical
days, when the duty of singing was performed by the immediate inspiration of
the spirit, upon some particular persons: and that these extraordinary motions
of Gods spirit in those times, were only vouchsafed to the Clergy or Ministry,
is not probable from the contents of that very Chapter. And therefore this
place of Scripture does not confine the whole vocal service of God (excepting
an Amen) to the Ministry, the people being altogether debarred and excluded.

5. But that all the servants of God may allowably be interested, (where the
due rules of order and edification are observed) in the outward joint
expression of praise and Prayer to God, is very agreeable to the holy
Scriptures, where the holy Angels are represented to cry one to another and
say, Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of Hosts, the whole Earth is full of his
glory, Is 6.3. and all Israel praised God and said, For he is good; for his
mercy endures for ever. 2. Chr. 7.3. And as S. Paul exhorts that with one
mind and one mouth Christians should glorify God. Romans 15.6. S. John in his
Vision beheld and heard the four living things, the Elders, the Angels, and
every Creature in Heaven and Earth, expressing blessing, honor, glory and
power unto God. Rev. 4.8. -- 11. Chapter 5, 8. -- 14. and a great multitude whom no
man could number, crying with a loud voice and saying, Salvation to our God,
which sits upon the throne, and to the Lamb. Rev. 7, 9, 10. and he heard
also the voice of the 144000. who were with the Lamb on Mount Sion, as the
voice of many Waters, and as the voice of a great thunder, singing a new Song.
Rev. 14.1, 2, 3. and these places last mentioned are the more considerable,
because they contain representative Visions, of the service acceptably
performed to God in the Christian Church.

6. If we consult Ecclesiastical practice, there is very probable evidence,
that under the Old Testament the people did vocally join by responsals, in the
ordinary service of God, in the Sanctuary and Synagogues. V. Hor. Hebr. in Mat.
6.13.
Both the Joma and other Tracts of the Talmud, mention the people in the period
of their Prayers, expressing (...) etc. Blessed be the name of the glory of his
Kingdom for ever and ever. In Chapter Par. in Deuteronomy. 10.16.
And the particular responsals used by the Jews at Circumcision, are expressed
by Fagius. The use of alternate singing among the Essens is sufficiently known,
but that this was of very ancient use in the Jewish Church, is very likely,
because the word (...) which properly signifies to answer, is an usual
expression of singing even in the holy Scriptures. And there appears
considerable evidence, from Ex. 15. v. 1. and v. 20. that that Song of Moses
and the Children of Israel, Phil. de Vit. Mos. l. 3.
was uttered as Philo Judaeus averreth, (...) with responsal melodies
alternately repeated.

7. In the Christian Church, the Original of the Antiphona, or the alternate
singing of Hymns by two quires, is ascribed by Socrates to Ignatius; the like
use of David's Psalms is declared by Theodoret, to have had its beginning at
Antioch from Flavianus and Diodorus. Their Original in the Latin Church is
referred by Platina to Damaseus, and by Walafridus Strabo to S. Ambrose: Is.
Hisp. de Eccl. Offic. l. 1. c. 7, 8.
but both Isidorus Hispalensis, and Rabanus Maurus, do testify that long
before this, the Responsoria wherein the whole Quire answered to one Man, Rab.
Maur. de Inst. Cler. l. 2. c. 50, 51.
were known by that name and used in the Latin Church. And sometimes the whole
Assembly joined in their Hymns and Psalms, sometimes they were sung by one
alone all the rest joining to echo forth the (...) or end of the Hymn, Conc.
Laod. c. 15:
and by the Laodicean Council the wholly Assembly were not allowed to join in
their public singing, which was required to be performed by the appointed
singers only. Thus the Ecclesiastical practice has varied, according to what
was thought prudent and convenient.

8. Concerning Prayers and Confessions, S. Basil declares it to have been in
his time the ordinary practice of diverse Eastern Churches, Bas. Ep. 63.
that every man by his own words did profess repentance, and make confession.
Naz. Or. 3.
And Gr. Nazianzene acquainteth quainteth us that Julian in imitation of the
Christians did appoint amongst the Gentiles (...) a form of Prayer to be said
in parts, or by way of Responsals. Hierom also relates, that populus cum
sacerdote loquitur in precibus, the people did speak with the Priest in the
Prayers; and Gregory the great notes, Gr. Ep. l. 7. c. 63.
that in the Greek Church the Lords Prayer was ordinarily said by all the
people together: and as anciently as we can meet with any parcels of Liturgy or
particular Offices, the use of responsals may be easily discerned, even as far
as S. Cyprians sursum Corda, and Habemus ad Dominum. Wherefore the use of
responsals, and the people joining in some expressions in the public service
of god, was a thing thought useful by the ancient Church, as well as by our
own, and is allowable by the rules of the Scripture, and the Order of the
public worship of God: and whosoever assert that the vocal joining of the
people, in any expressions of Prayer, in the public Assembly, is as Vzziahs
action was, an intrenching upon the Priests Office; does set up such Bars about
the service of God, which do keep Gods people at a greater distance from the
throne of Grace, than the nature and privilege of Christian liberty will
allow. Yet the composing or directing particular Prayers for the public use of
Christian Assemblies, is the proper work of the Church Officers who are to be
the guides thereof; as also teaching and instructing (being an act of
authority) does ordinarily belong to the Ministers of the Church: and this is
that speaking which is forbidden to Women in the Church, because it is an act
of authority, 1. Cor. 15.34. 1. Tim. 2.12. Whereas the joint expressing some
words of confession or supplication, is wholly an act of humility, and is not
forbidden by those places of S. Paul, which purposely provide, that women may
not usurp authority over the man, but be under obedience.

9. The next thing to be considered in the composure of our public service,
is, that it does not contain one continued Prayer only, for a particular
Office, which God has no where commanded, but several short Prayers which he
has no where forbidden. This has been thought by many considering and
Religious men, to be advantageous, for the quickening our affections and pious
desires toward God, and for preserving the mind from deadness and dullness. But
the shortness of these Prayers were censured formerly by the Non-Conformists,
to be short cuts and shreadings, and of late was styled by the Presbyterians,
an affected empty tossing Gods name in men's mouths, vain repetition^ and and
tautologies, which are not the (...) but the worse because Gods name is (...)
the matter of them. Presbyter. Papers p. 47, 48.
But surely (...) expressions, whereby they indulge themselves to make sport
with Religious ^^rvice, is not a thing well becoming so^^^r men and Christians;
and is so much the worse when they thereby cast reproach, even upon the devout
using the holy name of God in pious addresses to him. It is an easy thing for
the vain fancies of men, if they be not more Christianly principled, to make
use of scornful and deriding speeches, concerning any method of service
whatsoever, and indeed concerning any good thing: the effect of which would be
to bring contempt upon Religion and dishonor to him whom it should be our
endeavor to glorify.

10. But if we consider soberly; the main difference between the use of one
continued long Prayer, and diverse short ones to the same purpose, is this, that
in these short Prayers the name and attributes of God are more frequently
mentioned in the beginning, as the ground of our adoration and dependence; and
the merits of Christ are often mentioned in the end thereof, as the only way
and means of our access to God, and obtaining grace and help from him; with a
more frequent saying Amen, as an expression of confidence and joint consent in
these Prayers. Since therefore the serious sense of God, and an application to
him, and confidence in him, with an eye to the merits of Christ, ought to take
place in our minds throughout every petition in our Prayer; I cannot see how
the vocal expressing them if solemnly performed, and not beyond what is decent
and convenient, can possibly fall under any just censure, unless it could be
sinful to express that with the mouth in public service, which is both pious
and requisite to be conceived in the heart: especially since it cannot be
denied, but that God is honored by us if we think of him frequently, provided
it be also piously; and no imaginable account can be given, why he should not
be also honored by us when we often express his name in Religious invocation of
him, but not without a due gravity, reverent devoutness, and pious affection.

11. Indeed our Savior condemns battology or vain repetitions, where they
think to be heard for their much speaking. Mat. 6.7. which is, when true
Religion is neglected, and confidence placed in the sound and multitude of
words; as the Worshippers of Baal cried from Morning to Noon saying, O Baal
hear us. 1. Kin. 18.26. But the expressing our application to God and
dependence upon Christ for several distinct blessings in the Liturgy, is not a
repetition of the same sense but of that which is different: and yet where the
very same words and sense are piously repeated, this is as far from the vain
repetition our Savior condemned, as vanity is from Piety. Such repetitions
were frequently practiced by the Psalmist, and our Savior himself praying
thrice in a very short distance of time, did use the same words as the
Evangelists relate. Mar. 14.39. Mat. 26.44. And it is very observable, that
these repeated Prayers were the Prayers of his agony, when he prayed more
earnestly as is manifest from Luke 22.42, 43, 44. and with special reference to
these Prayers, the Apostle declares, that in the days of his flesh, he offered
up Prayers and Supplications, with strong cries and tears, unto him who was
able to save him from death. Heb. 5.7. So that affectionate repetitions are no
vain repetitions. And this may be sufficient to justify the repeated use of
the Lords Prayer, both before the use of the Psalms, Hymns, Scriptures and
Creed, and after them in the daily service, as also in the deprecatory Prayers
of the Litany, and in other particular Offices appointed.

12. But it is objected, Pr. Pap. ibid. Presbyt. Excep. p. 9.
that we have in Scripture some examples of the supplications of holy men,
where they are not composed of several distinct short Prayers, but the whole
matter of their address is comprised in one entire one. But here it is to be
considered, 1. That there is as much or more reason to admit, that it is our
necessary duty to observe no other method in Preaching, then what was used by
the Prophets and Apostle, some of whose Sermons are probably extant in the
Scriptures, as they were delivered to the Jewish and Christian Assemblies; as
there is to conclude that the method of our public Prayers must be conformable
to the Prayers of some holy men in Scripture, though we have probably no one
Prayer comprised in the Scriptures, which was the entire service of the Jewish
or Christian public Assemblies at that time. But the Non-Conformists
themselves do not judge themselves obliged to follow the method of the Apostles
Sermons, who ordinarily took no texts, and usually made a continued discourse,
without dividing it into first and secondly. 2. Diverse Prayers recorded in the
holy Scriptures, which were either directed for the use of, or declared to have
been used in their public Assemblies, were short Prayers, such besides the
Lords Prayer, was the Prayer of Hezekiah referring to the Passover. 2. Chr.
30.18, 19. the Prayer of humiliation directed for the Temple service, Joel,
2.17, 18. and that of Hos. 14.2, 3. and the time of these solemnities being
considered, it cannot in reason be doubted, but that they used other Prayers
besides these, at the same time. 3. That the Psalms of David were of ordinary
use among the Jews as Hymns of praise, is acknowledged by the Jewish Writers,
and is declared 2. Chr. 29.30. and that diverse Psalms were used one after
another, at the Passover and other Temple services is generally owned, but why
should not the beginning one Psalm after another be as much disliked, as the
beginning one Prayer after another? 4. There are some examples in the
Scripture, of one Prayer following another, in the same service of God and
supplication to him. So besides the Prayers in our Saviors agony
abovementioned, Solomon at the Dedication of the Temple, immediately after the
end of one Prayer upon his knees, 1. Kin. 8.54. begins another Prayer of
benediction standing, v. 56, 57. and when the Gospel service was represented by
a Vision of Angels, Elders, and other Creatures, Rev. 4.8, 11. Chapter 5.9, 12, 13,
14. Chapter 7, 10, 12. the worship of God was not there expressed in one continued
Prayer, but in several distinct short expressions of adoration. 5. No rule of
Religion declares any particular method of Prayer to recommend us to Gods
acceptance and blessing, which is done by inward grace and piety which is not
tied to a certain model of expression.

13. It has been also objected, that it would be unseemly and imprudent, for
any man who petitioneth a great King, diverse times to begin and end and then
begin again, and therefore this is not to be allowed in our address to God by
that rule, Mal. 1.8. Offer it now unto thy Governor. But 1. the expressing
diverse Prayers one after another, is not to begin and end but to continue in
Prayer. 2. Nor is there any indecorum, if he who is to speak to a King about
several matters, shall when he passes to a new head give the King some fit
honorable title. 3. And chiefly those words in Malachi do require, that that
respect and reverence which we are to express to God, must not be less, but
always greater than that which we give to any authority upon earth; but it no
way directs us to the same course in honoring and worshipping God, which we
use in giving respect to our Governor. It is most proper for a mean man who
would present a Petition to a King, not to attempt to come himself directly to
the King or the Prince, but to make some favorite who is also a mere subject
his friend to present his Petition; yet will not this plead for the Popish
address to God by Saints and Angels: and it would be accounted intolerable
impudence, if a subject should every day of his life twice, four times, or
seven times a day, come into his presence and prefer his suit to him in a great
measure to one and the same effect at all times; whilst this frequent practice
of supplication to God is a Religious devoutness. These things besides diverse
others manifest, that the measuring divine service and worship, by the standard
of any humane respect, in all the particulars of our address to God, is the way
to commit an error as great as from Earth to Heaven.

14. But besides this, if the ordinary practice of the Church of God be
considered, it may be of use to discover what has been accounted expedient, in
a matter where God has given no particular command. Buxt. Lex. Rab in (...)
Hor. Heb. in Mat. 6.9.
It has been observed by diverse learned men from both the Talmuds, that in and
before the time of our Savior the Jews had eighteen distinct Prayers,
appointed for ordinary daily use of them who were most devout, when they who
had not liberty to attend to them were to use the (...) or summary of them. And
the ordinary custom of celebrating the Jewish Passover, Idem in Mat. 26.26, 27.
did contain several distinct Prayers and benedictions: which is a practice
manifestly as ancient as the time of our Savior.

15. In the Christian Church the Liturgy framed by S. Chrysostom, Bax. Syn.
Jud. c. 13.
and before him that of S. Basil (though they have passed through cousiderable
changes) sufficiently appear to have been composed, after the manner of
distinct short Prayers: Bas. Ep. 63.
and S. Basil declares it to have been in his time the usual practice at
Caesaria, and diverse other Churches in the East, that even in the midst of
their Psalmody, or between their singing Psalms or Hymns, they did frequently
intermix Prayers, (...). And in the Latin Church the like use of short Prayers
is evident, from the composure of the Ambrosian and other very ancient Offices,
diverse of whose particular Prayers are collected, and exhibited in a distinct
Treatise by Cassander. Cass. Preces Ecclesiast.
These things (besidew what might be observed from Clemens his Constitutions,
and the Prayers used by the Brethren in Egypt, Aug. Ep. 121. c. 10.
which were very short as S. Augustine relates) do give considerable evidence
of the ancient practice of the Christian Church, and render it very probable
that the like methods of Prayer were used before the time of these Fathers,
because it is very unlikely, that a perfect new method and model of the service
of God, of a quite different nature from what was of former use amongst any
Christians, should about the same time be introduced into places so remote from
each other, as Italy, Cappadocia, Egypt, Syria and others. And as that
architect who disparageth a Fabric which himself cannot equal, does thereby
display his own imprudence; so it can be no part of wisdom, for persons in the
present age, to condemn the prudence of the ancient Christians, in ordering
their Religious service, when they were as well before us in the devoutness of
their Religious piety, as in time.

16. The last thing to be considered, concerning the composure of the Liturgy,
is, that it stands charged by some, who have greater regard to the serving an
interest than to truth, to be wholly Romish, and to be taken out of the Romish
Breviary Missal and their other Rituals. Whereas in truth the doctrine of no
Protestant Church differs so much from that of the Church of Rome, as the
model of our Liturgy does from their Mass and other Offices; where our
reformers have rejected all things that were corrupt or inconvenient in
themselves, which were very many, and have added much which was though
necessary or expedient, and have put the whole service into a different and
more regular frame. Indeed several pious Prayers (of which the Lords Prayer is
one) with some ancient and approved Hymns, and the Creed (besides Psalms and
Scriptures) which were by them used, are by us retained. And as for such
persons who assert, that every thing made use of in the Romish service though
never so innocent, ought to be rejected, V. Zanch. ad Arianum Resp. de
Antithes. Christi and Antichrist.
let them consider that upon this principle there were some who asserted it
necessary to disclaim our Creed, and renounce the doctrine of the Trinity,
beacuse it might not be acknowledged (said they) that the Romanists did retain
any true belief concerning God. And that strange design of rash rejecting those
things in Religion, (though useful and good) which they embrace, as it has
unchristianly engaged some to deny the Divinity of Christ; so if it be without
all bounds entertained, it may engage others impiously to disown the holy
Scriptures, and the true God: wherras our Caristian profession requires us to
prove (...) things, 1. These. 5.21.
and to hold fast that which is (...).

SECT. IV.
Of the Doxology, Athanasian Creed, and some particular expressions in the
Litany.
1. The frequent use of that Doxology, Glory be to the Father, etc. which is so
much disliked by some, is sufficiently vindicated from Battology, or a vain and
superstitious multiplying of words, in the foregoing Section. N. 11.
To which I shall here add these considerations. 1. That it seems
unreasonable and partial that they who allowed themselves in the conclusion of
their own Prayers, to use that Doxology, To whom (Christ) with the Father and
the Holy Ghost be Glory, frequently four or five times in the same Assembly,
should undertake to determine, Except. of Presbyt. p. 16.
that this other Doxology (more expressly acknowledging divine glory eternally
due to all the three persons of the Trinity) is unsit to be used more than once
in the Morning, and once in the Evening. 2. That since in all our Christian
service, and especially in Hymns and Psalms of praise, it is our duty to give
glory to the holy Trinity, it cannot be blamable to express that with our
mouths, which is at that time the most fit and proper exercise of our minds. 3.
That it is manifest from diverse passages of the Psalms, and other Scriptures,
as 2. Chr. 5.13. Chapter 7.3. Chapter 20.21. Ezr. 3.11. Jer. 33.11. That with their
Hymns or Psalms, the Jews ordinarily used some such Doxology as this,
Hallelujah or praise ye the Lord, for he is good, for his mercy endures for
ever. Delph. Phoenic. c. 6.
Hence it is probably conjectured that preparation to the Paeanism among the
Gentiles (...) or (...) had its original (being the corruption of Hallelujah.)
And from this use of the Jews the Arabian Church their Neighbors did probably
derive their practice, of expressing Hallelujah at the end of every Psalm, as
appears in the Arabic version of the psalms, who also make use of this
Doxology to the three persons distinctly, which is expressed in the
Arabickversion at the end of every tenth Psalm, but was probably in practice at
the end of every Psalm. And that the Western Church used this Doxology, Glory
be to the Father, Cassian Col. l. 1. c. 8.
and at the end of every Psalm we have the testimony of Cassian, for about
thirteen hundred years since. Wherefore since this is of so ancient original in
the Christian Church, so agreeable to the practice of the Jewish Church
approved by the Holy Scriptures, and a practice so reasonable in it self, it
may be piously used, but not justly blamed in our Liturgy.

2. The reading the Athanasian Creed, to some (though not the generality of
Non-Conformists) who heartily own the doctrine of the Trinity, has been
thought a matter not free from difficulty. For that Creed expressing, what must
be believed of every one who would be saved, does contain deep mysteries (as
for instance.) that the Son is not made nor created but begotten, and that the
Holy Ghost is neither made nor created nor begotten, but proceeding. Now since
believing things as necessary to Salvation, is not an assent to the use of
Phrases and expressions, but to the sense contained in them, it must enclude
that there is some difference understood between what is affirmed and what is
denied. But the difference between the Eternal Generation, and Eternal
Procession, being a Mystery where the greatest Divines see but darkly, they are
justly afraid to condemn all persons as incapable of Salvation, who cannot
reach to so high a pitch.

3. But here it is to be considered, that in that Creed commonly called the
Athanasian, there are some things contained and expressed as necessary points
of Faith; and other things for a more clear and useful explication of the
truth, though they be not of equal necessity to be understood, adn believed
even by the meanest capacities. Thus if we first consider the contexture of
that Creed, the Faith declared necessary concerning the Trinity, is thus
expressed in the beginning thereof, The Catholic Faith is this, that we worship
one God in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity, neither confounding the persons, nor
dividing the substance. After this follows an explication, useful to set
forth the true Christian Doctrine, which begins, For there is one person of
the Father, etc. after which explication, the same necessary doctine to be
known and believed, is thus again expressed pressed, and distinguished from
that explication in these words, So that in all things as is aforesaid, the
Unity in Trinity, and Trinity in Unity is to be worshipped, he therefore who
will be saved must thus think of the Trinity. So that the acknowledging and
worshipping the Trinity of persons, and Unity of Godhead, is that which only is
declared necessary in the former part of that Creed; and this must be
acknowledged necessary, since we are baptized into the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, and we must believe and worship according as we are
baptized.

4. What is contained in this consideration is the more clear (both with
reference to the instance mentioned, and to the Union of the two natures in
Christ,) by this following observation: viz. That our Church does both here and
in her Articles, evidently receive the Athanasian Creed: and yet from the
manner of using the Apostles Creed, in the form of Baptisin, as containing the
profession of that Faith into which we are baptized; in the Catechism as
containing all the Articles of the Christian Faith; and in the Visitation of
the sick, as being a rule to try whether he believe as a Christian man should
or not; it is manifest that no more is esteemed in our Church, of necessity to
salvation for all men to believe, than that only which is contained and
expressed in the Apostles Creed.

5. I proceed to consider some expressions in the Litany. In the way to which I
shall only reflect upon that objection, (which if it had not been mistaken had
been very inconsiderable) framed by Mr. Cartwright against the Litany in
General; That it being chiefly a deprecatory Prayer against evils was framed by
Mamertus Bishop of Vienna (or rather Vienne in France) upon a special occasion
of the calamities of that Country. This was a very strange and gross mistake,
for the Litaniae which were ordered by Mamertus were days of supplication in
Rogation Week, which days were called Litania minor, triduanae Litaniae, and by
some Litania major, Alcuin de Div. offic. Tit. dieb. Rogat. Amal. de Eccl.
Offic. l. 1. c. 37. Stra. de Reb. Eccl. c. 28. Mur. c. 57.
as is manifest from Aleuinus, Amalarius, Strabo, Mictologus, Rupertus
Tintiensis, Johannes Beleth; besides other latter ritualists, and the French
Historians especially Gregorius Turonensis, who all mention what Mamertus did,
in appointing days of Prayer, which were called Litaniae, to be yearly
observed, for the obtaining Gods mercy in their distress, occasioned by wild
Beasts and frequent Earthquakes. But that deprecatory Prayers which are called
Litanies also, and were so called by S. Basil, and were of so great use in the
stationary days of the ancient Church, should have their original from
Mimertus, who lived many hundred years after, is a notion built upon no other
foundation, but the manifest mis-apprehending the sense of that word Litania.

6. Amongst the particular expressions in the Litany, disliked by many
Non-Conformists the first is where we pray to be delivered from fornication,
and all other deadly sin. But the phrase of deadly sin is sufficiently
warranted from these places of Scripture, Romans 6.23. the wages of sin is death.
Jam. 1.15. Sin when it has conceived brings forth death. Jam. 3.8. The
tongue is full of deadly poison. And the sense of this phrase in this place is
this, that we here pray to be kept from all such sins as are most destructive
and pernicious (which is all one with deadly) and to be delivered from all sin
(the nature of all fin encluding a tendency to death) and this extensive sense
of this phrase, is both suitable to the pious desires of a Christian, and
agreeable to the comprehensiveness of the following words, From all the deceits
of the World, the flesh and the Devil, Good Lord deliver us.

7. That Petition against sudden death, has also been much excepted against,
and Drusius seemed to have an eye to this, Drus. in Job. 21.13.
writing upon that expression in Job, concerning the wicked, They spend their
days in wealth, and in a moment go down to the grave; that is (says he) they
dye cita morte quam aliqui deprecantur, sed viderint an recte. But if that
learned man had any design from this text to censure this Prayer of our
Liturgy, he has greatly miscarried in his attempt. For if he with others be
right in the exposition of that phrase (which may well be understood that the
life of the wicked was so prosperous, that it seemed not to them tedious and
long) I say if his sense be embraced, these words cannot be allowed to contain
such blessings, as were really advantageous to the wicked, and truly desirable
for him; but only such things at the best, as appeared good to them who have
their eye no farther than the things of this life; unless his being in a moment
cut off from all hopes of the time of grace and repentance, could be a blessing.

8. I doubt not but the intent of praying against sudden death, is this, that
whereas many dangers might daily surprise us, and by a sudden stroke end our
lives, if divine providence did not protect us, we here commit our selves to
Gods keeping, to be preserved by his care from such judgments and dangers. And
such a sudden death is a dreadful estate to the wicked, and to dye as Josiah or
Vzzah did, is not desirable to the most holy and pious men, who according to
the example of Jacob, David, and our blessed Savior himself, by their holy
instructions at the time of their death, may become useful for the bettering
the lives of them who survive.

9. But they tell us, there may be sudden death in a lawful War or Martyrdom,
To which I answer. 1. That sudden unexpected death is chiefly intended in this
Prayer, and in this sense Martyrdom is not always a sudden death. 2. That the
example of our Savior, who prayed with submission to his Fathers will, that
that Cup might pass from him, will warrant the like submissive Prayer in any of
his Disciples. 3. And chiefly it is upon diverse accounts both lawful and fit,
to pray that we may not be suddenly taken away, either by Martyrdom or War. For
though Christianity tends to prepare men to be willing and ready, upon just
occasions to hazard or lay down their lives; yet touching Martyrdom, true
Christian charity toward all men, and sincere love to the Church of God, will
direct us to pray, that the truth of God may ever be so countenanced in the
World (if God see it good) and especially amongst us, that the Church of God
may be free from persecution, and that none in the World may be so wicked, as
to oppose Religion, with design to take away the lives of its Professors; and
that the true members of the Church of God may be preserved from such cruelties
as were exercised in diverse horrid measures, and were designed in the
Gunpowder-treason. And so far as concerns sudden death in lawful Wars, the
peaceableness of the doctrine of Christianity, will not only allow bt excite us
to pray, that righteousness and love may so far prevail in the World, that none
may through any injustice, pride, or inordinate affections promote Wars, and
that Swords may be turned into Plow-shares rather than sheathed in one another
bowels.

10. However to be preserved in the day of Battle, is a mercy which as it
deserves thankful acknowledgment when enjoyed, so it may without all blame be
desired with submission to the divine will, to which purpose there are diverse
passages in the Book of Psalms. If we further consider the state of the most
pious man even upon his own account; it is acknowledged that it is not
considerable ferrum an febris de corpore solverit as S. Aug. expresses it,
Aug. Ep. 122.
whether he die in his bed or be slain in the field: yet even so holy a man as
S. Austen himself was, did both value and make good use of the time of his
sensibly approaching death, that he might be found well doing, Posid. in Vit.
Aug. c. 31.
and be the better prepared to die, by affectionate renewing the exercise of
repentance, humble confession, and lively faith. But in short, to return to the
proper and direct sense of this Petition in the Litany, let that man alone who
judges it unfit to commit himself to the protection of God; to be preserved
from dangers which may assault his life, condemn and reject this petition
against sudden death.

11. Another Petition which meets with opposition, is this, Fap. ^ Com. (...).
That it may please thee to preserve all that travel by land or by water: for
this is supposed to enclude the praying for Thieves and Robbers, and Pirates
and Traitors going on such errands as Faux did. But this objection is a violent
detorting these words; for he is properly a traveller who goes upon his
allowable or ordinary occasions. If the meanest man in the Country should hear
of an Act of Parliament, for secureing the safe passage of all travelers, he
would never thence conclude, that they intended or provided for the safety of
Robbers, Highway-men and Traitors, who are the great disturbers of safety.
Might not the instances objected be alleged against S. Paul, commanding that
Prayer be made for all men? and against the Geneva form, Prec. Eccl. Genev.
post Conc. and in Ca. Dom.
commending to Gods care, singulos etiam homines, all particular men in prison,
banishment, etc. as well as against this Phrase in the Litany? especially if
that comprehensive sense be allowed in this Petition, which charity will admit,
that God would not only preserve the bodies of them that travel from outward
danger, but their souls also from sin and their whole man from destruction. And
in this sense if this Petition should be supposed to enclude (which in the
proper sense of the words it does not) even Traitors and Robbers, can we be
blamed to pray even for them that God would preserve them from further sin and
so keep them that they may have time and grace for repentance, and that thereby
they may be preserved from eternal destruction, (according to Mat. 5.44.)

12. That Petition that God would have mercy upon all men, is condemned by
some, but is certainly commanded by S. Paul, requiring us to make Prayers for
all men: for nothing can be prayed for, which does not enclude Gods mercy. But
such light objections, which are easily made against the best words, that the
wisdom and piety of man can devise, I think not worthy the further naming, but
shall now proceed to some other matters of greater moment.

SECT. V.
Considerations concerning the public reading Apocryphal Chapters.
1. The reading the Apocryphal Chapters in our Church, has been severely
censured, as if it was a forsaking the holy Scriptures which are the waters of
life, to drink of other unwholsom streams: but that this matter may be rightly
understood, without prejudice or mistake, it will be requistie to take notice
of these following considerations.

2. Cons. 1. The excellent authority of the Canonical Books of Holy Scripture,
as they are distinguished from the Apocryphal, is fully and clearly
acknowledged by this Church in her Articles, Art. 6.
where it declares concerning the Apocryphal Books, that the Church ( as S.
Hierome says) does read them for example of life, and instruction of manners;
but yet does it not apply them to establish any doctrine: which Article plainly
disclaimeth them from being accounted Canonical Books of the Holy Scripture.
That the Jews do not own these Books as any part of the Old Testament, is
manifest from their Bibles which contain them not, and the particular evidences
from the Jewish Rabbis, against every one of those seven Books of the
Apocrypha, which are forged to be Canonical by the Council of Trent, are some
of them exhibited by Hollinger. These. Phil. l. 2. c. 2. Sect. 1.
And that neither the ancient Church of the Jews before the destruction of
Jerusalem, nor Christ and his Apostles, nor the several Ages of the Christian
Church till some late Romish Councils, did acknowledge or make use of these
Books as Canonical, is solidly and learnedly evidenced by the Bishop of Durham,
Schol. Hist. of Can. of Scripture throughout.
with reference to the sixth Article of this Church. Wherefore though it would
be injurious to the holy Scriptures, that any other Books which are not of
divine inspiration, should be accounted of equal authority with them; yet it is
far from being a dishonor either to them, or to they holy Spirit who indicted
them, if either these Apocryphal or any other good Books, be esteemed useful
and profitable, and acknowledged to contain things that are true and good.

3. Cons. 2. It was can usual practice in the ancient Christian Church, that
some of these Apocryphal Books, and other good writings besides the holy
Scriptures, were publicly read, as instructive Lessons in their Assemblies,
but with such variation as the prudence of every Church thought meet. In the
second Century, both the Fpistle of Clemens (...) according to the then ancient
Custom, In Eus. Hist. l. 4. c. (...).
and some other Ecclesiastical Epistles were publicly read even on the Lords
days, for their instruction, as Dionysius of Corinth testifies. And in
Euscbius his time as well as before it, Ibid. l. 3. c. 15.
was the Epistle of Clemens publicly read (...) in the greatest number of
Churches. Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 22. c. 8. Hom. de Sanct. de S. Steph. Ser. 7.
In the African Church in S. Augustins time, the Histories of the passions of
Martyrs, (v. Hom. 26. inter 50.) and accounts of miraculous works by the
efficacy of Christian Prayer, were read in their Churches, which Custom though
it was very pious in the beginning, was at last intolerably abused to the
bringing in legend stories. And more particularly the public reading several
Apocryphal Books; as Wisdom, Ecclesiasticus, Tobit, Judith and the Maccabees,
was ordered in one of the Carthaginian Councils in S. Augustins time, 3. Carth.
c. 47. Cont. Carth. c. 27.
and that Canon was taken into their Code; and besides what S. Hierom often
speaks of these Books being read in the Church, (but distinguished from their
Canon) Ruffinus his contemporary, who was first his friend, and then his
adversary, having given first an acount of the Canonical Books, proceeds to
these Books which he says are not Canonical but Ecclesiastical, Ruff. in Symb.
as Ecclesiasticus, Wisdom, Tobit, Judith, etc. and declares the judgment of
the ancient Fathers before his time concerning them, quae omnia legi quidem in
Ecclesiis voluerunt, sed non proferri ad auctoritatem ex his fidei
confirmandam, that they would have them all to be read in the Churches, but not
to be produced as of authority to confirm any matters of Faith. And that in
after Ages these Books were read in the Church, Isid. de Eccl. off. l. 1. c.
11, 12. Rab. de Inst. Cler. l. 2. c. 53.
is evident from Isidonss Hispalensis, and in the very same words from Rabanus
Maurus, and might be showed from very many others, if that was needful.

4. Cons. 3. These Books called the Apocrypha have been greatly esteemed, both
in the ancient Church, and by the chief Protestant Writers, as very useful
(though not divine) writings. Diverse of the ancients have cited them under the
title of the holy Scripture using that Phrase in so great a latitude, as to
signify only holy writings though not divinely inspired. The Council of
Carthage abovenamed does there call them Canenical Books, as does also S.
Augustine who was in that Council; De Doct. Christ. lib. 2. c. 8.
using the word Canonical in a large sense: for it is manifest from that and
diverse places of S. Aug. that they were not esteemed of equal authority, with
those Books properly called. Canonical. And therefore Cajetan for the
interpretation of the right sense of there words, Caj. Com. in Esth. in fin.
has well declared concerning these Books, Non sunt Canonici i. e. regulares
ad firmandum ea quae sunt fidei; possunt tamen dici Canonici hoc est regulares
ad aedificationem fidelium, or they are not Canonical as containing a rule to
direct our faith an belief, though they may sometimes be called Canonical as
containing rules to better our lives. In the Greek Church, where they were not
(at least so much) publicly read as in the Latin, they were accounted useful
for instruction, as appears (besides the Citations of the Greek Fathers) from
that very Epistle of Athanasius, Fragm. Epist. 39. in Tom. 2. Athanas.
where he purposely declares them to be no part of the Canon of Scripture. And
amongst the Protestants Dr. Reinolds who wrote so largely against the authority
of the Apocrypha Books, Censura de Lib. Apocr. Prael. 7.
in his Censura, yet in one of his Praetections declares of some of them,
chiefly Ecclesiasticus and Wisdom, valde bonos and utiles esse and omnibus
tractationibus praeferendos, that they are exceeding good and profitable, and
to be preferred before all Treatises of other Writers, Prael. 74.
and in another Praelection expressing his judgment of the same Books, says,
proximum illis locum deberi post scripturam sacram, that they ought to have the
next place after the holy Scripture; in the former of which expressions, he
follows the steps of S. Aug. de praedestin. Sanctorum. Exam. post. 1. de
Scrip. Can.
And Chemnititus allows them to be Books, quae a fidelibus in Ecclesiis
leguntur, Which are read in the Churches by the faithful, and non esse abjectos
and damnatos, that they are not condemned writings and off-casts, but may be
received in the number of the holy writings (or sacrae scripturae) sobeit they
be not reputed the Canon of Faith: and this says he we willingly both yield
and teach.

5. Cons. 4. And it is in this Case especially to be considered, that in our
Church no Apocryphal Chapter is appointed for any Lords Day throughout the
Year: not is any directed for any Holy Day, but only out of Wisdom and
Ecclesiasticus, which are Books of great esteem with all those who have well
considered them. And also upon those Weekdays when some Apocryphal Chapters
are read, there are always other Canonical Scriptures read likewise: Directory
of reading the holy Script.
whereas they who do oppose Conformity (so far as we may take the Directory for
their rule) did never appoint or direct any Scriptures, to be ordinarily and
publicly read upon any of these week days; but ordered that where the reading
on either Testament ends on one Lords day, it should begin on the next.
Wherefore it is to be well noted and observed, that our Church does not herein
differ from the dissenters, as if they did require the Canonical Scriptures to
be more frequently read in public than our Calendar appoints, but our
Calendar requires the Holy Scriptures to be much more frequently read in
public, (almost six Chapters for one besides the Epistles and Gospels) than
the Directory did; and besides them these Apocryphal Lessons for profitable
instruction.

6. But if any persons shall decry in the general, the hearing any thing in the
Church, besides the holy Scriptures of immediate infallible inspiration, this
would either from unadvisedness or from what is worse, reject and disown, to
the great disadvantage of Religion, the use of Sermons, Exhortations, and
Catechism. Nor is it any sufficient cause to condemn the reading Apocryphal
Chapters, because they are read as one of the Lessons: For our Church
manifestly declares these Lessons not to be Canonical Scripture; nor can any
command of God be produced, which either directly or by consequence, requires
that in every daily Assembly of Christians, there must be two Lessons read out
of the Canonical Scripture, or that none may be taken out of any other approved
Book. And it is manifest that the censuring this practice condemns diverse, if
not all the ancient Churches, before the decaying and degeneracy of the
Christian Profession. V. Bishop Durhams Schol. Hist. of Can. of Scrip. Sect. 60.
For though it be admitted that the Laodicean Council did appoint that none but
the Canonical Books should be read in the Church, and that Baruch and the
Epistle of Jeremy there mentioned are intended for parts of the Prophecy of
Jeremy, yet long before that did even the Greek Church read the Epistles of
Clemens, etc. above mentioned and the Book of Hermas. And it is not to be
wondered that there should be different practices observed in the Church, in
matters of order and liberty.

7. Cons. 5. Whereas this Church is the more blamed, for using some Apocryphal
Chapters, while some others acknowledged to be Canonical Scripture, are not
appointed to be read by the Calendar (which are mostly either some Prophecies
hard to be understood, or matters of Genealogy or Jewish Observations, or some
Histories for the mostpart expressed in other Scriptures appointed to be read)
it must be considered, that even hence it is evident that the Calendar was
never intended to be a Determination, or Declaration of what is Canonical
Scripture, and of certain divine authority, but only a direction for useful and
profitable reading. Nor was it the Custom of the ancient Christian Church,
Conc. Laod. c. 60.
that the Canon of the Scripture should be described by what was publicly
read: the rule of the Laodicean Council which comes nearest thereto, did not
direct the Revelation to be read. The ancient Jews who divided the Old
Testament into the Law, the Prophets, and the Hagiographa; Bux. Syn. Jud. c.
11. Salian Annal. Eccl. A. M. 3447. n. 16.
did for a long time only read the Law in the Synagogues, after which only a
Section of the Prophets was added: but that the Hagiograph^a (which included
all the Books from the beginning of the Chronicles to the end of the Canticles,
besides Ruth, Lamentations, and Daniel) were not read in the Jewish Synagogues,
Hor. Heb. in Joh. 4.15.
has been observed from the Talmudists: and this is agreeable to diverse
passages of the New Testament. Luke 4.16. Act. 13.15, 27 Act. 15.21. Yet Christ
and his Apostles blamed not the Jews but joined with them in this service.

8. Cons. 6. That which is objected from the matter of these Apocryphal
Chapters, which are appointed to be read, is not sufficient either to prove
them hurtful or not useful, as will appear from the following Section.

SECT. VI.
The Objections from the matter of the Apocrypha disoussed.
1. Among the particular Objections from the matter of these books.

Obj. 1. Judith, Susanna, Bell and the Dragon are thought to be sabulous,
because no certain time can be easily fixed for Judith, S. Hierome calls the
other susannae Belis and Draconis fabulas, Prol. in Dan. and Com. in Dan. 13.
and 14.
and Josephus makes no mention of them. But first, if these Books should be
admitted to be parabolical discourses, to express the great opposition of many
wicked men against God, and his Worship, the Vanity and Folly of their Pride
and evil designs, and the mighty protection that God can give to his people by
his Almighty Power, they might still be allowed to be of very considerable use.
The frequent use of Parabolical Instructions among the Jews, is both manifest
from their Talmudical Writers, and allowed by the practice of our Saviur. And
besides this, they had another Custom of Clothing real Histories under
different names which expressed a resemblance of the things intended: Targ. in
Cant. c. 6. v. 7, 8.
whence the Targum mentioning the expedition against Antiochus, speaks of him
under th ename of Alexander, and the Prophet speaks to the Jews under the
style of the Rulers of Sodom and the Elders of Gomorrha.

2. And secondly the Objection is not sufficient to disprove the Historical
truth of these Books, if we consider, 1. That the fixed time of the life of
Job, and the time to which diverse Prophecies refer is not easily determined,
which yet is no good argument against the truth of either: as it is a bad
argument against the credit of ancient History, either of our own or other
Nations, that it is hard to fix the situation of divets ancient places,
mentioned by names now unknown. 2. That both Josephus and other Historians, do
make no mention of diverse considerable things, which were certainly true, as
for Josephus, some of the Prophets, and the matter of diverse Canonical Books,
and some remarkable Histories, as particularly all that referred to the framing
the Golden Calf are omitted by him. 3. That the ancient Christians who had the
use of diverse ancient Jewish Writers, and other Histonary now lost, and had
thereby greater opportunity of searching into the Historical truth of these
things, did esteem them to be true Relations. Bell and the Dragon is cited as a
true Narration, containing an example for Martyrdom, and an instance of the
sureness of Gods provision for them that trust in him, by Irenaeus, Tertullian,
Clemens Alexandrinus, S. Cyprian and Gr. Nazianzen and diverse others. V. Lit.
African. in Crit. Sacr. Tom. 8. p. 46, 47.
And Origin particularly undertook the defense of the truth of the History of
Susanna in answer to the Letter of Africanus which contains the sum of all
the Objections against it, Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. (...).
which were fully and manifestly satisfied by Origin, says Eusebius. S.
Hierome also wrote a Comment upon Susanna and upon Bell, and declares Origin to
have written upon the same. And S. Hierome calling these fabulaes, uses that
word here as he does elsewhere (V. Epist. ad Castrutium) for true Narrations
which we also sometimes call stories; and these very things he particularly
acknowledges for truths. Apol. 2. ad Ruff. and Proleg. in Habbacuc. ad
Chromatium. And Judith is propounded as a true Narration and example of love to
her people or courage, by Hierome, Origin, Tertullian, Clemens Alexandrinus,
Clem. Ep. ad Corinth. p. 70.
and even by Clemens Romanus the Companion of St. Paul in that his undoubted
Epistle to the Corinthians. And these testimonies are the more considerable,
because several of these Writers, and particularly Tertullian, Clemens
Alexandrinus, Origin and Hierome, were men of great knowledge in all ancient
learning. Wherefore there is very considerable evidence that these relations
are true Histories, though it would be inconsiderable matter of Objection, if
they were acknowledged to be only Parables.

3. Obj. 2. Judith approves the fact of Simeon against the Sichemites, by
desiring the like assistance from God. Chapter 9. and spoke things untrue, Chapter 10.
v. 12, 13, 14. and Chapter 11. and yet she was commended highly, and blessed by
Joacim and the Elders. Ans. Both in these Books and even in the Canonical
Scriptures, we must distinguish between things Historically related, which are
many times evil; and the matters of precept and command which are always good.
The main design of this Book of Judith, being to show Gods wonderful Providence
in preserving his Church; diverse things are mentioned in the carriage of
Judith, which are neither to be allowed in her, nor imitated by us. And in the
Canonical Scriptures we read of good men uttering expressions in Prayer, which
were unadvised and blamerble; such were Elijahs intercession against Israel,
and both his and JOnah's passionate desire of Death. We also read of Jacob by
false speeches procuring his Fathers blessing, which were allowed by Rebecca;
and of the contrivance of Jacobs other Sons against Joseph, with their lying
devices to paliate their own sin, and of the like wiles which Jehu used to
destroy the Worshippers of Baal; and in some things both Jehu and Judith
deserved commendation, but in other things their practices (as the other now
mentioned and diverse more) are not examples for our imitation, but rather
warnings to us to take heed of the like miscarriages.

4. Obj. 3. From Tobit there are diverse things objected. (Of what is said
against any thing contained in the fifth Chapter, which is purposely left out
of our Calendar, I shall take no notice.) But Chapter 6.9, 10. The using the heart
and liver of a Fish is declared (as from an Angel) to be a Cure for one vexed
with an evil Spirit, and the Gall thereof to be a remedy for the whiteness of
the eyes. Concerning which place two ways of interpretation are propounded by
Drusius: Dr^^^ Tob.
theone that these words concern a Disease or distemper of body, occasioned by
the operation or influence of an evil spirit, which yet may be healed by
natural remedies, which the Angel did direct; and he shows that some parts of
fishes are reputed to have medicinal virtue; and it is ordinarily acknowledged
that some distempers curable by Medicine may be promoted by evil spirits. But
the other which I chiefly embrace is to this purpose, that it is no ways
improbable, that God who more frequently manifested himself by Angels before
the coming of Christ, should by the Ministry of one of them, vouchsafe an
extraordinary help and cure, to one who religiously served him, though by the
use of means otherwise inconsiderable, that his mercy and mighty power should
be manifested, by the effecting such a Cure. By washing in Jordan, according to
the Prophets direction, the Leprosy of Naaman was miraculously cleansed; by
washing in Siloam at our Saviors command, the blind man obtained a wonderful
Cure. So small a thing as Moses his r^d ordered by Gods power, was an
instrument of working diverse miracles, and by Elijah's Mantle smiting the
Waters, they were twice divided. 2. Kin. 2.8, 14. and in Egypt at the
sprinkling of blood the destroying Angel passed over. Now can any man think it
either impossible, or altogether incredible, that God should produce great
effects by small appearances, at the direction of an Angel, who had often done
the like at the direction of a Prophet. And this direction of the Angel is
manifestly designed, for a particular preservation to Tobit, and a Cure to his
Father, and the following Chapters declare the effect of both: nor ought it to
be doubted, but that our great and eternal God has done many great things,
besides what was thought necessary to be expressed in the Canonical Scriptures.

5. Obj. 4. In the sixth, seventh, and ninth Chapters of Tobit, the Angel who
is said to Accompany him, is spoken to under the name of Azarias ( viz. the Son
of Ananias) and seems to own that name, whereas it could not be true that
the Angel was this Azarias. But here it must be considered, V. Ambr. de Abr.
Patr. l. 1. c. 6. Drus. in genesis 18.3. V. Genesis 18.2. 16. 22.
that it is the usual practice even of the Holy Scriptures, to call Angels by
the name of such as they represent or resemble. The two Angels that came to
Sodom in the appearance of men, are called (...) men Genesis 19.12. The Angel that
appeared to Manoah's Wife, being asked if he was (...) the man who appeared to
the Woman declared that he was. Jud. 13.11. the Angel in the Sepulcher, who
gave tidings of the resurrection of Christ, is called (...) a young man Mar.
16.5. and the two Angels who appeared at the Ascension of our Lord, are called
by S. Luke (...) men in white apparel, Act. 1.10. Now it is not agreeable to
religious piety, to condemn such ways of expression as evil and sinful, which
are allowed in the holy word of God; nor is it unseemly for an holy Angel, to
own that manner of expression, which the holy Spirit himself uses. And
besides this, Estius in loc. diffic. Scrip. in Tob.
that which is hinted by Estius may well be admitted, that the name of Azarias
the Son of Ananias, might be taken by the Angel upon himself, to express by the
signification of these names, what was the business he came to effect. (
Azarias signifying the help of God, and Ananias the grace and favor of God)
that by the Angel the help of God was vouchsafed, which is the effect of the
Favor of God

Obj. 5. The last Objection from Tobit and the most considerable is, Tob.
12.15. Where the Angel is reported to say, I am Raphael one of the seven holy
Angels, which present the Prayers of the Saints, and go in and out before the
glory of the holy one. For the clearing of this place; touching the Phrase of
the seven holy Angels, (which yet is neither in Munsters Hebrew Copy of Tobit,
nor in the Syriack) it may be taken for an definite number as the like Phrase
is used, Mat. 12.45. Mede Disc. on Zech. 4.10.
And Mr. Mede's Notion is known, who asserteth it as an evident truth in his
judgment, (and for which he gives considerable proof) that there are only
seven principal Angels or Archangels, to which these words refer. But whether
these words be understood definitely for seven only, or indefinitely for an
uncertain number, we have the like expression in the Canonical Scripture, Zec.
4. 10. Rev. 5.6.

7. What is here said concerning Angels presenting the Prayers of the Saints,
this being a point of truth or matter of belief, may not be received (accordin
gto the judgment both of the ancient Church and our present Church) upon the
authority of an Apocryphal Book, further than it is grounded upon the evidence
of the Canonical Scripture, and in such a ense only as is agreeable to the
Doctrine of those holy Scriptures. Indeed if these words be acknowledged to be
the words of an holy Angel, as they are related in this Book according to some
versions, then must they be as certainly true, as if they had been spoken by a
Prophet or Apostle. But admitting that an holy Angel did converse with Tobit,
yet might his words be either misapprehended, or in this passage
misrepresented. And that they are so may be hence with some probility
conjectured, because in this place Tob. 12.15 there is no mention of Angels
presenting the Prayers of the Saints, either in the Hebrew Copy of Munster, or
Fagius, or in the Syriack Version, or in the Latin which S. Hierome translated
out of the Chaldee, but it is only expressed in the Greek, which our
Translation follows; and this very place was above 1400. Years ago thrice
cited by Cyprian, Cyp^^ de Orat. Domin and de Mortalitate Adv. Jud. l. 1. n. 20.
without this clause on this manner, Ego sum Raphael unus ex septem Angelis
Sanctis, qui adsistimus and conversamur ante claritatem Dei. Indeed in the
twelfth Verse, both according to the Greek, the Hebrew, and the Latin, the
Angel spoke of his bringing the remembrance of their Prayers before the holy
one, but even there the Syriack mentions no such thing.

8. But because these words are in our version; and taken in a restrained sense
have been ordinarily admitted as a truth, by diverse ancient Christian Writers,
I shall give a double account, in what sense these words may be taken agreeably
to the Canonical Scriptures, and the anciently received Doctrine in the
Christian Church, who owned not the Angels as Mediators, nor did allow that
Prayers should be put up to Angels. 1. They judged that the holy Angels who are
frequently present with us, do join in our Religious worship and Prayers to
God; and as all who join in Prayers do present those Prayers to God, so
particularly do the holy Angels, who enjoy a nearer Communion with God then we
have yet attained. Cont. Cells. l. 5. p. 273, and 238. Lib. 8. p. 401.
So Origin who expressly declares against praying to Angels, or to any who do
themselves supplicate, adds afterward that the Christians particular Angel,
(...) presents the Prayers joining in them; P. 420.
and in another place of the same Book, V. D. Hammond Annot. in 1. Cor. 11.10.
says, that many myriads of Angels (...) do join in Prayer with them who pray
to God. And as holiness disposes an Angel to be ever ready to join in
glorifying God, so love makes them ready to desire our good, Luke 15.10.
since there is joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner that
repents. And S. John in his Vision of the Churches worship declares the holy
Angels about the Throne to join in their Amen thereto. Rev. 7.10, 11, 12.

9. 12. That the holy Angels being Gods Messengers as their name imports, are
both Ministers of conveying much good to us from God, which divine Providence
could bbestow without their Ministry, and of representing our state and desires
to God as his Servants and our friends, which are fully and immediately
manifest to God who is Omniscient. And this may be performed partly as they are
testifiers and witnesses of our actions, Ad fr. in Erem. Ser^^. 68.
with desire of our good, and such S. Aug. judges them certainly to be, and S.
Paul gives Timothy a charge before the elect Angels, 1. Tim. 5.21. and
speaks of their presence in the Church, 1. Cor. 11.10. and if Satan be the
accuser of the brethren before God, Rev. 12.10. the holy Angels may well be
thought truly to represent what is good: and partly as they are ministering
Spirits attending on God and desiring our good, they declare our Prayers not as
Mediators but as Ministers, non quia Deum doceant (as S. Aug. expresses) sed
quia voluntatem ejus super his consulunt, desiring to know what commands God
will give them to Minister for our good according to our Petitions. Ep. 120. c.
22. Ep. 121. c. 9.
This sense is often expressed by S. Augustine, and in the Book under his name De
diligendo Deo, and seems well to agree with the expressions of others of the
ancient Fathers, and with the notion of the ancient Jews as it is mentioned by
Philo: Phil. de Plant. Nae. and de Gigantibus.
and thus much seems to be encluded in these words of the New Testament, Heb.
1.14. Are they not all ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who
shall be Heirs of Salvation, And Mat. 18.10. Take heed that you despise not one
of these little ones, for I say unto you that their Angels do always behold the
face of my Father which is in Heaven. And this notion expresses an honorable
ministration of the holy Angels, De Cu. Dei l. 9.6. 15.
which has respect to the Church of God, but does not allow them (as S. Aug.
would not) to be accounted Mediators, nor to receive Religious worship from us;
but to be honored by us Charitate non servitute, De Ver. R^elig. c. 55.
by an high degree of respectful love, but not by Religious service and
subjection.

10. As to that passage of Ecclus. 46.22. Which mentions Samuel prophesying
after his death, it is sufficient here to observe, that that that part of that
Chapter is by our Calendar directed to be omitted. And from all this it may
appear, that nothing is in our service appointed to be read out of the
Apocrypha, which being rightly understood is any way hurtful, or of ill
influence upon practice. Yet it is to be further noted, that he who shall
acknowledge that there is much good contained, and no evil or sin advised in
any of the Apocryphal Books, is still far from admitting them to be equal to
the Canonical Scriptures. For though there may be diverse Books free from actual
error; yet it is the Prerogative of the holy Scriptures alone, to be
immediately indicted by that holy Spirit who can never err, and to be tendered
of God and received of his Church, as the perpetual and infallible rule, to
manifest the will of God and the Doctrines of Faith.

SECT. VII.
Considerations about that Translation of the Psalms used in the Liturgy.
1. The next thing to be treated of is the ue of the Psalms, according to the
version in the Common Prayer Book, concerning which, Consid. 1. The use of this
Translation does not require us to judge it the best English Translation. For
as formerly the sentences out of the Psalms, before Morning Prayer and at the
Communion, were expressed according to another ancient and distinct
translation, so both the Epistles and Gospels, and the sentences out of the
Psalms at the beginning of Morning and Evening Prayer, are now altered
according to our last allowed English Translation, which alteration seems to
prefer that Translation as the best.

2. Cons. 2. The Translation of the Psalms used in our Liturgy, is from the
Hebrew, to which it generally agrees, sometimes using the liberty of a
paraphrastical style. And the Hebrew being the Original is doubtless more pure
than any Translation which differs fromit. And though the Septuagint in the
Book of Psalms (which of all other has been of most (frequent public use in
the Christian Church) does vary less from the Hebrew, than in any other
Poetical Book of holy Scripture, yet a Catalogue may be given of at least an
hundred and fifty places, wherein the Septuagint differs from the Hebrew (not
in any Christian Doctrine, but in the manner of expressing the sense of those
Texts) in all which the version in the Liturgy accords with the Hebrew, and
dissenteth from the Septuagint. Indeed in some phrases and clauses our version
follows the Septuagint, where the matter is unblameable: and three entire
verses which are not in the Hebrew, Chaldee, or Syriack, are in the fourteenth
Psalm added in this English Version, according to the ordinary Copies of the
70, Grot. in Ps. 14.
and of many (but as Grotius intimates not all) of the Aethiopick, Vulgar
Latin and Arabic, and which are not in the Greek Manuscript from Alexandria:
but these Verses being the same with what is cited by the Apostle out of the
Old Testament, Romans 3.12, 13, -- 18. cannot be disallowed as to the matter of
them, and the Psalms in the Liturgy being chiefly used as Hymns of praise, or
our words of blessing God (agreeably to the practice of the Jewish and ancient
Christian Church) may well admit in that use of such a variation from the
Hebrew Text.

3. If we observe the practice of the ancient Christian Churches, we shall
find, that the Greek Church publicly used the Psalms according to the
Septuagint, and the Latin, Arabian, and Aethiopick Churches, V P. Pithaeum de
Latin Biblior. Interpret.
had their Psalms of public use translated from the Septuagint, or with a
little tincture from Lucian the Martyr, wherein they also followed some evident
corruptions of the Greek Copies, as the Arabic in admitting (...) Ps. 17.14.
the Aethiopick in reading (...) for (...) Ps. 39.5. Ps. 92.10.
and the Vulgar in translating (...) instead of (...) The Syriack Version was
translated out of the Hebrew, but has suffered some alterations by being
revised according to the Septuagint, from whence among other things it received
its frequent use of (...); but this Version has many imperfections, as chiefly
its leaving out sometimes a whole verse, as in Ps. 34.9. and sometimes some
part thereof as Ps. 58.9. The result of this consideration is this, that the
Psalms publicly used in the Church of England, are more fully agreeing to the
Original Hebrew, than any of those known Versions were, which were used in the
ancient Christian Churches; and he who thinks that he may not lawfully join
or Minister in the Church of England, because of our use of this version of the
Psalms, might have discerned greater cause in this very particular, to have
kept him at a greater distance from all the famous ancient Christian Churches
in the World.

4. Cons. 3. The particular places most blamed in this Version of the Psalms,
do afford no sufficient cause, when our superiors enjoin the use of this
Translation, to withhold our hearty consent thereto. I shall instance in three
places which are chiefly urged. 1. One is Ps. 106.30. where this Translation
reads it, then stood up Phinees and prayed: and so the Plague ceased. But the
Version in our Bibles renders it, Then stood up PHinehas and executed
judgment. The word in the Hebrew is (...) the Verbs of which Root being most
used in the form Hithpahel, do generally signify to pray, and in this form of
Pihel they are rarely used, and do sometimes signify judging or the judge
interposing between men and men to end their strife. But in this place the
Chaldee Paraphrast, and the Syriack Interpreter (who both of them translated
from the Hebrew and well understood it) render it Phinees stood up and prayed.
Buxt. Conc. Hebr. in (...).
And Buxtorf in his Hebrew Concordances cites this verse twice under the
different significations of the same root, once as expressing Phinees praying,
and afterward as expressing him executing judgment.

5. If we compare this place with the History to which it relates, Number. 25. we
there find the Congregation of Israel, and Phinchas the Son of Eleazar the
Priest, in a deep humiliation weeping before the Tabernacle of the
Congregation. V. 6. Which solemn weeping was to doubt accompanied with the
Prayers of the Priest, as was directed and commanded in a like case, Joel 2.17.
Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between the proch and the
Altar, and let them say spare thy people, etc. and in its own nature Religious
weeping does enclude Confession and Prayer. Then we find Phinehas v. 7, 8.
slaying Zimri and Cozbi in their Adultry, which was his executing judgment
according to the particular commandment given, v. 5. and this was an act of his
zeal, which accompanying his Humiliation, Prayer, and Confession, did render
them more acceptable also: and besides this, very probably Phinehas either
offered incense, (as Aaron did to make atonement in the like Case of the
Plague, Number. 16.46, 47.) or Sacrifice, because v. 13. he is said to have made
an atonement (which is a Priestly action) for the Children of Israel: Sect. 1.
n. 7.
and that all such Offerings and Sacrifices did enclude Prayer, has been above
in some part observed. And by Phinehas his zeal (which might well be expressed
in all these things, and chiesly in his slaying Zimri and Cozbi) and by his
executing judgment, and making atonement, the wrath of God was turned away from
Israel, Number. 25.8, 11, 13. Now the Septuagint in this place of the Psalms use
the same word (...), which they used Number. 25.13. for Phinehas making the
atonement, as if the Psalmist had special reference thereunto. And indeed all
Phinehas his acting whereby he interposed between God and the Israeltes to stop
his wrath, may well be intended and encluded in this word (...) in this Psalm:
and therefore as it is well translated he excuted judgment, so it is not
blameably rendered, he prayed neither of these being the whole, and both of them
being parts of what Phinehas did in interposing. And I suppose all Christians
will acknowledge, that devout Prayer with reference to the atonement,
accompanied with true repentance and real resormation, is a very esfectual
means to appease the Prayer of the Priest in a solemn Assembly was directed,
under a promise of obtaining the favor and pity of God, Joel. 2.17, 18.

6. Another place is Ps. 58.8. which this Version in the Liturgy renders, Or
ever your Pots be made hot with Thorns, so let indignation vex him even as a
thing that is raw: and this by the Non-Conformists in King James his time was
censured for a translation senseless and absurd. They who have better
considered the Original in this place, acknowledge it a difficulty to clear the
manner of its expression: our last and best English Translation expresses it
thus, He shall take them away as in a Whirlwind both living and in his wrath:
which yet does not clear all the difficulty in the expression of the Original.
It is manifest from the context, that this verse encludeth a resemblance of the
speediness of Gods judgments coming down upon the wicked; which according to
this Version in the Liturgy, shall be as the snatching of flesh which is yet
raw, out of the Pot set on a sire of Thorns, which is torn in pieces and
devoured greedily in a time of famine, even before it has felt the heat of the
sire: and this explication and manner of resolving the words and phrases of the
Hebrew, is owned by Vatablus, and diverse and good expositors; and this general
sense of them relating to the swift destruction of the ungodly, is the
undoubtedly true meaning and intent of this place; but as to the manner of the
explication and unfolding of the Original phrases, among the very great variety
of conjectures, it is hard to say which is to be preserred before all the rest.
But this translation is so far from being (as it has been charged) senseless
and absurd, that it is certainly agreeing to the true sense, intent and design
of the Psalmist.

7. But no place is more insisted on, than Psalm. 105.28. where the Psalmist
speaking of Gods wonderful works against Egypt, says (...) (according to our
last English Version and diverse others) they rebelled not against his word;
that is, either Moses and Aaron, or the Israelites; or as Junius and Tremellius
understand it, his signs rebelled not against his word. But the Version in our
Liturgy, agreeably to the greatest number of Latin Copies in S. Augustins time,
Aug. in Ps. 104.
and to the Septuagint, the Arabic and Aethiopick, and to the last Greek
Version in the Octopta, and also to the Syriack, expresses it, they were not
obedient unto his word, understanding this Verse to aim at the Egyptians (of
whom the Psalmist was speaking) continuing disobedient under the mighty signs
and works of God; which sense contains an eviaent truth, and very suitable to
the History, and clearly reconcilable to the Hebrew, if (...) be admitted to
include an interrogation as the same word does. Ex. 8.26. and as diverse other
like phrases are conceived to do, as our Learned Fuller has observed. Miscel.
l. 3. c. 10.
And these words, and did they not rebel against his word? are of the same
import with these, they were not obedient to his word.

8. And they who are versed in the variety of Translations do well know, that
several particular expressions of Scripture, upon different accounts are by
some rendered in the negative, and by others in the affirmative, and yet both of
them are consistent with the Principles of Religion; and neither of those
Translations can thence be condemned as hurtful or useless. For instance, we
with almost all other Versions, read 2. Kin. 8.10. thou may certainly
recover, but Junius in his latter Editions, altering the sense of his former,
Non omnino revalesces. Where we, Genesis 2.5, 6. with most other Versions express,
there was not a man to till the ground. But there went up a mist from the
Earth. Junius and Tremellius agreeing with the Arabic Version (which in the
Pentateuch is translated from the Hebrew) render it, there was not a man to
till the ground: nor a mist that went up out of the earth. Yet here is no
difference about any matter of Doctrine, or rule of life, abut only about the
time of the first mist, into which no man has so clear a sight, as to see
further than the light of this Text will discover. Diverse other instances may
be observed, such as in the Syriack translation reading. Ps. 7.11. God is not
angry every day; to which the Greek agrees; and in the Syriack, and Arabic,
which in the Historical Books translateth from the Syriack expressing. 2. Kin.
18.27. That they may not eat their own dung, Mr. Thorn. Epil. l. 1. c. 32.
(which sense is well allowed by a learned man of our own Nation); and in the
Septuagint with the vulgar Arabic and Aethiopick who are guided by it,
rendering Ps. 35.20. They spoke peace to me; and also in the Samaritan
translating, Genesis 41.16. God will not give answer without me. The difference of
diverse translations may be noted in such places as these, Number. 11.25. where
some have, They did not cease, and others, They did not proceed; and in Job
34.30. Dent. 20.19. and Deuteronomy. 21.12. Where some read, She shall pare or cut off
her nails, others; She shall nourish her nails or suffer them to grow; and our
last English Translation does in the Text embrace the former, and in the
margent the latter; but it would be a great folly thence to conlude that that
Translation of the Bible is either useless or hurtful. See the like, 2. Kin.
19.25. Ps. 121.11. Yet the various ways of rendering some particular expressions
of Scripture, where it may be difficult to determine that sense which must
exclude all other, is very far from acknowledging the sense of Scriptures
ancertain, in matters of Faith and Christian life; which are frequently and
manifestly therein expressed; and to which the general consent of the purest
times of Christianity (and in matters of life the very principles of Reason and
Conscience) do agree. All that can be hence concluded, is, that there is
sufficient matter in diverse passages of Scripture, for the exercise of the
learnedest Critics and greatest Students, as there is abundant plainness of
instruction in the most necessary things for the meanest capacities.

SECT. VIII.
Of Holy Days, or Festival-days.
1. These days are acknowledged to have no particular divine institution, but
have been allowed and appointed by the Church of God, and are established by
the civil Sanctions of our laws. 5. and 6. Edw. 6.3.
The end of their appointment is, for the promoting the service of God and
Religious exercises Injunct. n. 20. Can. 13.
as is at large expressed in that Statute, by which they were particularly
confirmed, and in the Queens Injunctions, and in the Book of Canons; which
requires them to be employed in hearing Gods word read and taught, in private
and public Prayers, in acknowledging our ofsences to God, and amendment of the
same, in being reconciled to our neighbors where there has been displeasure,
in often receiveing the Communion, in visiting the poor and sick persons, and
using all sober and godly conversation. If such fruits of Christian Piety were
more plentifully and abundantly brought forth, they would by their pleasant
sweetness both recommend themselves, and those times and seasons, the good use
of which, more especially contributed to their ripeness and maturity.

2. Now these Duties being the principal business of the Christian life, it
must either be asserted that no particular time may be peculiarly set apart
thereto, unless it can be proved that God has particularly instituted that
time, which is an evil Principle whereby men would be taught to reject daily
Christian exercises, and to live in disobedience to Gods commands, and in much
impiety and irreligion: or else it must be granted (which is truth) that God
having commanded these Duties, does both allow and expect, that fit and
seasonable times in the whole course of life, be allotted to the practice
thereof; whence some portions of every day, and some especial days, may be
profitably and advantagiously employed, in these Religious exercises. And such
times may allowably the called Holy hours and days, from the holy actions of
Gods Service and Religion, for which they are reserved, and to which they are
appointed. 2. Kin. 12.18. Clem. Alex. Strom. l. 2.
For For that is properly holy which is set apart to God; and also according to
cl. Alexandrinus (...) all that is a holy time in which we receive the
knowledge of God: but the use of the word Holiday is no more but the ancient
English and Saxon word for Church-festivals.

3. But whereas many persons mispend these days in vanity and intemperance,
which by the direction of the Church and the prescription of the Law, ought to
be (and by others are) used piously and devoutly: these men's miscarriage
condemns their abuse, but not the appointment of these times to other good
ends and purposes. The Jews in Isaiahs time, abused their fasting days in
hypocrisy and to wicked ends, fasting for strife and envy, and to smite with
the fist of wickedness, Isa. 58.4. and yet the appointing fasting days to a
better end, was not only allowed at other times, but even in his time also in
Isa. 22.12. Indeed the corruptions of many men are prone to make a bad
improvement of the best things; The three solemn Feasts of the Jews, Tract.
Kiddush.
in which all their Males must appear before the Lord, were through their abuse
of them acknowledged by their own Talmud to be become (...) the Ulcer of the
year. Buxtorf. Lex Rab. in (...).
The Feasis of Par^^x were religiously appointed, though amongst the debauched
Spirits of the Jews they were turned into mere Baccanalia or voluptuousness and
vanity. And the want of care in many persons of the Service of god upon the
Lords days, has administered just cause for that great complaint in our
Homilies, Hom. of time and place of Prayer. Part. 1.
That God is greatly dishonored, and the Devil served upon that day. And in my
apprehension it is not improbable, that the oposition maintained against the
observing these Holidays, may have this forcible influence upon many, who are
easily withheld from good, but hardly persuaded ot it, to make them the more
neglectful therein of Religious exercises.

4. It was the practice of the Jewish Church, and was in many instances allowed
by the holy Scriptures, to set apart voluntarily some days for Religious
Service, which God had not particularly enjoined. I might mention their usual
Fasts of the firstborn before the Passover, and their Fasts after the days of
unleavened bread, and after Pentecost. The annual Fasts for many years of the
fourth, fifth, seventh, and tenth months are mentioned by the Prophet Zechariah
( Zech. 8.19.). We read also of a particular Fast proclaimed by Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 20.3. and of another in Josiahs time, Jer. 36.9. and another in Josiahs
time, Jer. 36.9. and another commanded by Ezar, Ezr. 8.21. and of a three days
Fast appointed by Esther, which the Chaldee Paraphrast with some probability
observes, to be kept within the days of unleavened bread. See Esth. 3.12. with
Chap. 4.8, 16. Chal. par in Est. 4.17.
and it may be easily inferred, that if it be lawful to set days apart for
humbling themselves before God with sasting and prayer, without any particular
divine Commandment; it must needs also be lawful where there is sufficient
occasion, to appoint the like for the Service of God, with Religious praise and
thanksgiving, with joy and gladness of heart.

5. They had also the Feast of Purim established by the Letters of Mordecai,
Esth. 9.21. when the Jews ordained and took upon themselves to do after this
writing, verse. 27. after which Esther and Mordecai wrote with all authority to
confirm these days of Purim, verse. 29.31. and it is expressly declared, that the
Decree of Esther confirmed these matters of Purim, verse. 32. The Feast of
Dedication was appointed by Judas Maccabaeus and his Brethren, and the Children
of Israel 1 Mac. 4.59. to be observed annually for eight days, in remembrance
of the cleansing of the Temple from the profanations of Antiochus, and the
restoring the liberty of the performing the Service of God therein; and at this
Feast was our blessed Savior himself present at the Temple, Joh, 10.22, 23.
And that the Feast of Dedication was that Feast appointed by Judas Maccabaeus
(though some ancient Christian Writers did otherwise interpret it) is proved by
Junius, Buxtorf, but especially and very largely and fully by Mr. Seldom. De
Syned. l. 3. c. 13. Sect. 7. etc. Ibid. Sect. 12.
Diverse other Feasts are mentioned in the various Jewish Kalendars, as may be
seen in Scaliger, and in that Calendar exhibited by Mr. Seldom, which I shall
not insist upon. Yet it may be considered, that Scasiger divides the Jewish
Feasts into the Legalia or Feasts appointed by Gods Law, and Politica or such
as were established by their own consent; and that those of this last sort,
were some of them appointed before the time of Fsdras, and some after, of both
which he undertaketh to give particular instances: De Emend. Temp. l. 7.
and it is thought by Mr. Thorndike, that the Feast of the Wood-offering,
expressed in the Jewish Kalendars, Of Religious Assemblies, c. 8.
is referred unto in Neb. 10.34. and Chap. 13.31. both which places speak of
the Wood-offering at the time appointed. But the instances above mentioned are
sufficient to manifest, that it was lawful under the time of the Jewish Church,
to appoint days of Religious Solemnity to be annually observed, though they
were not enjoined by any divine Institution. Wherefore I forbear to insist upon
the seven days feast which Solomon kept before the Lord, immediately before the
Feast of Tabernacles, 1 King. 8.65. 2 Chronicles. 7.9, 10. and of the seven days
feast in the time of Hezekiah, added to the seven days of unleavened bread, 2 Chronicles. 30.23. Now it seems very reasonable, that Christians whose mercies
from God are greater than the Jewish Church enjoyed, should also make use both
of weekly and other set times for the Service of God, it being prophesied of
the Gentile Church under the Gospel, Isa. 66.23, That from one new Moon to
another, and from one Sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to worship
before the Lord.

6. After the Coming of Christ, as the Disciples of John fasted often, so our
Lord declared that his Disciples should fast after his departure. This duty was
asterwards practiced by the Apostles, and enjoined to all Christians, 1 Cor.
7.5. and was in part exercised in the stationary days of the ancient
Christians, two days in the week. And besides other times, Eus. Hist. Eccl. l.
2. c. (...).
the time of our Lords passion, which Eusebius calls (...), is evidently
asserted by him, (though he misunderstand some words of Philo) to have been
observed by the Christians in the days of Philo, and that is from the time of
our Saviors death; and to the observation of the Passion time those words of
Tertulli in do manifestly refer, (notwithstanding the diverse conjecture of
learned men) where he declares the Christians appointing jejuniis Parasceven,
Advers. Psye. c. 14. Cont. Cets. l. 8.
and what Origin writes of their observing the (...) which probably includes
more than a single day.

7. There is abundant testimony also of other solemn days of Religious joy
besides the Lords days, to have been observed; Tert. de Idol. c. 14.
among which Tertullian mentions the whole fifty days from Easter to
Whitsontide, with which he says no Religious Solemnity of the Gnetiles could
compare; and Origin undertaketh to justify the Festivals of the Christian
Church at Easter time and Whitsontide, Orig. Ibid.
and such like (besides the Lords days) not to be contained under the Apostles
censure upon the Galatians, for their observation of days and times. And before
their time the observation of some annieversary remembrance of eminent Martyrs
is expressed in the Martyrium S. Ignatii, published by Bishop Usher from
ancient Manuscripts which he judges to have been written by Philo, Gaius, and
others, who were present at this Martyrdom, who write, Manifestavimus vobis
diem and tempus, ut secundum tempus martyrii congregati communicemus althletae,
-- glorificantes in ipsiusee merabili and sancta memoria Dominum nostrum Jesum
Christum. To the same purpose are the words of Cyprian, Cyp. Ep. 34. n
Martyrum passiones and dies anniversaria commemoratione celebramus, and this
is the sense also of Tertullian his oblationes pro defunctis, pro natalitiis
annua die facimus; for both the Phrase and thing of these ancient oblations, De
Cor. Mil. c. 3.
did particularly intend an honorable memorial and Communion with the person.
And when Eusebius gives an account of the change of the Empire under
Constantine, from Heathenism to Christianity, he says they then had great
respect to the Lords day, De Vit Constable. l. 4. c. 23.
and honored the days of the Martyrs, and celebrated the Festivals received in
the Church. And I suppose it needs no proof, that the Apostles and
Evangelists had the chief place among the Christian Martyrs, who were the
principal Testisiers of Christ, and the particular days wherein a pious
remembrance of them was celebrated to the glory of God, are frequently
mentioned after the end of the third Century, and are expressedin Constit.
Apost. l. 8. c. 33. And though the particular Festivals of the Apostles were,
according to the practice of the Church in several parts of the World,
celebrated at very different times, as may appear by comparing the practice of
the Western Church, with the Constitution of Alexius Comnemus, which concerned
the Eastern or Greek Church, and with the several Arabic Kalendars, two of
which are exhibited by Mr. Seldom, de Syneder. l. 3. c. 15. Yet in all these
Churches (as also in the Syriack, as appears from the Rubricks for the
Lessons on these days in the Syriack Testament; and also in the Aethiopick and
Egyptian Churches, as appears from the Computus Aethiopicus, De Emend. Temp.
l. 7.
and Computus Copticus in Scaliger) they did not only allow and observe such
days as lawful, but they appointed and owned them as conducing to the honor
and advancement of Christianity, being piously and religiously used.

8. Amongst the Protestants the Bohaemian Church, Rat. Disc. c. 3.
and those of the Augustane Confession, are very much agreeable to us in the
observation of Festivals; Conf. Boh. c. 15. Conf. Aug. c. 15. Conf. Helv. c. 24.
and their approbation of these days not only as lawful but as useful and
requisite is contained in their public Confessions: and the Church of
Switzerland allows several such days with a Maximopere approbamus, and the
Dutch Church observe the Nativity of Christ, and some other Festivals as
appears from their Canons, ratified by the Synod of Dort. Indeed the Church
of Geneva (and that of Scotland (which from 1560. till 1617. did herein follow
it) did not admit of any of these days: but this was so little pleasing to
Calvin the most eminent Minister of Geneva, that he writing concerning the day
of our Lords Nativity, which was not there celebrated, says, Calo Ep. Hallero,
Sancte testari possum, I can in a sacred manner proiest, that this thing was
transacted, when I neither knew of it, nor had any such desire; and he further
declared, that it was his endeavor that it might have been there observed.
Wherefore the laying aside all these days was even in his eyes the defect and
blemish; but not the perfection and b^^^ty of that Church.

9. Besides all these arguments from authority, to prove the allowableness of
Festival days for Religious exerciss; it may be considered that if it be both
lawful and good, when we have received some eminent mercy from God, to set some
hours or some particular day apart, to praise and magnify the goodness of God,
there is the same or greater reason, to give allowance to the observation of
these stated Christian Festivals. For I think no man can deny, that not only
the benefits flowing from the great actions of our Savior; but even the
advantages accruing to us from the Apostles and Evangelists, by their faithful
preaching the Gospel of Christ, and giving testimony to his Doctrine, and
continuing steadfast therein unto the death, is to us more valuable and
advantageous than any temporal benefit whatsoever; because our enjoying the
knowledge of Christ and being Christians, which is the fruit of the Apostles
and Evangelists making known the Gospel to the World, is a greater privilege
than any outward advantage in the World. And the benefit of holy exercises, and
of being employed in glorifying God is so excellent, that the use of particular
times appointed for that purpose, ought not be rejected by pious men, though
some men do abuse those means which they should improve.

10. But it is here objected, that the fourth Commandment says, six days shall
thou work, and S. Paul blames the Galatians for observing days and times, and
months and years. Concerning which places waving diverse other things which
might be answered. 1. Let the Objectors consider, whether themselves would be
willing to admit this to be the sense of either of these Texts, That it is not
lawful to set apart any day of the Week, either for praying, fasting, or for
praise and thanksgiving: if this sense be allowed, they must then condemn not
only the instances abovementioned both of Jewish and Christian practice, but
they must also deny them that liberty, which the prophet Joel commanded them to
exercise Joel. 2.15. sanctisy a Fast, call a solemn Assembly, and thereby
render Gods command of none effect: but if this sense of these Scriptures ought
not to be admitted, then cannot the Religious observation of Festival days be
thereby condemned. 2. These words, six days shall thou labor, never were to
the Jews a Precept of such an unlimited and unbounded sense, as to admit of no
other use of any day, but in labor. Indeed isoth, idleness, and negligence
were here condemned; and those days allowed and appointed for labor, in this
restrained sense, or with this exception, Unless some reasonable and
accountable occasion require the contrary. The reason of this restrained sense
will appear necessary, because the solemn days of Gods appontment under the
Jewish State, ought to be observed, even upon any of those six days, though
they required strict rest as the day of atonement did: and because it was also
lawful upon a providential occasion to employ a day in voluntary mourning for a
sick or dead friend, 2 Samuel 3.31, 33, 35. Chapter 12.16, 17, or in rejoicing for
the Circumcision of a Child, or such like cause: and it must be still
acknowledged lawful for a Child, Servant or Subject, to employ a day upon the
command of his Father, Master or Sovereign, in attendance upon their persons;
much more might the Jews keep a Fast or observe a Feast when Esther required,
and signal providence directed them thereto. August. Conc. Adimant. c. 16.
3. The observing days and times condemned, Gal. 4.10, concerns wholly the
Jewish solemnities as S. Aug. and S. Hierome observe, and the scope of the
place demonstrateth; the observing which is opposite to Christianity. Hier. in
Loc.
Thus he who keeps the Jewish Sabbath out of Conscience to the Moisaical Law,
does so far oppose Christianity, and return to Judaism, this being a shadow of
good things to come, Col. 2.16, 17, and is condemned by S. Paul; but he who
Christianly observes the Lord's Day, acts for the advancement of
Christianity, and the honor of Christ; and is not in this place blamed by the
Apostle: And so he who observes the new Moons out of respect to the Law,
stands charged with Judaizing; but he who sets apart any day for Christian
exercises, acts as becomes a Christian; for as he is the best Christian who
is most frequently exercised in these practices; so he cannot be blamed who
especially upon some days engages himself to these duties. So that the
difference between our observeing the Christian Festivals, and the Jewish, is
answerable to the difference between Judaism and Christianity.

11. As to that Objection, against the observation of the days of the
Annunciation (or the Conception of our Savior) the Nativity, Passion and
Ascension of our Lord; that these days are at least the less allowable, because
the Lords day is particularly appointed for the worship of God, and the
honorable memorial of the great undertaking and actions of our Savior; it may
be sufficient to observe, 1. That this argument seems equally to oppose, the
setting apart any other Portion of time besides the Lords day, to be purposely
and particularly employed for the Religious worship of God: which would greatly
prejudice the exercise of Religion; or at least the insisting upon this
objection, will not allow Christians to engage themselves, to glorify God for
Jesus Christ, and to admire the grace of Christ upon any other day; because
this would require some other time to be designed for these Religious actions.
2. That though the Jewish Sabbath had a peculiar respect to their deliverance
from Egypt, Deuteronomy. 5.15. Yet for that mercy (which was far inferior to what
Christians enjoy by Christ) they observed also other yearly solemnities,
especially the great Feasts of the Passover, and the Feast of Tabernacles.
Wherefore though the observation of the Lords day, as it is one day in seven,
encludeth a testimony that we worship God the Creator, who made the World in
six days and rested the seventh; and as it is the first day of the Week it
contains a a professed owning and honoring of Jesus Christ our Lord and
Savior, who accomplished his humiliation and began his exaltation on that day;
yet this does by no means exclude the lawful use of any other time directed,
either by voluntary choice, or Ecclesiastical or political laws, for the
advantage of piety in the worship of God, and the more solemn observance of
those great actions of our blessed Lord, which ought evermore to be had in
remembrance.

CHAP. V.
Of the particular Offices in the Liturgy.
SECT. I.
Of the direction for Communicants receiveing the Lords Supper.
1. THE first particular office, according to the order of the Book, is, that
for the Communion; at the end of which the Rubric requiring every Parishioner
to communicate at least three times in the year, is disliked, because many
persons may not be duly qualified to receive; Presbyt. Excep. p. 21.
and therefore this Rubric was desired either to be left out, or to be altered
to this sense, that the Communion should be thrice in the year administered, if
there be a convenient number to receive. Now because this exception is thought
considerable, whereas indeed the Rubric is herein not only justifiable but
very commendable, I shall endeavor to clear this whole matter by these
considerations.

2. Cons. 1. To receive the holy Communion is a very great Christian duty, and
cannot be neglected without grievous sin and the displeasure of God. This may
appear, by observing that God strictly required all his Sacramental
Institutions to be received; when he appointed Circumcision, he declares
concerning the uncircumcised Manchild, that that Soul should be cut of from his
people, he has broken my Covenant, Genesis 17.14. When he ordered the use of the
Passover, he said the man that is clean, and not in a journey, and forbeareth
to keep the Passover, the same soul shall be cut off from his people, because
he brought not the Offering of the Lord in his appointed season; that man shall
bear his sin. Number. 9.13. and even this person who was unclean, was bound to
keep the Passover in the next following month. Number. 9.10, 11. Under the New
Testament those words, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born of water and of the
spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God: are by the general testimony
of Antiquity to be understood concerning Baptism, and the Pharisees are
condemned for rejecting the Counsel of God against themselves, being not
baptized of John, Luke 7.30. Now the reason why God was so greatly offended, at
the neglect of these Sacraments, is expressed to be, because he accounted this
to be a disowning or dis-esteeming his Covenant, of which his Sacraments were a
sign and seal. Genesis 17.14. and because Gods appointment and institution therein
was not obeyed, Number. 9.13. Luke 7.30. Wherefore because the Lords Supper does
exhibit the New Testament in the blood of Christ, and the partaking thereof is
particularly commanded by Christ, it must upon the same reasons be as evil and
dangerous to neglect this Sacrament, as those other. And if it be further
considered, that this is a special Ordinance of eminent Christian profession,
showing forth the Lords (...) till he come, 1. Cor. 11.26, and exhibiting the
Communion of the body and blood of Christ, the right partaking of this
Ordinance, must needs be concluded to be a principal action and service of
Christianity, whether we consider the duty performed, or the benefits which may
be thereby received.

3. If the practice of the Apostolical and Primitive Church be consulted, the
three thousand converted on the day of Pentecost when the Holy Ghost was given,
Act. 2.42.
did all continue steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship, and in
breaking of Bread and Prayer. And the receiving the Communion was esteemed so
high a part of the Christian service in their public Assemblies, Act. 20.7.
that their assembling was called their coming together to break bread. Conc.
Ant. c. 2.
The Council of Antioch determined them to be cast out of the Church who were
present at the reading of the Scriptures, but (...) in a disorderly manner went
away and received not the Eucharist: Can. Ap. 9.
and the same was decreed in the Canons of the Apostles, and much to the same
purpose in other Councils, which (as that of Antioch) were embraced as part of
the Code of the Universal Church. Agreeably hereunto it was Ignatius his desire
for the Ephesians, Ign. Ep. ad Ephesians.
(...), that they all of them jointly, and every one of them particularly should
meet together, and partake of the same bread. Among the Protestant Churches,
Syn. Petricor. Sect. 5. 1587.
the Polonian Synod consisting of members who owned three distinct confessions,
did unanimously declare, that all Pastors ought to teach and accustom their
auditors, that as often as the Lords Table is prepared in the public Assemblies,
for the faithful, they should not neglect every one of them to come unto it.
And the vehement expressions in the Geneva Catechism, and in Bucers Censura
against them who neglect to come to the Lords Supper, might be here added, with
other testimonies of the same nature. Only it must be here observed, that
Nonconformity has run its changes, at such a variance, as if both the
extremes were to be preferred to the middle way. The Author of the Admonition
esteemed this direction for the Communicants receiveing to be too large, T. C.
Reply p. 117.
and that too much was done in directing them to Communicate, but both Mr.
Cartwright the chief opposer of the Liturgy in Queen Elizabeth's time, Alt.
Damasc. c. 10. p. 727, 728
and the Author of the Altar Damascenum, who was the most violent censurer
thereof in King James his time, thought that too little was done herein: for
both of them would have all who are in the Churches Communion forced, (even by
civil punishments says the former, and statis temporibus omnes adigendi sunt
says the latter) to receive the Lords Supper, and both of them condemn them
who abstain from the Lords Table out of fear, as guilty of superstition, and
that they ought not to be born with. But now again the Chanel is altered and
the stream is returned to the other side. But by the invariable rule of the
will of God, which is an unerring guide, it is the duty of all Christians to
attend upon the institutions of Christ, which is the first consideration I
propound.

4. Cons. 2. The necessity of being duly qualified for the right receiving the
Lords Supper, does not leave men at all excusable in their ordinary forbearing:
for the danger of performing any Religious duty carelessly, is expressed in the
holy Scriptures, to quicken men unto the greater piety in their attendance upon
those services, but not to give them any liberty of neglecting them. That
slothful and wicked servant who hid his talent in a Napkin, had at last no
comfort by his pretended excuse for his neglect that he looked upon his Lord as
an hard man whom he could not please, Mat. 25.24. -- 30.
but was cast into outer darkness. It was no way lawful for the Aaronical
Priests, to forbear to offer the Sacrifices which God had commanded, because he
had declared that he would be sanctified in them that come nigh him, and had
destroyed Nadab and Abihu for their undue approach. Though God upbraided the
Jews that they did steal, and murder, and commit adultery, etc. and come and
stand before him in his House which was called by his name; yet it was still
the duty of every male among them, religiously to present themselves there
before the Lord three times in the year, Deuteronomy. 16.16. and they were all
enjoined to keep the Passover, which encluded a yielding themselves to the
Lord. 2. Chr. 30.8. and a preparing their heart to seek God, v. 19. And when S.
Paul had said, 1 Cor 11.27, 28, 29.
that whosoever shall eat his bread and drink this Cup of the Lord unworthily
shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, this gives no allowance to
any to neglect this Ordinance; but the next verse directs, but let a man
examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread and drink of that Cup: and
the following words, For he that eats and drinks unworthily eats and
drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the Lords body; are laid down as
an argument, to show that men ought to examine themselves, and so to eat and
drink.

5. He that hears or reads the word of God, or knows his will, or
professes the name of Christ, without obedience yielded thereunto, does
increase his sin and condemnation; and yet hearing, reading, knowledge and
profession of Christianity are necessary duties, but that which it here only
available, and is every man's indispensable duty, is, to join the life of
Christianity with its knowledge and profession. So it is a duty to receive this
Sacrament, and to be careful not to receive it unworthily, or (...) unsuitably
to its nature and institution. Wherefore this Ordinance encluding under the
Elements of Bread and Wine, an Heavenly Communion of the body and blood of
Christ, whose death is here represented as he offered up himself to God for us,
and established the New Testament, with the assurance of all the blessings and
promises thereof; the worthy receiving this Sacrament will require that
Communion with Christ be both heartily desired and piously embraced; that the
death and mediation of Christ be acknowledged, as the only way of atonement and
remission of sins; that the Christian Religion established in the New Testament
or Covenant, be owned as the only true Religion, and all others rejected; that
the promises of eternal life, pardon and grace, be valued and sought after, as
the chief objects of desire and hope; and that the Christian practice which the
New Testament requires be undertaken, and resolved upon, with a circumspect
care of repentance, and amendment of what is amiss, and with a peculiar respect
to peace and love, by reason of this Sacrament of Unity; it being noted by S.
Augustine, De Consecr. did. 2. c. Qui manducant.
that he who receives the Sacrament of Unity, and does not hold the bond of
peace, does not receive the Sacrament for his good, but as a testimony against
himself; which was also the Doctrine of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.17, 18. And though
there be too many who do not practice, according to the necessary rules of
Christianity, it is absolutely and indispensably necessary for them that their
lives be changed and amended, that they may not only be fit to receive this
holy Sacrament, but that they may be fit to partake of the blessing of God, and
to avoid the dreadful miseries of everlasting torments, and to live answerable
to their Baptismal Covenant, that they may be advantaged by their profession of
Christianity. And let any man consider, whether it be not as unreasonable a
Plea in the sight of God, for any man to avoid the holy Communion, because he
is not willing to live according to the Christian rules, when both these things
are his duty; as it would be in the sight of a Prince, for a Subject to refuse
to take the Oath of Allegiance, upon pretense that he is inclined to undertake
practices of Rebellion.

6. Cons. 3. The Doctrine of our Church and its Rules for Communion, do not
allow that any persons should come to the holy Sacrament, otherwise than in a
suitable and Religious manner: but it jointly urges (as the holy Scriptures do
also) the duty of coming, and the necessity of coming preparedly. Amongst our
Writers Bishop Cranmer declared, that we ought not unreverently and unadvisedly
to approach to the Lords Table -- but we ought to come to that Board of the
Lord with all reverence, Def. of Cath. Doctr. of the Sacr. l. 3. c. 14.
faith, love and charity, fear and dread. Both Bishop Whitgift, and Mr. Hocker,
in their defense of the Order for the Communion against T. C. allow, that there
may be cause of present forbearance from this Sacrament, because of unfitness,
but this ought to be amended: B. Whitg. Tr. 9. c. 6. and Tr. 15. c. 2.
and that it is not desirable that men persisting in wickedness, should be
constrained to come to the Lords Supper. Eccles. Pol. l 5. c. 68.
But it is needless to add other testimonies, when the Communion Book it self
in the first exhortation says, If any of you be a blasphemer of God, an
hinderer or slanderer of his word, an adulterer, or be in malice or envy, or in
any other grievous crime; repent you of your sins, or else come not to that
holy Table, lest after the taking of that holy Sacrament, the Devil enter into
you as he entered into Judas, and fill you full of all iniquities, and bring you
to destruction both of Body and Soul. Wherefore it is acknowledged in our
Church, that the receiving the Holy Communion is not a right Christian action,
where it is not performed with a Christian spirit and disposition: and partly
upon this account, and partly for the disciplinary discountenancing of
wickedness, both the twenty sixth Canon and the Rubric before the Communion,
do require that no notorious evil liver or malicious man, before their
amendment be suffered to come to the Lords Table: and consistently herewith
must that Rubric requiring every Parishioner to communicate be understood, so
as to be exclusive of such notorious siners until their amendment, but to urge
and warn them to amend.

7. Cons. 4. There is just cause why Christians should be required, at least
thrice in the year, to receive the Communion. For whereas God required all
males among the Jews to appear before him three times in the year, which
appearing encluded their professing, owning, and engaging to serve the God of
Israel, and their accepting and submitting to the Law of Moses, and the
Covenant God made with Israel, with their expectation of the benefits thereof;
it would be very unreasonable, that Christians who are freed from that severe
yoke of bondage which the Jews were under, and enjoy higher privileges than
the Jews did, should come short of them in our great duties of Religion; and
therefore we should at least so often express our owning, honoring, and
accepting the Gospel Covenant, and the service of Christ our Lord, in the most
solemn manner, approaching to this Sacrament of our Lords institution.

8. Amongst the ancient Christians this Sacrament was received ordinarily
thrice in the Week, that is upon the Lords day, and the two Stationary days;
some did partake thereof daily whose practice S. Aug. would neither commend nor
censure, but he exhorts them who are duly prepared to receive every Lords
day; with whom agrees Gennadius, Walaf. Strab. de Reb. Eccl. c. 20.
as he is cited by Walafridus Strabo, who further observes, that they are
related to be excommunicate in the Greek Church, who passed two or three Lords
days without receiving the Communion. They who required the least among the
ancients, did strictly enjoin the communicating thrice in the year, De Consecr.
d. 2. Seculares. and omnis hosito.
as besides others the Councils of Elvira and Agatha are related to have done.
Our later English Constitutions before the Reformation advised it thrice in the
year, but insisted upon once at the least; Linw. prove. l. 5. Tit. 16.8.16.
and some Reformed Churches have directed it four times yearly; and without all
doubt the great neglect of so many amongst us, to partake of that Ordinance, is
a manifest evidence of the want and decay, of the ancient spirit of Christian
piety and devotion.

SECT. II.
Of some other things in the Communion Office.
1. Some exceptions here tendered are such, that it cannot be conceived, that
the Objectors thought them at all considerable: such is the disliking that
clause in the Prayer before the Consecration, That our sinful bodies might be
made clean by his body, and our souls washed by his most precious blood. This
passage is charged, with ascribing a greater efficacy unto the blood of Christ,
than to his body; whereas in truth these words as they are here expressed, do
no way exclude the efficacy of his blood from washing our bodies, nor the
sufferings of his body from cleansing our Souls; and those words used at the
delivery of the Elements. The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given
for thee, preserve thy body and soul unto everlasting life, and the like
concerning his blood, are a manifest expression, that the benefits both of the
body and blood of Christ, do redound to the salvation both of our souls and
bodies.

2. Commiss. pap. p. 92.
But with more earnestness and heat, the Ministers delivering the Elements to
every Communicants hands, and using the form of words for the distribution,
particularly to every one of them, is censured as a thing contrary to the
practice of Christ: and the judging this to be expedient, is insinuated to be a
studying to be wiser than our Master, and not to be obedient to him. This
Objection was urged also by the Authors of the Admonition, V. Bp. Whitgift. Tr.
13. c. 1. d. 17.
and by Mr. Cartwright formerly; and the ground they build upon is this, that
the holy Evangelists relate our Savior in his institution of the Lords Supper,
to have said to his Disciples, (...) take ye, eat ye, whence they conclude that
he neither gave the elements singly to every one, nor used any particular
expressions to every Communicant, at the delivery of the Elements. Wherefore
that this may be rightly understood, I shall consider what may be collected,
concerning the manner of our Saviors distribution, and the expressions he used
in this ordinance.

3. Touching the distribution of these Elements, as I can find no evidence in
the holy Scriptures, to show that it was not particular, (which yet would have
been evidently expressed, if it had been designed by our Savior to be made a
necessary duty, in all future Administrations of this Sacrament) so there are
some expressions in the Scripture which seem to intimate the contrary. When S.
Matthew, Mat. 26.26, 27. Mar. 14.22, 23. Luc. 22.19, 20.
S. Mark, and S. Luke reciting the institution of this Sacrament, relate both
of the Bread and the Cup, that he gave it to the Disciples, or he gave it to
them; these words do more fairly and probably express his giving the Elements
to every one of them, than that he either only blessed them and set them before
them all, or that he delivered them to one of his Disciples to be given from
one to another. And if we consider the manner how the chief person of the
family did bless things at the Jewish Passover, it will give some light hereto,
it being manifest that our Lord did much comply with the ordinary Jewish Rites.
According to their Customs they only blessed some things, and every one present
took thereof, which was their usage about the bitter Herbs, which required no
action of the Master of the Feast, to give or distribute them; but other things
he both blessed and particularly distributed to every one present, and such was
their usual practice at the eating of the Cake in the Passover Feast. Syn. Jud.
c. 13.
The former of these is expressed by Buxtorf on this wise, that after his
benediction comedit and alios quoque comedere jubet, and of the latter, he
says comedit and aliis quoque porrigit: and Camero citing the words of the
Jewish ritual referring to this latter, Camer. in Mat. 26.26.
(...) does well render them, tum singulis dat seu distribuit, then he gives
or distributeth to every one of them. To the former Custom our Savior
manifestly complied, when he blessed the Cup before the Lords Supper, and
commanded them to take it, and divid it among themselves, Luke 22.17. but his
practice was agreeable to the latter Custom, when he gave the Bread and the Cup
in the Lords Supper, to his Disciples.

4. If we further consider the practice of the ancient Christian Church, in the
purer times of Christianity; it is most likely, that their practices were
conformable to the practice of Christ, in the manner of distribution, and it is
no way probable that they in those early and purer times, did administer the
holy Sacrament contrary to Christ's institution, or otherwise then he had
delivered it. Just. (...)
Justin Martyr declares, that after the (...) the chief person in
Ecclesiastical Office, had given thinks, those who are called Deacons and
Ministers, did distribute to every one that was present Bread, and Wine mixed
with Water: Tert. de Cor. Mil. c. 3.
and Tertullian very clearly declar^th, that they received the Eucharist, (...)
de aliorum manibus quam praesidentium, from the hands of none other persons
than those who presided in the Church. And thus far we have plain evidence,
that in these ancient times, the Lords Supper was particularly distributed to
every Communicant, by the Ministers of the Church.

5. But the words of Clemens Alexandrinus are produced, Commis. pap. ubi sup.
as a testimony that in his time (which was the same with Tertullians) the
Church Officers did not distribute this Sacrament to the faithful, but only
suffered every one of them to take a part thereof, according to his own choice:
he says (...). Strom. l, 1.
The sense of whose words is this, that some persons (to wit Church Officers or
Ministers, being here opposed to the people, and supposed to have the power of
the Keys, in admitting to the Eucharist) distributing the Eucharist ((...) here
not properly signifying dividing, as the Latin Translation renders it, for the
Minister can in no proper sense be said to divide the Wine into parts, of which
every one may take one, but it signifies distributing or delivering to every
one the Sacrament) do suffer every one of the people to take part thereof. Now
it seems a strange acuteness from hence to conclude, that the Ministers did
not particularly distribute this Sacrament, because the people were suffered to
take or receive, as if one man's receiving was wholly inconsistent with another
delivering: Whereas indeed the particular distribution of the Elements, is
encluded in the true sense of this place of Clemens, and is no ways opposed
thereby. And this is sufficient to clear the ancient practice of the Church
herein, and to show that so far as we can judge thereby, or by the Jewish
Customs, or the most probable expressions of Scripture, our blessed Lord at his
institution of this Sacrament, did deliver it particularly to every one of his
Disciples, and even in that respect was also amongst them as one that serves.

6. I proceed now more briefly, to the consideration of the words, which our
Savior spoke at the distribution of this Sacrament. Now these words of
command, Take, eat, in S. Matthew and Mark; drink ye all of it in S. Mat.; and
do this in remembrance of me, in S. Luke, and S. Paul, as also these words,
this is my body which is given for you, and my blood which is shed for you, are
all expressed in the plural number, as being directed to more persons than one.
Yet considering that these holy Penmen did in short relate the institution of
Christ, sufficiently delivering what was necessary for us, but not confining
themselves to the very words he spoke, but to the sense thereof, (which is
manifest because they all four, relate his words spoken at the distribution,
differently from one another) the Evangelists expressions, may well consist
with his speaking particularly to every person; because what is spoken to every
one, may be briefly and succinctly related as spoken to them all. And though
this be not certain (which yet is the more probable from the evidence above
given, of the particular distribution of the Sacramental Elements, to every
Communicant) let them who manage this Objection consider with themselves,
whether they would grant that in other Cases, which they plead for in this. We
read that when our Lord gave full Commission to his Apostles, he said to them,
Jo. 20.21, 22, 23. As my Father has sent me, even so send I you, Receive ye
the Holy Ghost. Whose sins ye remit they are remitted unto them, and whose sins
ye retain they are are retained: and yet I suppose no sober spirited man will
from hence infer, that where diverse persons are at one time to receive Orders,
that no solemn words of ordination may lawfully be expressed to each person,
particularly and distinctly, but that they ought to be spoken to them all
together, generally and jointly. Our Savior also commanded his Disciples, Mat.
28.19. to teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: but will any Christian think it hence
deducible, that where diverse persons, or great numbers are to be baptized
together, the solemn words of baptizing them in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, may not lawfully be expressed severally to every
person? And if the baptismal form of words, may be solemnly and suitably to
that Sacrament, applied to every person baptized, by the general acknowledgment
of all Christians, there can be no reason why the like may not be allowed in
the Lords Supper. Wherefore the practice of our Church herein is no way
unsuitable to the institution of Christ, or the nature of this Sacrament, and
the alteration of it would be for the worse, and to the abating the solemnity
of its Administration.

7. Concerning the Communion, I shall only further consider that Rubric, which
directs, that if any of the Bread and Wine that was consecrated do remain, it
shall not be carried out of the Church, but the Priest, and such other
Communicants as he shall then call unto him, shall immediately after the
blessing, reverently eat and drink the same. Now this is supposed by some, to
give too high an honor to the Sacramental Elements, even after the Communion
is ended: to which I answer, 1. That all superstitious or other sinful honor
of the Elements, must be founded in the embracing those false apprehensions,
and corrupt Doctrines, which our Church rejects: and he who nourishes such
corrupt opinions (which none can do unless he forsake the truth, and the
Doctrine of our Church) might have more opportunity for such corrupt practices,
by the Elements being carried out of the Church, than by their being eaten and
drunk in it. 2. That our Church does sufficiently distinguish the eating and
drinking the undistributed Elements, from the Communion it self, both by the
formerly allowed use of them, and by the appointing them to be eaten and drunk
after the blessing, which ends the office of the Communion, and by expressing
them under the name of Bread and Wine whichh was consecrated. Such remaining
Elements have been variously disposed of: Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 35.
Evagrius relates it as (...) an ancient custom at Constantinople, that they
were sent to the Children at School to be received by them, as an
acknowledgment of the Christian Religion; before the Council of Laodicea, Conc.
Laod. c. 14.
they were sometimes sent to other Churches, as Enlogiae and tokens of
Communion with them; but this (as some other ways of reserving them) as found
to be of ill use. Hesych. in Lev. 8.
Hesychius speaks of a custom of burning them, which custom I suppose took
its original from those Commands of God, whereby he enjoined the remainder of
the Jewish Passcover, and of the Sacrifices of thanksgiving (and some others)
to be burnt with fire, Exodus 12.10. Lev. 7.15, 16, 17. The Council of Mascon
directed them to be given in the Church, Conc. Matisc. 2. c. 6.
to such Christians as kept their Fasts there, on the fourth and sixth days of
the week, which were the old stationary days. The direction in our Rubric is
ordered with as much prudence as any of these, if it be not to be preserred
before them all; for as there is no reason to doubt but that they may be eaten;
so can there be no reason produced, why the Communicants may not as well eat
them as any other persons. 3. The eating these Elements in the Church by the
Communicants, out of a reverent respect to the Sacrament, for which they were
consecrated, is allowable and no way blameable. Both our Articles, and our
Rubric after the Communion Service do acknowledge, that the sacramental Bread
and Wine even in the Sacrament, do remain in their proper substances, which
with other expressions in our Liturgy, sufficiently exclude the Romish
corruptions. Yet since we believe this Sacrament to be an excellent Gospel
Ordinance, I suppose that out of respect thereunto, devout Christians do
generally acknowledge, that even the Vessels particularly appointed for the
Bread and Wine at the Communion, and the Communion Table should not be used at
men's ordinary meals, and certainly a due respect to Gods Ordinance, for which
they are set apart, will not allow this, which was also condemned by the
ancient Canons: and it appears very reasonable, that those Elements which were
consecrated for the Sacrament, may be used with at least as much reverence as
the Communion Cup or Patine. De Consc. l. 4. c. 31. Sect. 3.
And when Amesius truly asserteth that it necessarily follows from the
Religious honor of God, that those things which have any respect unto Gods
Worship, ought to receive from us a privative honor, even when they are not
used to a holy use, as heh instanceth in Bread and Wine left at the Communion,
which is to be honored privatively, that is, care ought to be taken that it be
not used contemptibly, and sacred Phrases (as sacramental words, etc.) not to
be used in sport: even hence it will follow, that they may be used with a
relative honor; that is, so used as to express a reverence to those holy
Ordinances, to which they bear relation.

SECT. III.
Of the saving Regeneration of Infants in Baptism, and the grounds upon which
it may be asserted.
1. THE next Office in the Book of Common Prayer is that of Baptism, where that
which requires principal consideration, is that every baptized Infant is
declared Regenerate, and thanks is returned to God (after Baptism) that he has
regenerated this Infant by his holy Spirit, and the beginning of the Catechism
declares, that the Child in Baptism was made a Member of Christ, a Child of
God, and an Inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven. These expressions have been
somewhat differently understood, some applying them to a saving Regeneration of
every baptized Infant, others to a federal Regeneration, or a Regeneration
Sacramento tenus. And I suppose it evident, that if it can be certainly proved,
that every baptized Infant is savingly regenerated, or if on the other side all
the expressions in the Liturgy can be fairly and probably interpreted of a
federal Regeneration, which is generally acknowledged, there can be then no
doubt but all these expressions may be fitly and allowably used shall treat of
both these senses, because they both plead an allowance in our Church; and
indeed the latter does not necessarily destroy, but may well consist with the
former.

2. Beginning with the former, I shall first show what evidence there is, that
the acknowledging a saving regeneration of every Infant baptized, has been the
Doctrine publicly received in this Church, ever since the Reformation. This is
the more probable sense of that Rubric before the Catechism, in the former
Book of Common Prayer, and that at the end of Baptism in the present Book, both
which declare, that Children baptized are undoubtedly saved; that is (as the
first Book of Edw. VI. and our present Book do express it) if they dye in their
infancy, and before they commit actual sin. And our Book of Homilies declares,
Hem. of Salvation of Mankind by Christ, Part. 1.
that Infants being baptized, and dying in their infancy, are by his (Christ's)
Sacrifice washed from their sins, brought to Gods favor, and made his children
and inheritors of his Kingdom of Heaven. To these I shall and what Bishop
Cranmer, who was a great Instrument in our Reformation, and Bishop Juell a
principal Defender thereof write concerning Baptism, complying with the sense
here expressed. Bishop Cranmer says, Of the Lords Supper. lib. 1. c. 12.
For this cause Christ ordained Baptism in water, that as surely as we see,
feel, and touch water with our bodies, so assuredly ought we to believe when we
be baptized, that Christ is verily present with us, and that by him we be new
born again spiritually, and washed from our sins, and graffed in the stock of
Christ's own body, so that as the Devil has no power against Christ, so has he
none against us, so long as we remain graffed in that stock, Def. of Apol.
Part. 2. c. 11. Sect. 3.
etc. Bishop Juell declares the Doctrine of the Church of England thus, We
confess and have evermore taught, that in the Sacrament of Baptism, by the
death and blood of Christ, is given remission of all manner of sin, and that
not in half or in part, or by way of imagination or by sancy; but whole, full,
and perfect of all together, so that now was S. Paul says, There is no
condemnation to them that be in Christ Jesus.

3. But it must be here noted, that by the saving regeneration of baptized
Infants, it is not intended that their understandings or wills are guided to an
high esteem and love of God and the Christian life, which the Infant state is
not capable of: but this regeneration is mainly relative, so that being
regenerated by Baptism, they are no longer the Children of wrath, and under the
curse due to original sin; but are brought into a new state, to be members of
the body of Christ, and thereby partakers of the favor of God. And though some
small seeds of gracious disposition may be in Infants, who are capable thereof
in the same manner as they are of corruption; yet that regeneration or
renovation of an Infant in Baptism, whereby he is received into a state of
remission and Salvation, is very different from the regeneration of an adult
person, whereby his soul and life is molded according to the form of the
Christian Doctrine, and brought into a conformity to the Image of God; Aug. de
Trin. l. 14. c. 17.
and so S. Augustine distinguishes them; Renovatio (says he) quae fit ad
imaginem Dei non momento uno fit, sicut momento uno fit illa in baptismo
renovatio, remissione omnium peccatorum. And even this benefit of Infant
Baptism, is vouchsafed by the Holy Ghost, for by one Spirit we are all baptized
into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13. And it must needs be the work of God and of his
Grace, to accept an Infant born under Original sin into his favor, or as S.
Augustine expresses it: Aug. Retract. l. 1. c. 13.
By the grace of God, the guilt of all sins that are past, is pardoned in them
who are baptized into Christ, which is done by the Spirit of Regeneration; and
in the Adult their will is cured by the Spirit of Faith and Charity.

4. Now that all baptized Infants are savingly regenerated, is asserted upon
such Arguments as these. 1. Because Baptism does evidence every person rightly
baptized according to Gods will to be received by the will of God, to be under
the terms of the Covenant of Grace; but he who is rightly received to be under
the Covenant of Grace is in the favor of God, if the conditions of that
Covenant on his part be performed, nor does any thing exclude him from that
favor besides the sinning against or the breach of those conditions. But
Original sin (of which alone Infants are guilty) was supposed to be the state
under which man lay, when the Covenant of Grace was tendered to him, and so is
no breach of the conditions of that Covenant, but may be pardoned by the
benefits thereof. And no condition can be assigned to be performed on man's
part, by or concerning an Infant born in the Church, more than is encluded in
its being baptized (which I shall further clear when I shall treat of the
condition of believing which is generally propounded) even as the being
circumcised was of old the performing the condition of Gods Covenant, by the
seed of Abraham, Genesis 17.7, 10, 11, 12, 14. faith and obedience being also
necessary in persons adult. But that Baptism does admit the person baptized
aright, to be under the terms of the Covenant of Grace is manifest, because
they are baptized into Christ's body, 1 Cor. 12.13. They are baptized into
Christ, and have put on Christ, Gal. 3.27. And are baptized into the death of
Christ, Romans 6.3. and even Circumcision it self was a seal of the Righteousness
of Faith, Romans 4.11.

5. 2. The Gospel Doctrine and the holy Sacraments do convey saving benefits to
them who received them aright, and are partakers of them with due
qualifications. That Infants born in the Church are fitly qualified to receive
Baptism, is not only manifest from the general practice of the Church from the
Apostles times in baptizing Infants; but also from the favor of God expressed
toward them in the Covenant of Grace, and in that Circumcision was administered
to Infants, which was a Seal of the Covenant of Grace. And as the Gospel
Doctrine brings Salvation to him who rightly receives it, and the Lords
Supper tendereth Christ and remission of sins to the worthy partakers thereof;
so even Baptism conveyeth saving benefits to them who receive it with due
qualification: hence S. Paul calls in the washing of regeneration, by which
God saved us, Tit. 3.5. S. Peter commanded them who were pricked in their
hearts to repent, and be baptized in the Name of the Lord Jesus, for the
remission of sins, Act. 2.37, 38. and Ananias directed Paul to be baptized, and
wash away his sins, Act 22.16. Which places both show, that Baptism does convey
remission of sins, to them who are qualified aright to receive it, and also
that they who were under a due preparation to receive remission of sins by
Baptism, were not partakers thereof without Baptism. And indeed no adult person
is ordinarily capable of remission, but by joining inward faith and repentance
with outward Baptism, as is expressed, Mar. 16.16. Act. 2.38. Baptism being the
instituted Ordinance wherein they must declare repentance in coming to Christ,
and profess faith in accepting the Gospel and receive gracious Union with
Christ. Wherefore since Baptism does bring the due receiver thereof into a
saving estate; infants must also be acknowledged due receivers of Baptism, and
rightly admitted thereto.

6. 3. Christ has appointed his word and Sacraments, as the ordinary means of
Salvation to the Members of his Church, Ephesians. 5.26. That he might sanctify and
cleanse it with the washing of water by the word. But infants dying in infancy
are capable of no other Ordinance of Christ but Baptism, and therefore that is
to them the only means of Salvation. And it seems injurious to the grace of
God, to imagine that he appoints any only means, which is ineffectual to the
end, though it be complied with, as much as is possible it should be, by them
who make use thereof: but the infant state can admit no more, but that they
should be passive recipients, both of this Ordinance ^^d of Divine Grace, and
therefore thereby (...) obtain Salvation. Now that Baptism is designed to be a
means of Salvation, besides the Scriptures abovementioned, is expressed by S.
Peter, 1. Pet 3.21. who says that Baptism now saves us. And whereas that
Apostle presently adds, that it is not the putting away the filth of the
flesh, but that answer of a good Conscience toward God; he does not thereby
look off from the Sacrament of Baptism, to something else as a means of
Salvation; but he thereby declares, that this Christian Sacrament is not as
the Jewish Purifications, only a putting away the filth of the flesh, but it is
a professed engaging of man to God, or to the Covenant of Grace.

7. 4. If baptized Infants born in the Church be not in their Baptism in a
state of Salvation, it will be hard to show what benefit, any Infant dying in
his Infancy, can enjoy thereby. Now to assert that they have no benefit by
Baptism, would be to render that Ordinance to them useless and of no effect,
which the Scriptures do declare to be of a saving nature; and to enclude a
being buried with Christ, Col. 2.12. Now if it be said that by Baptism they
become members of Christ, what advantage can this be to them, if this
Membership does not enclude the favor of God, and a state of Salvation? If it
be said that it may be hoped that God will save the baptized infant; this
indeed may be hoped with confidence, if Baptism bring them into a state of
salvation; but if Baptism (supposing always the Grace of God tendered therein)
do not enstate them in salvation, them must they be saved only by Gods
extraordinary grace, not by the ordinary grace of his promise, to them who
embrace aright the means of salvation, or by the grace of God in the Ordinance
of Baptism, and therefore this Salvation would not be an advantage slowing from
their Baptism. But if it be said that by Baptism the Covenant of grace is
sealed to such Infants, we must here further consider, that Gods Covenant by
reason of his faithfulness, goodness and Sovereignty cannot be sealed as men's
Covenants are, to make it firm and binding, when it would otherwise be void and
of no force. Wherefore there remain two ways, whereby the Sacraments as they
are on Gods part Seals of the Covenant of Grace, may be of great advantage unto
us: the one is, as they give further assurance, of the privileges of that
Covenant for our comfort; but of this benefit these infants are not capable,
partly because the receiving this comfort, requires the exercise of judgment
and consideration; and partly because the evident sureness of Gods Covenant,
can be no cause of consolation to them, unless we admit that there is some-
ordinary means appointed of God, whereby they may attain the blessings so
assured: the other way of advantage is, by the benefits of Gods Covenant being
sealed, or surely conveyed, as the present interest and privilege of the
persons, rightly receiving these Seals, and in this way which encludeth saying
regeneration, infants are indeed capable of receiving wonderful benefit thereby.

8. 5. And (omitting other arguments) even the Prayers of the Church, with
faith and confidence, upon the other grounds abovementioned, not doubting but
earnestly believing, that God will favorably receive those infants, and
embrace them with the arms of his mercy, does give further assurance of
forgiveness of sin, and a state of salvation, for baptized Infants: For God who
has declared his favor toward them, and encluded them in his Covenant, does
direct. 1. Joh. 5.16. that if any man see his Brother sin a sin which is not
unto death, he shall ask and shall give life for them that sin not unto death,
and this general command encludeth Gods gracious answer to such Prayers: and
Prayer which is a general means to obtain Grace, is used for the obtaining
saving benefits in Baptism, with the greater encouragement, because the
blessings prayed for, are tendered in this Ordinance, and by Gods promise, unto
Infants who receive Baptism. To this purpose S. Augustine says, that remission
of sins in Baptism is obtained per orationem, De Bapt. cont. Don. l. 3. c. 18.
i. e. per columbae gemitum, by the Prayers and groans of them who live in
Peace, Love and Unity: and our Church in the Prayer before the words of the
Gospel, in the Baptismal Office, urges Gods promise, Ask and you shall
receive, seek and you shall find, etc. the usefulness and benefit of Prayer
being here the same in Baptism, as it is in the most religiously prepared
person for receiving the benefits of the Communion.

SECT. IV.
The Doctrine of the ancient, and diverse Reformed Churches, herein observed.
1. In observing the Doctrine of the ancient Church, Conc. Milev. c. 2.
I shall begin with Councils. The Council of Milevis condemned those, who
denied infants to be baptized for the remission of sin, or who asserted that
they did not draw that original sin from Adam, which is purged by the laver of
regeneration; and they declare, that by the rule of the Catholic Church,
Infants are baptized for the remission of sin, that that may be cleansed by
regeneration, which was derived by generation. And this Canon of Milevis is the
more considerable, Conc. Carth. c. 124.
because it was taken into the African Code, and with that-Code was confirmed
by the sixth General Council. Conc. Trul. c. ^.
The sixth general Council in another Canon, requires, that those infants
should be baptized without any scruple, concerning whom there can be no
sufficient testimony given, that they were baptized before; Conc. Trul. c. 84.
and this it enjoineth lest such scruple should deprive them, (...) of this
Baptismal purging for sanctification. Conc. Constant.
And whereas the Creed of the second general Council expresses a belief of one
Baptism for the remission of sins, the Council of Milevis above mentioned
avoucheth, Conc. Mil. ubi supra.
those expressions to have been always so understood in the Church, as to
acknowledge that baptized Infants did thereby obtain actual pardon and
remission. And that African Synod whose Epistle is extant amongst S. Austins
Works, declared, Aug. Ep. 90.
that whosoever shall deny that little Children are delivered from perdition,
and do obtain Eternal Salvation by the Baptism of Christ, let him be an
Anathema.

2. If we consult the ancient Fathers, it is beyond all contradiction evident,
that real remission and regeneration of all baptized Infants, is acknowledged
by S. Aug. ( Ep. 23. and de peccat. Merit. and Remis. l. 2. c. 28. and passim)
by Optatus, Advers. Parm. l. 5. Fulgentius, de fide ad Petr. c. 30. by Prosper,
and generally by the suceeding Writers of the Church. But some have pretended,
Gatak. de Bapt. Infant. vi. and effic. p. 268.
that this position sprung from their eager opposition of the Pelagians, who
denied Children to be guilty of original sin; for the removing of which
pretense, it will be requisite to give some testimony of the judgment of the
Ecclesiastical Writers, who lived before the appearing of the Pelagian tares.
S. Cyprian night two hundred years before Pelagius, did not only express the
mighty sensible efficacy of his own Baptism for conferring Grace to him, in his
Epistle to Donatus, but in his Epistle to Fidus he declares, that Infants by
their Baptism do obtain the grace and favor of God, Cyp. Ep. 59.
and the remission of their sins; and several expressions of that Epistle do
intimate that this is the end for which they are baptized: and comparing the
state of an Infant coming to Baptism, with an adult person embracing
Christianity and the true Faith, he does in this respect prefer the state of
the Infant, because ad remissam peccatorum hoc ipso facilius accedit, etc. he
does upon this account the more readily obtain the remission of sins, because
the sins forgiven to him were not his own acts but another (or Original sin).
Orig. in Luc. Hom. 14.
Origin in his Homilies upon S. Luke which were undoubtedly his and translated
by S. Hierome, says that Children are baptized for the remission of sins, but
(says he) of what sins? and when did they sin? and a little after answers,
that by the Sacrament of Baptism, nativitatis sordes, the sins and defilements
with which they were born are laid aside: and for this cause (says he) little
ones are baptized, for unless a man be born again of Water and of the Spirit,
he cannot see the Kingdom of God. The same Doctrine is also asserted by
Nazianzen in his 40th. Oration, Naz. Orat. 40.
as the comparing some things not far from the beginning, with others toward
the middle thereof will manifest; and this he calls (...) to be sanctified
without any sense or apprehension thereof. Wherefore S. Aug. did truly assert,
De peccat. Mer. and Remis. l. 3. c. 5.
that of old the whole Church did firmly hold, parvulos fideles originalis
peccati remissionem per Christi baptismum consecutos esse, that little Children
of the Church of Christ, do obtain remission of original sin, by the Baptism of
Christ.

3. Among the public Writings of the Protestants, the first Augustan
Confession asserteth, Conf. Aug. 1530. Art. 9.
that Children being offered to God in Baptism, are received into the favor of
God, and condemns the Anabaptists who say, that Children may be saved (i. e.
ordinarily) without Baptism; to which the larger Confession, 1540. adds, that
concerning Children baptized in the Church of God, Christ said, Mat. 18. It is
not the will of your Father which is in Heaven, that one of these little ones
should perish. Conf. Saxon de Baptism.
The Saxon Confession fully expresses the saving regeneration of baptized
Infants, and that these words, I baptize thee, etc. are as much as to say, By
this mersion, I testify thee to be washed from thy sins, and to be now
received by the true God, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has
redeemed thee by his Son Jesus Christ, and sanctifies thee by the Holy Ghost:
and it declares, that at that time Infants are truly received of God and
sanctified: and to the same purpose is the Confession of Frederick the third,
the Prince Palatine. Conf. Helv. c. 20.
And the general expressions of the efficacious saving virtue of Baptism, Conf.
Gal. c. 35.
in the Helvetick, French, and Scottish Confessions, Conf. Scot. Sect. 21.
are such, that the state of Infants cannot be excluded therefrom. And the
Geneva Catechism declares, that By baptism we are Clothed with Christ, and
receive his Spirit, unless by rejecting the promises, which are there tendered
to us, we render them unfruitful to our selves.

4. To give an account of the particular judgments of Protestant Writers, would
be a needless, difficult and endless undertaking. Diverse of them manifestly
assert the saving regeneration of all baptized Infants; others do embrace
another notion of baptismal regeneration, which I shall afterward mention; and
some from the use of different ways of expression, and from what they speak
with just earnestness, against the errors of the Church of Rome are sometimes
misunderstood. Cath. Orthod. Tr. 3. qu. 3. Sect. 1.
Rivet averreth that there is no true Protestant, who does not approve that of
Aquinas, 12ae. q. 81. Art. 3. That Original sin is done away in Baptism, as to
the guilt thereof, and he there says, that it is most false, that Calvin and
Beza ever said that some baptized Infants are damned, Ibid. Sect. 9.
dying in their infancy, before they commit any actual sin unrepented of:
Absters Call. Calum. 7.
and the same thing is with much passionate earnestness asserted by Beza
himself, writing against Tilemannus Heshushius. Whit. ad Rat. 8m Camp.
And Dr. Whitaker against Campian, undertaking herein to declare the Protestant
Doctrine, says, In baptism we receive remission of sins, we are entered into
Christ's Family, we have the Holy Ghost given us, we are raised to certain hope
of eternal life: what has your Baptism (says he to Campian) that ours has
not? has it grace? has it the merits of Christ? has it salvation? all these
has ours. And against Duraeus in defense of his answer to Campian he says, To
the adult Faith is necessary, Cont. Duraeum. l. 8.
that Baptism may be a saving Sacrament; but to little ones because they are
the Children of believing Parents, and are encluded in the Covenant, it is the
Sacrament of Salvation, though they by reason of their age cannot believe:
where, by the Children of believing Parents, his foregoing words declare him to
mean, Children born within the Church, in distinction from Turks, Jews and
Ethnicks. These words do express an actual regeneration of baptized Infants, by
the grace of God, and the application of the merits of Christ, for remission
and Salvation; but they are very hardly reconcilable with diverse passages, in
the posthumous Writings of that learned man, especially his Praelections de
Sacram. Qu. 4. c. 2, 3.

SECT. V.
The Objections against the saving regeneration of Infants in Baptism,
considered.
1. Against all baptized Infants being savingly regenerated by their Baptism,
it may be first objected, That the Scriptures declare the general necessity of
Faith in order to Salvation, and therefore Infants unless they believe cannot
be saved by being baptized. In answer to this (it being a matter of obscurity)
I shall relate different ways of solution. Aug. de pec. Mer. and rem. l. 3. c.
2.
1. Many account Faith the condition for adult persons, Aug. Ep. 23.
but not for Infants; but this is discarded by others, both ancient, and
modern; Kemait. Exam. Part. 2. de Baptism.
partly because by the general practice of the Church at Infant Baptism, (of
which S. Aug. takes notice) it was declared in the Infants name (as it is in
our Liturgy) Credo, or I believe; and partly because the condition of Faith,
seems so generally expressed in the Gospel, that they judge that Infants
cannot be thence excluded, though the Faith for the infant state cannot be the
same, with what is required from the adult. 2. Diverse others as Augustine,
Bid, Hugo de Victore. Amalanus, and Walafridus Strabo think baptized Infants
to be saved, by the Faith of the Church into which they are baptized, or by the
Faith of them who offer them unto Baptism; or as many Protestants (and also the
Catechismus Romanus) express it, credunt parentum fide by the faith of their
Parents; as the Syrophaenician Woman's Daughter, was healed by her Mothers
Faith, Mat. 15.28.
and the sick of the Palsy was Cured by the Faith of them who brought him to
Christ. Mat. 9.2.
But this does not satisfy Kemnitius, and some others, partly because it is
every ones one Faith, which is the Gospel condition for his Salvation, though
another Faith may be instrumental for the procuring of diverse blessings; and
partly because this answer gives no good account of the Ecclesiastical usage
of owning or professing the Creed in the Infants name at the time of his
Baptism. 3. Others assert that there is some Faith wrought in Infants, Inst.
lib. 4. c. 16. Cath. Orth. Tr. 3. qu. 1. Sect. 12.
which Calvin and Rivet say is not the act but the seed of Faith, by the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, and Kemnitius asserteth this operation of the
Holy Ghost in Infants, to be that they call Faith, though they know not what
kind of operation it is.

2. 4. To these I shall add what I conceive most probable, That since Infants
are not capable of the Faith of adult persons, which comes by hearing, and
consists in the knowledge and assent of the mind, with the engagement to love
submission and acceptance of the heart; and since there are different degrees
of Faith, in several adult Christians, and different acts of Faith, relating to
the object thereof, in the Jewish and Christian Church; it will be sufficient
that the Faith which refers to Infants, have only some general agreement in
its notion, with the Faith of the adult. Now since the Faith of the adult is an
acceptance of the Covenant of Grace, and the Gospel Doctrine, with a submission
thereunto, which in their state requires an active exercise of the whole Soul,
Mind and Will; when an Infant is said to believe, this must consist in such an
acceptance of, and submission to the Gospel, as his State is capable of, which
is Passively. Thus by being baptized he accepts Christ, and the Covenant of
Grace, being united to and made a Member of that Church, which holds Christ
as the head, and the Gospel Covenant as the ground of Hope, (or if Baptism
cannot be obtained, its being designed may be here considerable) and hereby
according to their capacities, Infants do enter upon a profession, and
acceptance of the Christian Faith, which their sureties declare, and themselves
stand obliged to own, when they come to years of understanding. To this
purpose in S. Aug. Infans vocatur fidelis, Aug. Ep. 23.
non rem ipsam mente annuendo, sed Sacramentum percipiendo; and in Gratian
Credere est infantibus baptizari or they become believers by being baptized
into the Faith, and thus S. Aug. gives an account of the Custom of the Church,
declaring Infants at their Baptism to believe, that is to undertake the
profession of the Faith, and this he calls, saluberrimae consuetudinis
rationem, an account of a very good Custom.

3. Obj. 2. If Infants be savingly regenerated by being baptized, then must
Infants dying without Baptism be excluded from Salvation. Ans. 1. Though it be
certain that S. Aug. Fulgentius, Prosper, Isidoms Hispalensis, Alcuinus, and
the whole stream of later Writers before the reformation, do pass a sad
sentence upon unbaptized Infants, yet even then some and those none of the
meanest, Cassand. de Bapt. Inf.
did strive against the stream, as Biel, Gerson, Cajetau, with some others
noted by Cassander. And it has been ordinarily acknowledged in the Christian
Church, that where Baptism could not be obtained, adult persons exercising
Christian Graces, Cont. Don. l. 4. c. 22.
might obtain Salvation without it, even besides the case of Martyrdom: this
was asserted by S. Augustine, largely defended by S. Bernard, Bern. Ep. 78. Lib.
4. Did. 4. Amb. de Obit. Valent.
and the Master of the sentences, with his School, is encluded in S. Ambrose
his hopes of Valentinian the Younger, who died without that Baptism which he
designed and desired, and is proved by the instance of the Thief upon the
Cross. And hence it will follow that though Baptism be an instrument of
Salvation, yet it is not in all Cases of absolute necessity thereunto. 2. There
is cause to hope well of those dying Infants who cannot obtain Baptism, because
the mercy and goodness of God, may account them according to their capacity,
passively to accept of the Covenant of Grace, by being born in a Church and of
Parents, who designed them for Communion with Christ, and the embracing
Christianity. Rivetus ubi supra, n. 8, 9. Wardi Resp ad Gat. n. 18.
Of the happy state of such Infants, Rivet and Dr. Ward doubt not, though this
latter expresses his less degree of confidence where Baptism is wanting,
through the neglect or contempt of the Parents: yet it must of necessity be
acknowledged, that there is greater certainty of the Salvation of Infants
baptized, than of those who dye without Baptism, because the Ordinances of
Christ ought by no means to be looked upon as useless for salvation; and the
promise made to Christians and their Seed, is upon condition of their
acceptance of the Covenant of Grace, Act. 2.38, 39. as was also the promise to
the Seed of Abraham. Genesis 17.7. -- 14.

4. Obj. 3. If Infants be savingly regenerated by Baptism, it would be an
excellent piece of Charity to baptize Pagan Infants, and even to murder
baptized Infants, because many of these do afterward by irreligion or
debauchery, expose themselves to eternal damnation: but the former is opposite
to Christianity and the other to humanity. Ans. There can be no act of Charity,
but what is every way conformable to Christian duty, and is no way injurious to
the interests of men, and therefore the actions mentioned in this objection are
far from being charitable. Because 1. To baptize Pagan Infants, continuing with
them under their education; would be to abuse Gods Ordinance, by administering
it to subjects not duly qualified, according to the will of God; and therefore
no saving benefit could be expected thereby to such Infants; because as Mr.
Hooker expresses it, Eccles. Pol. l. 5. n. 57.
Sacraments are not physical but moral instruments of Salvation, which unless
we perform as the Author of Grace requires they are unprofitable. 2. To take
Pagan Infants from them forcibly and unjustly, that they may be baptized, and
educated in Christianity, is no right act of Christian Charity: for though
those particular persons might obtain that Salvation by embracing the Christian
life and doctrine, which they cannot enjoy in the pursuance of Pagan Idolatry:
yet such actions being against the right of their Parents, and thereby contrary
to that justice and innocence which Christianity recommendeth, would greatly
tend to the prejudice of the name of Christ in the World. 3. Pagan Infants
undertaken to be brought up in Christianity and as it were adopted into
Christian Families, have by reason of that intended education, a right to
Christian Baptism, as Abraham's Servants bought with money had to Circumcision,
with all others born in his House: and if such an Infant dye, so soon as it
has received Baptism, yet Fulgentius declares him factum esse haeredem Dei,
Fulg. de Ver. Praed. l. 1. c. 12.
and cohaeredem Christi, that he is made an Heir of God, and joint Heir with
Christ.

5. As to the other part of this Objection, Though it be certain (whatever we
judge of Baptismal regeneration) that it had been better for every wicked man,
never to have lived to commit those heinous sins, for which the wrath of God
comes upon the Children of disobedience: yet there can be no more horrid and
uncharitable action attempted in the World, than the murdering baptized
Infants: which would be a wicked acting against the holy command of God, and
extremely opposite to the meekness and goodness of Christianity, and such
practices would tend to the ruin and extinguishing of the present Church of
God, and to render Christianity abhorred in the World, to the prejudice of many
thousands of Souls: and to the prejudice of these Infants, both in the loss of
their lives, and in hindering them of the opportunity of exercising pious and
holy lives in the World; whereby God might be glorified, and themselves
qualified through the grace of God, to partake of higher degrees of glory in
the World to come; there being good reason to judge, that the Apostles,
Martyrs, and eminent Servants of God in this life, have a more excellent glory
in the other World, where all that enter in, have perfect joy.

6. Obj. 4. This position places a great efficacy in Order to Salvation, in an
outward action of man baptizing, yea rather more than in the Grace of God and
Predestination: Since it must be supposed, that many who were in a state of
Salvation by their Baptism, do yet finally perish; and therefore also all those
who assert perseverance in a state of Grace, must disown this opinion of
Baptismal saving regeneration. Tertul. de Bapt. c. 2.
Ans. 1. That it is certain that some outward actions of men, not as they are
their actions, but as they onclude the tenders of the grace of God, and are his
institutions, or as they bear respect to the Grace and Promise of God, may be
greatly available to our Salvation: such were the Apostles Preaching, and such
is the due Administration of Sacraments; and he who will dispute against the
efficacious virtue of these things, as means of Grace, must oppose also the
saving benefits of the Gospel, and of the institution of Christ. And the
advantage by this Ordinance of Baptism is, that it is a performance on man's
part, of what the Covenant of Grace requires concerning Infants, and that it
is on Gods part an Ordinance of Grace; and therefore the benefits by Baptism,
do flow from the Grace and Promise of God, and ought not to be considered in
opposition thereto; and even the advantage of baptized Infants dying in their
Infancy, is the fruit of the grace of God and Predestination. Wardi These. n. 36.
2. The Question about Perseverance is well observed by Dr. Ward to be distinct
from this present subject: for to persevere in the Infant-regeneration which is
chiefly relative, is no sufficient qualification for the acceptance of the
adult, in whom another kind of regeneration, (by inward real conversion, and
gracious qualifications and exercises) is necessary, and of whom the Question
of Perseverance is in the same place declared to be understood, These. Salm. de
Persever. th. 39. Ibidem.
and to the same purpose writes Amyraldus also. And whereas Infant Baptism
receives the person to be under the Covenant of Grace, it is justly asserted
by Dr. Ward, that even those who after Baptism live in wickedness, do continue
acquitted and discharged from the Original guilt of the first Covenant, and
that bringing destruction upon themselves under the Gospel, they do perish
altogether for the breach of the second Covenant, or for not performing the
conditions of Christianity, which they undertook in Baptism, which also was
asserted by S. Augustine, These. n. 35.
Fulgentius, Prosper and the African Synods which are by him there produced.

SECT. VI.
Of the notion of visible regeneration in Baptism.
1. There is another Notion of Baptismal Regeneration to be considered, That
Baptism does certainly admit persons, into Communion with the Church of Christ,
and to visible Membership with him; and that every baptized person whether he
be adult or Infant, has thereupon such titles belonging to him, that he is to
be called regenerate, a Child of God, a Member of Christ, upon the account of
his being then admitted into the Christian Society, and being received by
Baptism to the profession of Christianity, and under the Covenant of Grace,
whereby he is visibly such. And this opinion as it refers to the adult, does
also acknowledge, that Baptism is to them a means of Grace, and of Spiritual
Regeneration unto Salvation, when they come to it duly prepared with those
gracious qualifications which are necessary to the receiving the saving
benefits of Gods Covenant, and also as it is well improved by their future holy
exercises of life. Indeed there are some men who allow no spiritual efficacy to
the Ordinance of Baptism, as an instrument of grace; but this is an opinion so
contrary to the nature of a Sacrament, and to the general Doctrine of the
Ancients, and the Protestant Churches, that it deserves to be earnestly
exploded.

2. This notion as it is extended to Infants, as understanding them in this
sense to be regenerated in Baptism, was embraced by some in our Church from
King Edwards Reign, and seems probably favored by some expressions of Bishop
Whit-gift, Answ. to the Appeal c. 12.
and is more particularly expressed by Bishop Carlton and diverse others. Nor
does the entertaining this way of explication, necessarily deny the saving
Regeneration of all baptized Infants. For though some few persons have
inconsiderately uttered hard expressions against many dying baptized Infants,
as that multi infantes damnantur cum baptismo; such words do appear at least so
unadvised and ungrounded, that I presume it will be ordinarily acknowledged by
them who embrace this notion to be neither safe nor charitable to imitate them.
But most others who proceed this way, though they come not so far as to embrace
it as a Doctrine, that all baptized Infants in the Church are in a state of
Salvation, yet because they know of nothing wanting toward their Salvation,
they conclude that it is at least very hopeful to Godward, and that the Church
by the judgment of Charity, must acknowledge them all in a justified estate.

3. Bishop Carlton declares himself to this purpose, Vbi supra^
That young Children baptized are delivered from Original sin we doubt not, and
if they dye before they come to the practice of actual sins, they shall be
saved: and that Children baptized are put into the state of Salvation, I make
no doubt of it, but, says he, this we must believe ex judicio charitatis.
Which Phrase of believing by the judgment of Charity (which some have thought
improper) is I conceive the same with those words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 13.7.
Charity believes all things; that is, where there is nothing that can
determine us to the contrary, Christian Charity requires us to entertain the
most favorable apprehension, and to judge and hope the best. And that Rubric,
That Children baptized dying before they commit actual sins are undoubtedly
saved, may according to this notion, be acknowledged as certainly true of
Children indefinitely, without denying it to be true universally. And they who
entertain these apprehensions do acknowledge, that all baptized Infants or
others are regenerated and justified Sacramento tenus; or they are visibly such
so far as concerns their profession, and the application of the means of
grace; and they may be affirmed to be such, according to the usual language of
the Holy Scriptures concerning Sacraments, and the dispensation of the grace of
God.

4. And this notion as it is very true, so it is made use of and manifestly
allowed in our Liturgy, in the office for them who are baptized in riper years:
where every person then baptized is said to be regenerated and graffed into the
body of Christ's Church, to be born again, and made an heir of everlasting
Salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, and to have now by Baptism put on
Christ, being made a Child of God and of the Light. Yet it is not hereby
intended to be dogmatically declared, that every adult person receiving Baptism
is thereby in a certain state of Salvation, because true Faith and Repentance
which some such persons may possibly want, is in them necessary in order to the
spiritual efficacy of the Sacraments, and is so acknowledged by the Doctrine of
our Church. Artic. 27.
For as our Articles declare, that those who receive Baptism rightly, are
thereby as by an instrument graffed into the Church, and obtain remission of
sins, so they also assert concerning Sacraments, Artic. 25.
that in such only who worthily receive the same, they have a wholesome effect
and operation.

5. Agreeable hereto are the frequent expressions of the ancient Church, in
which it was ordinarily and truly delivered, that Baptism without true Faith
and Repentance, cannot avail to the salvation of the adult, nor put them into a
present justified state. And though some words in S. Augustine by way of
dispute and inquiry, do incline to the contrary, yet that that was none of his
fixed judgment, was sufficiently observed by the Master of the Sentences. Sent.
l. 4. Did. 4. b. Aug. Cont. Liter. Petit. l. 1. c. 23.
S. Augustine proves that Baptism is inwardly of no profit to some, from the
example of Simon Magus; and from the same instance S. Hierome concludes, Hier.
in Ezekiel. 16.
that he who does not receive Baptism with a complete Faith, is indeed baptized
with water, sed nequaquam baptizatus est in salutem, but is in no wise baptized
unto salvation; Cyril. Hieros Procatach.
and Cyrill of Hieru. expresses him who comes with his body to Baptism, and
not with his heart, to be nothing profited. And this must needs be acknowledged
for truth, because the performance of the conditions of the Covenant of grace
by the adult, can in no respect be confined to Baptism only.

6. Yet these Writers did ordinarily acknowledge, both universally concerning
all persons baptized, and particularly concerning any adult person, that they
had put on Christ, and were made his Members, and were regenerated by the Holy
Ghost, and born again, with other such like expressions. S. Augustine says,
Cont. Donat. l. 5. c. 24.
Men put on Christ either ad Sacramenti perceptionem, so far as concerns the
receiving the Sacrament, or usque ad vitae sanctificationem, as far as reaches
to the sanctification of life: which is admitted by P. Lombard, who infers
thence, that all persons who receive Baptism put on Christ. Cyril tells every
one of those adult persons, who came to be baptized, Cyr. Catech. 3.
(...), the Holy Ghost will seal your Souls. According to the expression of
Rabanus, any baptized person a Christo Christianus vocatur, De instit. Cleric.
l. 1. c. 1.
and Dei Patris and Ecclesiae matris noscitur esse filius: is called from
Christ a Christian, and is known to be a Child of God his Father, and of the
Church his Mother; and Clemens Alexandrinus accounts all who are admitted
into the Church of Christ, to be called Members of Christ whose body is the
Church; and toward them who indulge themselves in Carnal practices and
pleasures, Strom. l. 7.
he indulgeth himself in this fanciful expression, to esteem them (...).

7. But above all, the language which the holy Scripture uses, is to be
observed, which as it often speaks of Children of God, and such like Phrases
concerning them who are inwardly renewed by a divine life (which it every where
requires as of absolute necessity) so upon account of visible admission to the
Church, and profession of the Faith it often applies the like expressions
toward every person received into the Church. So 1. Gal. 3.27.
S. Paul declares as many of you as are baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ. 2. Concerning baptized persons being Members of Christ. and graffed
into his body, the Apostle says, 1. Cor. 12.13. We are all baptized into one
body, and v. 27. Ye are the body of Christ and Members in particular: Which
words respect every one in the Church of Corinth, who are required from this
argument, because they are members of Christ's body, to consult not themselves,
but the benefit of the whole Church, and to consider the different proportions
of several Members. And when he uses this Argument against Fornication. 1.
Cor. 6.15. Shall I take the Members of Christ, and make them the Members of an
Harlot? God forbid; he does no doubt thereby dissuade every person who had
undertaken Christianity, from that filthy sin, because by his Baptism, his body
was dedicated to be a Member of Christ. And to this may be added what our
Savior speaks, Joh. 15.2. of a branch in him that bears not fruit.

8. V. Sect. 9. n. 5.
3. Concerning the titles of being regenerated, born again, and being the
Children of God; we may observe that even those circumcised Members of the
Jewish Church, who denied the holy one and the just, and killed the Prince of
life. Act. 3.14, 15. Act. 3.25.
and who as yet had not repented nor were converted, v. 19. were yet called the
Children of the Covenant, which God made with Abraham. And of those Jews for
whom the Apostle had great sorrow and continual heaviness, and for whom he
could wish himself accursed from Christ, he says, Romans 9.4*
that to them pertains the adoption. By which expressions it is meant, that
they were visibly Children of the Covenant by undertaking it, and that they
were under the tenders and external privileges of adoption, and under the
visible means of the spiritual benefits thereof. Under the Christian
profession, the Apostle expressing to his Galatians, the difference between
being under the legal Covenant which gendreth to bondage, Adv. Marc. l. 5. c. 4.
Chapter 4.24. and the Evangelical Covenant which brings forth them that are
free, or between Judaismus and Christianismus as Tertullian speaks, says,
that the Jerusalem which is above (that is the Covenant of Grace, and the
Gospel Doctrine as Illyricus rightly glosseth) is the Mother of us all, Illyr.
Gloss. in Loc.
v. 26. and we are the Children of the promise, v. 28. Which things are
mentioned as titles of privilege, which their undertaking the Gospel
profession did receive them unto. And when the Apostle tells them, Gal. 3.26.
Ye are all the Children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus, it is evident from his
scope, that by faith is there understood the Gospel dispensation of Faith
undertaken by them, in opposition to the Law; and that those who by Baptism are
admitted to the profession of the Christian Faith, are called the Children of
God, Chapter 3.26, 27. or by way of distinction, (...), Sons of God, under great
external privileges of Christian freedom, (and also inwardly Sons and Heirs of
life if they live as becomes the profession of Christianity) whilst they who
were under the Law were (...), Children under age, being in bondage under the
Elements of the World, Gal. 4.1, 3. And since all those who by Baptism do enter
upon Christianity, are entitled Sons of God; which Sonship proceeds not from
their natural Generation, but from their entrance into the Covenant of God,
persons baptized may according to the same sense, be hence called regenerate
and born again: and such expressions also are sufficiently allowed and
defended, from the Scripture speaking of being born again of Water and of the
Spirit, Joh. 3.5 and calling Baptism the washing of regeneration. Tit. 3.5.

9. 4. Concerning baptized persons being called Heirs of Everlasting Salvation,
we may observe, that those Members of the Church visible, who shall be cast
into outer darkness, are yet called Children of the Kingdom, Mat. 8.12. And
they may well be called Heirs, to whom the promise referring to the inheritance
is confirmed, and who are by Baptism received under the Seal of the Covenant of
Grace, which alone gives right of inheriting, Gal. 4.30. On this account the
Gentile Church, and every Member embracing the Christian Faith, are called
Fellow-Heirs and Members of the same body, Ephesians. 3.6. they also being now by the
Gospel grace received to be the Children of the Covenant. And S. Peter
exhorts Husbands and Wives embracing Christianity, to mind their duties, as
being Heirs together of the grace of life. 1 Pet. 3.7. And when S. Paul
exhorts the Thessalonians to walk worthy of him, who has called them unto
his Kingdom and Glory; it is manifest that he speaks to them all, and even to
them who were most negligent of the Christian life; to whom such titles of
dignity do belong, from their Christian profession and being under the Gospel
Grace; though the inward privileges exhibited under those Titles, are only the
portion of those who do perform the Conditions of the Gospel Covenant. And upon
the same account that baptized persons may be called the Sons of God, they may
be also thence concluded Heirs of Salvation.

10. 5. On the same manner, may Christians by Baptism be acknowledged to be
regenerated by the Holy Ghost, because the entrance into the body of Christ by
Baptism, is a privilege obtained by the Grace of God, or by the Holy Spirit.
For in Baptism the Minister acts in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost, and therefore as Calvin asserteth, Baptism is to be received as from the
hand of God; Baptismus accipiendus est quasi ex manu Dei: Wherefore in like
manner as Baptism which is performed in the name of the Holy Ghost has been
showed to regenerate, persons may be properly said to be therein regenerated by
the Holy Spirit; to which agrees that Phrase of being born of Water, and of
the Spirit, Joh. 3.5. And as all gifts, and diversities of operations in the
Christian Church, are derived from the Holy Spirit. 1 Cor. 12.4, 11. So
particularly this gift or privilege of being baptized, and received into
Membership with the body of Christ, is acknowledged by the Apostle to flow from
the holy Spirit, unto whom all benefits of Divine Grace and favor are
ascribed. For the Apostle says, concerning every visible member of the Church
of Corinth, as is manifest from the design of that Chapter, 1 Cor. 12.13.
By one Spirit we are all baptized into one body: to which place Zanchy
referring says, Vi Spiritus Sancti baptizamur, etc. De Trib. Eloh. Par. 1. l.
7. c. 5. Sect. 6.
By the power of the Holy Ghost, we are baptized of the Father, into one body
of Christ, and thereby regenerated as well by the Spirit, as by the Father and
the Son. And again, Haec regeneratio seu insitio in Christum, fit a patre sed
per Spiritum Sanctum. And this is agreeable to our Book of Articles, Artic. 27.
expressing, that in Baptism the promise of forgiveness of sins, and of
adoption to be the Sons of God by the Holy Ghost are visibly signed and sealed.

11. Besides these expressions, the Scriptures speak of persons baptized being
buried with Christ, Col. 2.12. and being dead unto sin, and buried with Christ
by Baptism unto death, and being planted together in the likeness of his death.
Romans 6.2, 4, 5. And as Zanchy at large observed, Tom. 7. de Persever. c. 2. p.
118. and 137, 138.
Notanda est Scripturarum consuetudo, etc. The usual way of the Scriptures is
to be observed, they call as many as give up their names to Christ, and are
baptized into his name, persons justified, sanctified, and the Sons of God. And
in another place he says, All who are baptized are sealed unto Christ, Tom 8.
de Relig. Christ. Fides. De. Baptismo. Sect. 1.
as being now incorporated into him by the Holy Ghost, that they may not be
under their own power, but under his; by whom they are said to be taken into
the fellowship of his Covenant, and to be made one body with him and all
Saints, and to be partakers of all spiritual and heavenly good. And in his next
Paragraph he says, All who are baptized tales esse and fieri Sacramentaliter
and vere dicuntur, Sect. 2.
are sacramentally and truly said to be such and to be made such.

12. But it may be said, that according to this sense, these expressions of
being regenerated, born again, members of Christ, etc. have but a low
signification, not suitable to the excellency and dignity of those names. Ans.
1. These expressions even as they are used at the Baptism of the adult, do
enclude a considerable hope and evidence, of true spiritual Communion and
Membership with Christ, and of inward regeneration and a right to Eternal Life,
which are benefits certainly attained in Baptism, by persons duly qualified for
the receiving them. 2. They declare the very high privilege of the Christian
calling, the entrance into which is the way to the Communion with Christ, and
to the highest enjoyment of the privileges of the Children and Heirs of God,
which those persons do enjoy who do neglect the Christian life. And the
Scriptures usually mention those who are under the tenders of Salvation, by
terms of great privilege and dignity; not to make them secure in the
disregarding true piety: but partly to amplify and exalt the Gospel grace and
goodness of God whereby so great benefits are set before us; partly to manifest
our great engagements to exemplary Piety and Obedience, from so great
encouragements; partly to testify that if we perish by willful neglect of God
and disobedience to the Gospel, this will be to fall into dreadful misery, out
of that state which encluded excellent means and great opportunities, of
obtaining Eternal Salvation; and partly to manifest that wicked practices in
such persons are both in themselves more heinous, and more abominable in the
sight of God, because this includes a spiritual sacrilege, or a profanation
of what was devoted to God, by the most solemn dedication of Christian Baptism.

13. Thus under the Old Testament, it was no argument for neglect and security,
but an high expression of Gods favor to the Jews, and of their deep
obligations to serve and honor him, and cleave unto him, Jer. 31.9.
when he declared himself; I am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim is my first
born; Jer. 3.14.
and turn ye back sliding Children, for I am married unto you. And it was the
aggravation of their sin and disobedience against God, Is. 1.2.
that he had nourished and brought up Children, Jer. 31.32.
and they had rebelled against him, and that they broke his Covenant though he
was an Husband to them; and that Israel and Judah who had God for their
Husband, Hos. 2.^ 2, 3, 4, 5, 7.
should play the Harlot, and commit Whoredom and Adultery, in departing from
him; and deal treacherously with him, Jer. 3.20.
as a Wife treacherously departs from her Husband. And under the New
Testament, Mat. 11.23.
when Christ said of Capernaum, that she was exalted to Heaven, but should be
brought down to Hell; this both expressed Gods exceeding kindness manifested
unto them, and their very unanswerable behavior, together with the aggravation
of their misery, 1 Cor. 3.16, 17. Chapter 6.15, 19.
that after such tenders of Salvation, it should be more tolerable for Sodom
than for them And the Apostolical Doctrine abundantly testifies, that to
defile the Temple of God, and profane the members of Christ, are practices
execrably impious, and destructively pernicious.

SECT. VII.
Of Sureties, and some other things in the Office for Baptism.
1. The next thing to be considered, is the use of sureties, or of Godfathers
and Godmothers. These have been received and appointed by the Bohemian, French,
Dutch, and other Protestant Churches, and that the Primitive Church had
sponsors for Infants at their Baptism, is evident from diverse passages in S.
Augustine, and from the author de Hierarchia Ecclesiastica, and also from
Tertullian, Tertul. de Bap. c. 18.
speaking of the Sponsores circa parvulos in Baptismo. Buxtorf tells us, De
Synag. Jud. c. 2.
that the Jews at their Circumcision have a susceptor, or compater; Synops.
Pur. Theol. Disp. 44. n. 54.
and among others, the Leyden Professors have esteemed that place of the
Prophet Esaias, Is. 8.2, 3. to be an instance of the ancient use of such
witnesses, at the circumcision of their Children, and that from thence this
usage in the Primitive Christian Church was received. Now though the use of
sureties be not much opposed, yet 1. Some impose a sense upon some expressions
of the Liturgy, as if sureties were made thereby a necessary condition, without
which Baptism might not be administered to Infants: and 2. it is objected that
they do declare and promise the belief of the Faith (and the practice of
Christian life) in the Infants name, and yet they can neither truly say that he
now does believe, nor can they upon sufficient grounds engage that he ever
shall believe, etc.

2. But 1. It is fully evident, that neither the use of sureties, nor their
promise is made a necessary condition in our Liturgy, of administering Baptism
to Infants, because no sureties are required at the administration of private
Baptism, where our batpismal Office declares, the Child to be lawfully and
sufficiently baptized. And though it be directed as expedient, that if the
Child which was privately baptized do live, it should be afterward brought into
the Church with sureties; yet at that time before any notice is taken of the
sureties, the Privileges of Baptism are declared to belong to that Infant;
that he is by the Laver of Regeneration in Baptism, received into the number of
the Children of God, and Heirs of everlasting life. Wherefore these words in
the form for public Baptism of Infants, This Infant must also faithfully for
his part promise by you who are his sureties; do only evidence that this which
is in it self a thing expedient, must be practiced according to the Order and
Constitution of the Church, which is grounded upon profitable and useful
considerations, for the better assuring the Christian education of the baptized
Infant.

3. The Baptismal Interrogatories which are next objected, are both of greater
antiquity, and of allowable and profitable use. That Interrogatories were used
in Baptism, from the very time of the Apostles, and that S. Peter's (...), 1
Pet. 3.21. does allude thereto, has been observed by very learned men with
much probability. Cyp. Epist. 70. and 76.
In S. Cyprians time the particular Forms of Interrogation in Baptism, were so
honorably esteemed, that they were inviolably observed without alteration,
even by those Heretics and Schismatics who then separated from the Church,
although their retaining them, Tertul. de Pudic. c. 9. de Bapt. c. 6 Ad Mart.
c. 3. de spect. c. 4. de Cor. Mil. c. 3.
encluded what was prejudicial to the designs of their Schism Tertullian also
expresses the custom of using Interrogatories, concerning the Creed and
profession of the Christian Faith, and also concerning the renouncing the Devil
and undertaking the Christian warfare; and in diverse places sufficiently
signifies the set Forms of Interrogations and Answers. In the Greek Church,
Constable. Apost. l. 7. c. 42.
as the Author of the Constitutions has expressed it, the person to be
baptized being asked, if he did renounce the Devil, and engage himself to the
warfare of Christ and believe, he answered (...). and (...); I renounce the
Devil, etc. I engage under the Banner of Christ and believe. Eusebius. Hist. Eccl.
l. 7. c. 8.
And the fixed use of certain Interrogatories and Answer is mentioned by
Dionysius Alexandrinus, as being observed in Baptism before his time.

4. The use of Interrogatories, at the Baptism of Infants to be answered by
others in their names, was encluded as part of this ancient Ecclesiastical
practice, as may be collected from the place abovementioned, from Tertullian
speaking of the Sponsors of little Children in Baptism: Augustine Ep. 23.
but the same is more fully expressed by S. Augustine who declares his
approbation of the usefulness of the answers made to these Interrogatories in
the behalf of Children, and undertaketh to give an account how they must be
understood, and calls this an useful Custom; which both intimates it to be
of ordinary practice, and to have been of long continuance. The Author of the
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, expresses the Sponsor for the Child, to declare in
his name, De Hier. Eccl. c. 7. ad fin.
(...), that the Child does renounce and engage; and Isidorus Hispalensis
notes, that little ones who cannot speak or declare they believe, are baptized
alio protestante, with another persons making the profession on their behalf;
and this usage has been also embraced by diverse Protestant Churches, Rat.
Discip. c. 3. Sect. 2.
herein following the Bohemian which was the first reformed.

5. That the true intent and benefit hereof may be understood, we must
consider. 1. That every person baptized, thereby undertaketh to renounce the
Devil, to embrace the Christian Faith, and to become the Servant of God, and
Disciple of Jesus Christ. This is evident from that Command of Christ. mat.
28.19. (...) make them Disciples by baptizing them, and from the form of of
Baptism, in, or into the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost; and
from such expressions as these, concerning them who have undertaken Baptism,
That they are dead unto sin, so as that they should not live any longer
therein, that they are baptized into Christ, and into the likeness of his
death, and that they have put on Christ. 2. That Infants are capable of being
engaged to God, and may stand obliged to believe in God, and serve him, and to
reject the ways of sin and wickedness. This is manifest from the Circumcision
of Children under the Law, and from their little ones entering into Covenant
with God, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12, etc. and is encluded in the Baptism of Infants,
which is a dedicating them unto God, and lays an obligation upon them to
entertain and persevere in the Christian Life and Faith, whether they have any
Sureties or no: and he that owneth not this obligation from his Baptism, does
go far toward the renouncing of Christianity. 3. That when the Sureties answer
in the Child's name, I believe, I renounce, etc. this is a more solemn
representation or declaration, of what the Child undertaken by his Baptism, and
hereby as the Master of the sentences determines, Sent. l. 4. Did. 6. g.
parvulus hac sponsione tenebitur non sponsor, the Child and not the surety
stands bound by this engagement: only the Surety is obliged to be careful of
admonishing him. This explicit Declaration of what the baptized Infant
undertaketh, is fitly used in Baptism, conformably to Antiquity, because it
tends to express clearly, a considerable part of the design and end of
Christian Baptism, and to put all other baptized persons in mind of their
engagement that they may live answerably thereto. And the matter of this
baptismal vow being expressed in the public Congregation, in the Child's name,
where all who are present may bear witness thereto, may be a considerable
argument to be urged upon him when he comes to Age, to induce him to the
greater diligence in the Christian life. And these words of the Sureties I
believe, etc. are not directly words of promise of what they undertake shall be
performed, but words expressing contract and engagement in the baptismal vow,
and declaring in what profession and practice, this Infant by his Baptism
stands obliged to live and die.

6. There is a further advantage by the the use of sureties, in that they are
(as is expressed in the exhortation to them) to see that the Child be taught,
what a solemn vow, promise and profession, he made in Baptism, that he be
virtuously brought up. And that he be instructed in those points of
Christianity, which a Christian ought to know and believe to his Souls health,
and to call upon him to hear Sermons. All this (which is in our Church
required) may well be performed by the Surety, and imposes no heavy burden
upon him, and (besides the Parents care which may hereby be quickened) it may be
of great advantage to the Religious life of the Child. The ancient Church
either did require more than this from the Sureties, Tert. de bapt. c. 18.
Dionys. ubi supra. De Cons. Did. 4. Vos ante omnia.
touching their particular ordinary care of the Child's Education, or else their
sense was over-severely expressed, by several particular Writers as Tertullian,
the Author de Ecclesiastica Hierarchia, and some others.

7. Having thus far discoursed of the use of Sureties, and the intent of the
Interrogatories, referring to the baptismal engagement; it may be further
observed, that when they are asked, Will thou be baptized into this Faith? and
they answer in the Child's name, That is my desire; the plain meaning thereof
is, to express, that the intent of the Child's being present, is to receive
Baptism, which upon its account, and in its right and name they desire for it.
And when in the Catechism there are these Questions and Answers. Q. What is
required of persons to be baptized? A. Repentance whereby they forsake sin, and
Faith whereby they steadfastly believe the promises of God, made to them in that
Sacrament. Q. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age
they cannot perform them? A. Because they promise them both by their Sureties;
which promise when they come to age themselves are bound to perform: the sense
of the former answer is, that he who comes to Christian Baptism, is not left
at liberty to lead a loose life, but he ought to practice faith and repentance,
as a previous qualification unto Baptism in the adult, and as a consequent duty
upon Baptism, both in them who are baptized in their Infancy, and at riper
years. And the sense of the latter Question and Answer is, That though Infants
be not capable of the particular acts of faith and repentance in their present
state, yet by those expressions of contract, whereby their Sureties in their
name only, declare what their Baptism obliges them unto, it is manifested that
they do undertake faith and repentance, as much as is possible for the infant
state, and do stand engaged from their Baptism, more particularly to act Faith
and Repentance when they come to Age.

8. Another expression in the baptismal Office has been misunderstood: viz.
Who by the Baptism of thy wel-beloved Son Jesus Christ, did sanctify water
to the mystical washing away of sin. Now we may well say that water is
sanctified for Baptism, when by divine authority water is selected from all
other things, and determined to be the proper matter, or outward Element of
Baptism: and that is sanctified which is set apart, or determined, to such a
sacred use, to which other common things are not admitted. And Christ's
Commission to his Disciples, to baptize all Nations, in the name of the Father,
and the Son, and the Holy Ghost, is an Authoritative determination of the form
of Baptism, or the Sacramental words, and of the extent of its use. And both
from thence and from our Saviors passion does it receive an efficacious
virtue. But water was the matter of Christian Baptism, for the remission of
sins, and admission into the number of Christ's Disciples, before either that
Commission, or our Saviors Passion. And as water was appointed for the
Disciples of John, by Gods commanding him to baptize with Water, so that this
was the Element which was set apart, for the admitting Disciples unto Christ
himself, under the Gospel, and for the conveying to them remission of sins, was
manifested by Jesus coming to be baptized therewith, from whence forward all
who came to be his Disciples, were baptized with water in the Baptism of
Christ. To this purpose the ancients frequently speak of Christ's Baptism,
sanctifying the water of Baptism. Tertul. adv. Jud. c. 8.
So Tertullian Baptizato Christo, i. e. sanctificante aquas in suo baptismate.
And the Author de Cardinalib. Christi operibus. Veniebat Christus ad baptismum,
De Bapt. Christi.
ut Sacramento perennis daretur authoritas. To the same purpose also Nazianzen
Orat. 38. and 39, and S. Bernard de Epiph. Sermon. and even the Annotations under
the Assemblies name, express this as one end of Christ's Baptism, to sanctify
the flood Jordan, In Mat. 3.15.
and all other waters to the mystical washing away of sin.

9. The use of the sign of the Cross in Baptism, I here purposely omit, because
it will be more fitly discoursed of in the following Book, where also I shall
discourse of the Imposition of hands in confirmation, and of the Ring in
Marriage.

SECT. VIII.
Of the Office for Confirmation, and that for Marriage.
1. The main things referring to Confirmation, being considered in the
following Book; and some things in the Catechism (which are most impugned)
being sufficiently cleared from the five foregoing Sections; I shall here only
observe that though our Catechism, Hom. of Com. Pray. and Sacr. Art. 25.
Homilies, and Articles, do sufficiently declare, that Christ ordained only two
Sacraments in his Church, yet some have taken exceptions at those words of the
Catechism, which express that there are two only (Sacraments) generally
necessary to salvation, as if these words did intimate the contrary: which
exception does manifest how innocent words may be wrested by the force of
suspicions.

2. And some like not that these Sacraments are said to be generally necessary
to Salvation: which as it was the Doctrine of the ancient Church, so is it also
of the Protestant Churches; Conf. Boh. c. 11.
the Bohemian Confession expresses it to be their Doctrine, that Sacraments
are necessary to Salvation; Catech. Genev. de Sacram.
and the Geneva Catechism declares that he who despises the use of the
Sacraments, is to be accounted of as one who tacitly denies the name of
Christ, and he who thinking not meet to profess himself a Christian, ought not
to be ranked among Christians. And concerning Baptism when our Savior says,
Mar. 16.16.
he that believes and is baptized shall be saved, does not that besides other
Scriptures express it to be ordinarily part of the condition of Salvation? And
touching the Lords Supper, if the obeying the great commands and institutions
of the Gospel, and the attending to and receiving those excellent means of
Grace, and of Communion with Christ which he appoints in the Gospel, be
ordinarily necessary to Salvation, then must the receiving the holy Communion
be acknowledged to be so. And let it be considered without prejudice, whether
when our Savior declared, Joh. 6.53. Except you eat the stesh of the Son of
man and drink his blood, ye have no life in you; these words (though they
cannot be confined to that Sacrament not then instituted) do not sufficiently
declare, that he who hops for eternal life by Christ, may not safety neglect
the careful attendance on that Ordinance, which Christ has particularly
appointed, to be the Communion of his body and blood.

3. Concerning the Office for Matrimony, the words of contract will be most
fitly discoursed of in another place, where I treat of the use of the Ring. I
shall here only consider such Phrases which some disrelish, that our Liturgy
calls it an holy Estate of Matrimony, and says that God consecrated the
state of Matrimony to such an excellent Mystery, that in it is signified and
represented the spiritual marriage and Unity, between Christ and his Church.
Now it is manifest, that the Apostle expressing the Marriage institution and
Union, Ephesians. 5.30, 31, 32. calls it a great Mystery, not as it refers to
the Husband and Wife, but as it mystically represents Christ and his Church;
saying, We are members of his flesh, of his body, and of his bones. For this
cause shall a man leave his Father, and Mother, and shall be joined unto his
Wife, and they two shall be one flesh. This is a great mystery; but I speak
concerning Christ and the Church. And to these words of the Apostle, the Phrase
of our Liturgy has manifest reference.

4. And when it is said to be consecrated, or to be a holy estate, this is as
much as to say, that it is designed for a holy and religious end and purpose.
Though the Gentiles lived in lasciviousness and all uncleanness; the Christian
marriage as well as the whole Christian life is to be a holy estate, separate
from these pollutions: of which the Apostle speaks, This is the will of God
even your sanctification that you abstain from fornication, that every one of
you may know how to possess his Vessel in sanctification and honor, not in the
lusts of concupiscence, 1 These. 4.3, 4, 5. for God has not called us to
uncleanness, but unto holiness.

5. Christian marriage is also an holy estate, as it is the lawful way, set
apart and ordained, according to the will of God, for the increase of his
Church. Thus Children born within the Church and under the Covenant, are called
Sons and Daughters which are born unto, or for God. Ezekiel. 16.20. holy Children,
1 Cor. 7.14. and with reference hereunto that the Children may be holy and
within the Church, the Apostle says the unbelieving Husband is sanctified by
the believing Wife, and the unbelieving Wife is sanctified by the believing
Husband: and upon this account the Christian marriage may well be esteemed holy
and sanctified, as being a marriage in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39. and is fitly
called, as S. Ambrose expresses it, Amb. Apol. Dav. c. 11.
Sancta copula, a holy bond.

6. And whereas S. Paul declares how all things are sanctified by the word of
God and Prayer; we have concerning marriage a more especial word of Divine
Institution, whereby two are made one flesh, Genesis 2.24. and that no man may put
them asunder, because it is God who joineth them together. Mat. 19.6. and also
a particular divine benediction which God gave unto the estate of marriage,
Genesis 1.28. And this Marriage Union has been generally attended with the use of
Prayers in the Christian Church.

7. Wherefore Christian Marriage, which as well as the Christian life is
designed for the service of God, and for holy ends and an holy use, is upon
that account the more fit, to represent the Unity and Marriage between Christ
and his Church: and this Union being hereby resembled, is both an argument to
the more holy deportment in Christian Marriage, and does also add to the honor
of that holy estate; and therefore it may well be mentioned as a further
excellency of that holy relation, that God has consecrated it to such an
excellent mystery, that in it is signified and repented, the spiritual Marriage
and Unity, between Christ and his Church.

SECT. IX.
Of the Communion of the sick, and the Office for Burial.
1. The Communion of the sick is very allowable, because the dying state may
need the best supports of Christian Faith, the highest encouragements of Divine
Grace, and the chief means to strengthen hope, all which is encluded in this
Ordinance of the Lords Supper; it being a pledge and assurance; yea a tender
from Christ, of mercy and forgiveness, to them who truly repent and believe.
And though the celebrating this holy Communion in private places, Conc. Laod.
c. 58.
stands condemned in ordinary cases by the ancient Canons, Conc. Nic. c. 13.
yet in this extraordinary Case sick or dying persons were ordinarily allowed
to receive it, and the Council of Nice does well approve of the sick persons
desire thereof. And though it be sufficiently proved by Albaspinus, that the
Viaticum frequently given to dying Penitents, did not always enclude the
Eucharist, yet it is manifest that they did frequently partake thereof; 4.
Conc. Carth. c. 76, 78.
as is expressed not only in the Canons of the fourth Council of Carthage but
in the more ancient testimony of Dionysius Alexandrinus. Eus. Hist. Eccles. l.
6. c. 36.


2. Diverse Protestant Churches besides our own, Rat. Disc. c. 3.
have retained the use thereof; and amongst them the Bohaemian, Syn. Petric.
Sect. 5.
the Polonian, with the consent of the Ministry of the three several
Confessions, Form. Visit. Aegr. in Bucer.
and that of Strasburgh as it was in Bucers time. And though this was not
practiced at Geneva, Calv. de quibusd. Ritib. Aug. 12. 1561. Calv. Oleviano.
Call. Dec. 1563.
yet Calvin did in several places, and even toward the end of his life,
testify his allowance thereof, and also that there were diverse weighty causes,
which constrained him to judge that it ought not to be denied.

3. But against this it is objected, that some persons who have led vicious
lives, may earnestly desire the Communion in their sickness, and yet not be
truly penitent for their sins, and therefore cannot worthily partake of those
holy Mysteries. To which I answer, that even in this Case Christian Charity
must incline to the more favorable part, and since man has no certain
evidences to judge of sincere repentance; the infallible discerning thereof,
must be reserved to the judgment of God. And if this person has lived vainly
and exorbitantly, the Minister may acquaint him with the nature (if need be) of
true Faith and Repentance, and the necessity thereof, both to a dying Man and
to a Communicant, and if he appear so far as is in him desirous to practice and
exercise those Christian Graces, and to obtain the help of Jesus Christ and his
Grace; to deny him this Sacrament, would be to deny him a testimony in Gods
name, that he will upon these conditions bestow grace and remission of sins,
and to shut up the means of Grace and remission from a Sinner who seeks after
it; and certainly it cannot agree with the Ministers Office, to reject those
persons, who in a dying state declare they would come to Christ. And in the
strict times of Primitive Discipline, he was thought worthy to be deposed from
his Ministry, who either rejected or did not receive any Sinner upon his
return; and a peculiar Charity toward dying persons was expressed in diverse
ancient Canons.

4. In the Office for Burial several expressions are misliked, as being thought
unmeet to be spoken of every person dying in the Churches Communion. Where a
first expression to be considered is, That Almighty God of his great mercy,
has taken to himself, the Soul of the person departed; When yet we cannot
assert that every person dying in our Communion is eternally saved. Ans.
Besides what may be said of the judgment of Charity, the wise man tells us,
Eccl. 12.7.
that the Spirits of dying men return to God who gave them, that is, to be
disposed of according to his righteousness: and our Church in this place
acknowledges the mercy of God, through the grace of Christ; who now has the
Keys of Hell and Death, that dying persons do not forthwith go into the power
of the Devil, who had the power of Death, Heb. 2.14. but do immediately go into
the hands of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, to be disposed of by
him, according to the promises and conditions of the Gospel Covenant. This is
that which all Christians must acknowledge, to flow from the great mercy of God
toward man; and that this is the sense intended in this place, I am induced to
believe, because in the ancient Offices of Burial, they magnified the Divine
Power, whereby the unjust and tyrannous power of the Devil was overcome, and
our Lord receives us, Dioniss de Eccles. Hier. c. 7.
(...), unto his peculiar and most righteous judgment. Yet even this sense does
express a general and firm confidence, of the future happy state of all them
who heartily embrace the Christian Faith and life; as being consequent upon the
gracious mediation, and Sovereign Dominion of Jesus our Savior.

5. And whereas this Office calls the deceased person, Our Brother, and Our
dear Brother, these Phrases may undoubtedly be applied to every person, who
professing Christianity dies in the Churches Communion; And that extensive
sense of those words, is sufficiently warranted by the use thereof in Scripture
when it commands us to love our Brother, not to put a stumbling block before
our Brother, not to defraud our Brother, 1. These. 4.6. to forgive our Brother,
Mat. 18.34. and when it speaks of the Brother that walks disorderly, 2.
These. 3.6. and of admonishing him as a Brother, v. 14. and of thy Brother
trespassing against thee -- and if he hear thee thou have gained thy Brother.
Chrysostom. in Heb. 11. Hom. 25.
Mat. 18.15. and if any man that is called a Brother be a Fornicator, 1. Cor.
5.11. from which place S. Chrysostom observes that every Christian man
baptized by the laver of regeneration is there called a Brother. Tertullian in
a general sense as they are men, allows even the Heathen to be accounted
Brethren, Apol. c. 39.
though they be Mali fratres, evil Brethren; but in a more special sense he so
esteems of all Christians, Praep. Evang. l. 1. c. 4.
who acknowledge one God the Father, and much to the same purpose writes
Eusebius. Cyr. Hier. Praef.
And Cyril tells all those who gave up their names to Christianity, that they
become the Sons and Daughters of one Mother. V. Albasp. Obs. l. 1. c. 19.
So that this manner of expression in this Office, is the same which the
Scriptures and the ancient Fathers have ordinarily used, or it is approved by
those Writings which only are of Divine Authority, and by those which are in
the Church of greatest humane Authority.

6. The expression of his being a dear Brother, does only enclude a respect
suitable to a Brotherly relation, and expresses that the Members of the Church
of Christ, had real desires of the welfare of such persons as are received into
its Communion.

7. That clause in committing the body to the ground, in sure and certain hope
of the resurrection to eternal life, does so evidently express the Faith and
Hope of the general resurrection, wherein all Christians are concerned; when
(as it follows) he shall change our vile bodies, and make them like to his
glorious body; that it cannot reasonably be understood, with a particular
restriction to the party deceased: but it declares that while this object of
mortality is before our eyes, the Faith of the Resurrection to Life remains
fixed upon our hearts.

8. When we give thanks to God, that he has delivered this our Brother out of
the miseries of this sinful World, it must be considered, that the en^ling all
troubles and miseries, is an act of Gods mercy, and ought to be so
acknowledged, though some men by their own neglect of the Christian life,
deprive themselves of the benefits thereof: as the goodness of God in his
patience ought to be owned, though some aggravate their own misery by the
mis-emprovement thereof. And some regard may be had in this expression, to the
Christian hope of the future estate, which is the more quickened by every
instance of our present frailty. And both this and the former expressions may
be used with a particular confidence of the eternal bliss of any holy person
deceased, and with the exercise of the judgment of Charity in its proper object.

9. There is only one expression in the latter Prayer, which encludeth
particularly our favorable thoughts of the person departed, when we pray that
we may rest in him, as our hope is this our Brother does. In the use of which
Phrase, we may well express different degrees of hope, according to the
different evidences of Piety in several distinct persons. But even where men
were vicious in their lives, there may be in ordinary cases some degree of
hope, that they knowing and professing the truth, might at last become truly
penitent, though we have no evidence thereof. For some degree of hope does not
enclude so much as the judgment of Charity, and it may be exercised, where ever
we cannot certainly determine the contrary. Yet if there should be any such
extraordinary case, where not so much as any degree of hope can be admitted, it
is far more desirable, that this expression should be omitted in that singular
case alone, (which would be very rarely found) than that all ordinary
expressions, of the hopefulness of them who depart this life, in Communion with
so excellent a Church as this is, should be expunged and disclaimed. For as
this would be an undertaking extremely groundless and deeply uncharitable, so
the very sound thereof may be enough to affright Pagans from Christianity, and
Papists from the Reformation, if our selves did not allow ordinarily any hopes
of the happy estate of the Members of our Church.

10. Yet that this may not be misunderstood and mis-emproved, when it is
applied to such persons, who have been wanting in the practice of due
strictness of Christian life, and too much swerved from the holy Rules and
Doctrines delivered in the Gospel and received by our Church; we ought to
consider, that this expression of hope, is no encouragement to any others to be
guilty of the like neglects. For the bare expression of hope is below any
degree of evidence; and only expresses that our judgments and understandings,
cannot conclude it absolutely certain, that he was finally impenitent, though
his state may appear extremely hazardous. And whosoever lives wickedly, and
dies without sufficient repentance, (of which god can certainly judge where
man cannot) it will be no advantage to him in the other World, that his name
was mentioned in the Church with some degree of hope; or as the Author of the
Constitutions expresses it, Constable. Apol. lib. 8. c. 43.
(...). And the state of such a person is not the less miserable, because frail
men are not endued with that infallible judgment, whereby they can conclude it
utterly desperate.

11. The Charity of the ancient Christian Church, in expressing their hope of
them who dyed in their Communion, is very manifest; and it is a great mistake
which some have entertained, that through the strictness of their Discipline,
no persons had their names honorably mentioned by the Church, with hopes of
their future happiness, but such who had lived altogether free from any
apparent sinfulness of life, or had given severe testimonies of a strict
amendment. Indeed some rigorous Canons, neither of general practice, nor of
long continuance in the Church, would not allow some offenders, (whatsoever
repentance they manifested) to be reconciled to the Church, or admitted to its
Communion throughout their whole life, no nor at the hour of death: and yet
these Canons have been conceived only to make them perpetual Poenitentes, so
that after their death their oblations were received; or they all who were
admitted as such Penitents, were then owned among them who had relation to the
Church, Albasp. Obs. l. 2. c. 4.
and of whom it had hope. but amongst the ordinary rules of Primitive
Discipline, these were generally admitted. Cyp. Ep. 54. Can. Apost. 52.
whatsoever his crime was, he might upon his supplication be admitted to be one
of the Poenitentes or to be under the rules of penance; 4. Con. Carth. c. 74.
and the not admitting him hereto was accounted an heinous crime, because non
fas est Ecclesiam pulsantibus ^laudi. 2. That if any of these Poenitentes were
under dangerous sickness, Cyp. Ibidem Conc. Nicen. c. 13. Ancyr. can. 6. Araus.
can. 3. 4. Carth. c. 77.
it was requisite they should be then admitted to the peace of the Church, and
its Communion. 3. That even they, who being under censure, did only in the time
of dangerous sickness desire to be admitted Penitents, might thereupon
forthwith be both admitted Penitents and receive reconciliation and Communion.
Conc. Araus. c. 2. Leo. Ep. 91.4. Carth. c. 76.
This is a consequent from the two former, and is encluded in the Canon of
Ancyra now mentioned, and is manifest by diverse other particular testimonies,
and it was grounded upon this reason, because (as Leo expresses it) we cannot
limit the times, nor determine the measures of Gods mercy. Dion. de Eccles.
Hier. c. 7.
with others who died in its Communion, Cyp. Ep. 10.
and even Penitents who dyed without the opportunity of obtaining disciplinary
reconciliation, Con. Nic. c. 13.
had the memories of their names recommended in the Churches Prayers, 4. Carth.
c. 79.
as persons of whom it hoped well: which is I suppose intended by (...) in the
Council of Nice though it be otherwise understood by the Greek Canonists and in
Albaspinus his explicaton. Conc. Arel. 2. c. 12.


THE SECOND BOOK CONCERNING CEREMONIES, AND Ecclesiastical Constitutions.
CHAP. I.
The lawful use of some Ceremonies, in the Christian Church asserted.
SECT. I.
What we are here to understand by Ceremonies.
1. AMong all the things appointed in our service, there is nothing against
which a heavier charge is drawn up, than against the Ceremonies, as they are
ordinarily called; common custom herein making use of a word which admitted^
great variety, and latitude of sense and signification. For 1. The word
Ceremonia (Ceremony) primarily encludeth the general exercise of all public
Religious Worship and Piety: Scal. in Fest.
for as Scaliger notes Ceremonia was as much as Sanctimonia, being derived
from Cerus, which in the old ^atin signifies the same with Sanctus; and
Ser^^us has been observed to declare, that omnia Sacra apud Latinos Ceremoniae
dicuntur: and to this purpose the old Constitutions of the twelve Tables
declared, Leg. 12. Tab. De Sacerdot. officio.
Sacerdotum duo genera sunto: unum quod praesit Ceremoniis and sacris, etc.
intending thereby all sacred actions of Religious service; and in this large
sense is this word sometimes used by some later Writers, Luth. de piis Cerem.
servand. Bucer. Censur. c. ultim.
as Luther and Bucer. 2. This word sometimes among the ancient Christian
Writers peculiarly expresses the most solemn visible Symbols of the Grace of
God: in which sense also in the Augustan, Saxon, and Witemberg Confessions, and
the Apology of the Church of England, the two New Testament Sacraments are
called Ceremonies; and Bishop Saunderson resolves the sum or main Contents of
the Gospel, into these three things, De Obl. Cors. Prael. 4. Sect. 32.
the Mysteries of Faith to be believed, the holy Ceremonial and Ecclesiastical
Institutions, and the maral Precepts. Bishop Whitg. Tr. 2. c. 1.
And these Bishop Whitgist calls substantial Ceremonies which a ^ of the
substance of Religion. 3. This word sometimes encludeth all such practices as
bear any external respect unto Religion; whence some have called Holy Days by
the name of Ceremonies: and Gotofredus probably supposes that fasting (at
least with some other external observations) is so called, in those words of
the Code of Justinian; Cod. Justin. l. 3. Titl. 12. Sect. 6.
Quadraginta diebus qui auspicio Ceremoniarum Paschale tempus anticipant, etc.
4. In this present enquiry, by Ceremonies must be understood, some particular
external and visible actions and circumstances, which are not instituted by
God, but are in themselves things indifferent, and are appointed in the Church
for order and decency.

2. And there is a vast difference between the things called Ceremonies in the
Church of England, and the chief part of those things, which by an aequivocal
use of the same word, we commonly call Ceremonies, in the Jewish Constitutions,
under the Mosaical Law. For those Jewish Ceremonies which consisted in their
Sacrifices, Purifications, or the proper Levitical and Temple worship, were
such things as used aright with respect to the Messiah, were the way and means
whereby Gods acceptance was obtained, and his grace and favor vouchsafed, and
did partake of a Sacramental nature, and were not amiss by Durandus called the
Sacramentalia, Rational. div. Offic. Prooem. Sect. 7.
and did also prefigure Christ to come in the flesh. And upon this account no
such rites as these, could ever be appointed or lawfully used, but such only as
were established by a divine Institution; nor might they be any longer
observed, than that institution did either enjoin, or warrant and allow them:
and hence both S. Aug. Ep. 19.
Augustine, and S. Hierome, do justly and vehemently condemn and censure the
observation of these things among Christians. And of this nature was the whole
paedagogy of the Mosaical Constitutions jointly considered, and every branch
thereof so far as it encludeth an owning of Judaism, as the way of Gods
acceptance: especially Circumcision, Sacrifice, and such like services of the
Jewish Temple: the observing of which under the Gospel, since the clear
manifestation of Christianity, would be to deny Christ to become in the flesh;
and to close with that, as a way of obtaining grace from God, and finding
favor with him, which is contrary to his will, and stands for ever abrogated
by the Gospel. And hence it may appear, that he who would charge the use of all
Ecclesiastical Rites appointed for Order, and the promoting reverence in the
service of God, as if it encluded the same, with reducing the Ceremonial Law of
the Jews, might with a fairer plea of reason, accuse all use of Seals or
Ornamental Engravings to be a forging and counterfeiting the Kings Broad Seal,
and thereby to be deeply criminal.

3. Yet it may be observed as a truth (though in be not necessary for the just
defense, of any of those things commonly called Ceremonies in our Church) that
there were many particular things in the Ceremonial Law, which singly taken and
by themselves, did only include some rational provisions, and comely and fit
Constitutions, and had nothing in themselves, which did necessarily restrain
them to the Judaical state: and such things where there is no design of any
Jewish signification, may lawfully be still made use of under the Gospel, as
still retaining what convenience or decency they would have had, if they had
never been included in the Jewish Constitutions. The appointment of the Jewish
Tabernacle in the Wilderness, is no sufficient ground to conclude it a sin, for
such Christians who sojourn in deserts, and have minds far from Judaizing, to
build an House with boards, for the place of their Christian Assemblies: nor is
the building our Churches with hewn stone to be censured as unlawful, because
such were the materials of Solomon's Temple: nor is it unlawful to use Vessels
of Silver and Gold at the administering the Communion, because such were the
Vessels of the Tabernacle and the Temple: and the like may be said of Tithes,
and some other things. To this purpose Bucer determined in his Epistle to
Alasco, and P. Martyr to Bishop Hooper, and Bishop Saunderson observes, De
Oblig. Cons. Pral. 4. Sect. 29.
that all Ceremonials are not to be alike accounted of, but those which concern
order and decency, are with prudence to be separated from those which
prefigured Christ to come: and that prudent Casuist well resolved, that those
things Which concerned order and decency, are not now simply unlawful; yet may
they be many times inexpedient, as they become dangerous by their scandal.

4. And it is acknowledged and declared, that the things with us called
Ceremonies, are in themselves indifferent, and no direct parts of worship;
because these particular things are only of Ecclesiastical or humane
constitution: for since all instituted worship is directly appointed, for the
acceptable service of God (which especially considering the fall of man, must
be in a way of Grace, and not of Merit) it must be God and not his Creature who
must determine, what Institutions will be pleasing to him. Sermon of good works
Par. 2 Sermon of Prayer. Par. 2.
And this is the Doctrine of our Homilies: and the Book of Common Prayer
speaking of Ceremonies, expressly declares, that those which remain are for a
Godly Discipline and Order, which may be altered and changed; and therefore are
not to be esteemed equal with Gods law. And our Articles assert, Art. 34.
that the Church has authority to change or abolish Ceremonies, ordained by
man's authority, so that all things be done to edifying. All which words show
that there is no holiness placed in these things, nor are they of themselves
made any part of the worship of God, in the Church of England.

5. Yet even the observation of things indifferent, may by a secondary and
consequential respect to other commands of God and duties of men (though not
directly from themselves) render our services more acceptable unto God. Thus
that gesture of body, which is not particularly determined as a necessary duty,
may be pleasing to God; as it includes a religious respect to those duties, of
glorifying God with our bodies, and serving him acceptably with reverence and
godly fear: and the observing other decent rites, may be pleasing to God as it
expresses a reverence of God, and his Ordinances and service; an obedient
respect to that command, that all things be done decently and in order; a
subjection to our Superiors in things lawful; and a care of the Churches
Peace. Upon this account Vrsin truly said, Vrsin. Explic. Catech. q 96. Loc.
Theol. in 2. Praecep.
Adiaphorae actiones possunt Deo placere, liect aliter quam cuttus Dei proprie
dictus; that indifferent actions may please God, but in a different manner from
that which is properly and directly the worship of God. To such general ends,
are those indifferent observations in our Church appointed, which are called
Ceremonies, and hence it is with good reason declared in the Book of Common
Prayer, that they are as well for a decent Order in the Church, as because they
pertain to edification. For as whatsoever exciteth reverend thoughts of God,
and his Ordinances, is thereby useful for the Churches edifying; so the Aposile
requires ruies of Order to be made for edification, 1. Cor. 14.26. and S.
Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. Chapter 14.40.
Chrysostom truly observed, that good Order, Peace and Love are the most
useful things to promote edification. (...).

6. But though external rites should be never so innocent in their own nature,
as being neither Jewish, nor owned as parts of Christian Religion, nor as
operative means in themselves to convey Grace: yet the introducing a great and
unnecessary number of them, would be disadvantageous to Religion, by obscuring
and darkning the spiritual duties and privileges thereof; by being needlessly
burdensome to Christians; and by diverting men's minds to attend chiefly unto
such external observances. Hence S. Aug. Ep. ad Januar. c. 19.
Augustine in his time (as is observed in our Liturgy) complained of the
excessive number of such rites: and the conditions which Protestant Writers
require concerning Ceremonies are such as these that they be in their kind
things indifferent, in their number sew, Kemnit. Exam. Conc. Trid. de
Tradition. 7th, genus. Vrsin Ex. pl. Catech. ad qu. 103.
and in their use godly and profitable for edification. Now in our Church,
besides the use of expedient gestures in the fervice of God, there is nothing
which in common Custom of speech is called a Ceremony, which in any proper part
of worship, is appointed in our Liturgy, to be used by any other person besides
the Minister. And in our ordinary service the Minister is only required to use
the appointed habit, which though it be customarily called a Ceremony; is no
otherwise such, than the Church, Pulpit, and the Vessels for the Communion, and
the Communion-Cloath are to be so esteemed, which are only used in the service
of God. And in our particular Offices, we have only the use of the Cross in the
Office of Baptism, of imposition of hands in Confirmation, (and the civil rite
of the Ring in Marriage): and therefore if the nature of these particular Rites
be allowable, (which in due place will be considered) there can be no damage
to Religion, nor burden to Christians from the number of them.

SECT. II.
The first Argument for the lawfulness of Ecclesiastical Rites, from the
liberty herein allowed to the Jewish Church.
1. Having hitherto endeavored to prevent mistakes and mis-apprehensions,
about the subject of my present discourse; I shall now lay down such Arguments
as will manifest, that some decent external observations in the Church, though
they be not particularly instituted of God, are allowably ordered and
appointed. The first Argument is from the pactice of the Jewish Church, which I
shall consider in a threefold respect.

2. First in their Temple worship. For though they might not lawfully appoint
any Sacramental Rite, (which was the the nature of diverse of the Temple Rites)
and though Solomon's Temple as well as Moses his Tabernacle, 1. Chr. 28.12, 19.
was built according to the pattern which God directed, and diverse other
external things were determined by divine appointment, yet even here were some
things left to the liberty, and determined by the Authority of the Jewish
Church, or the Rulers and Governors thereof. I shall not here insist upon
Solomon's offering Burnt-Offerings in the middle of the Court, and not only upon
the Altar, 1. Kin. 8.64. nor upon Hezekiahs proclaiming a general Passover, on
the second Month, 2. Chr. 30.2. because these were extraordinary Cases, which
were only allowable by the weightiness of the present occasions; when
Ceremonial Commands of God might be dispensed with, in cases of greater
concernment, upon which account it was also lawful for David and them who were
with him, to cat the show bread. But it must be acknowledged, that such
extraordinary Cases, are no more a sufficient ground for constant and ordinary
Constitutions, than the constant keeping a vein open can be concluded
allowable, because it may be expediently at some times opened, for the
preserving life or health.

3. The first instance of this liberty among the Jews, concern^th the Passover;
which was (after the building the Tabernacle and Temple) a proper Tabernacle or
Temple Rite. Phil. l. 3. de Vita Mos. Lib. de Decalog. Lib. de Septen. and
Festis.
Deuteronomy. 16.6. and though Philo Judaeus does in several places express the
Passover to be sacrificed by all the people of Israel, and not to be presented
to the Priests as other Sacrifices were: both the Talmud, Maimonides, and
diverse Texts of Scripture do sufficiently evince the contrary, as 2 Chr. 30.3,
16, 17. Ez^. 6.20, and however, it was a principal duty of the Jewish worship.
But the Jews (differently from what was commanded, only concerning the first
Passover in Egypt) usually prepared the Paschal Lamb upon the fourteenth day of
the Month; (which was also observed by Christ and his Apostles, Luk, 22.7, 8.)
they used also diverse other Rites about their Paschal Cake, their several Cups
of Wine and other observations concerning that Feast. And especially (...) it
may be observed, that the discumbing gesture or leaning on Beds or Couches, was
the posture ordained in the later times of the Jewish Church, for their eating
the Passover, as appears both from their rituals, and the Jerusalem Talmud in
Pesachin; Phil. de Vit. Contempl.
and Philo who lived about the time of our Saviors Passion, declares that
this was the gesture of ordinary use at that time, amongst the Jews at their
Religious Feasts, which was also manifestly allowable, because it was practiced
by our blessed Savior and his Apostles; being expressed by the Evangelists by
(...), and (...). Mat. 26.20. Mar. 14.18. Luke 22.14. Joh. 21.20. De Emend.
Templ. l. 6. p. 573.
And Scaliger so earnestly asserteth, that Christus obstrinxit se ritibus
Judaeorum; Christ did oblige himself, to follow and conform to the commonly
received rites of the Jewish Passover; that he accounts all who shall deny
it, to be hosts bonarum literarum, Enemies to good learning. But in the first
Passover in Fgypt they were commanded to eat with their Loins girt, their
Shoes on their feet, and their staves in their hands, which could not consist
with their discumbing: and that they stood steadfastly upon their feet is
declared by Philo, Phil. de Sacr. Abel and Caim.
and that the same gesture was ordinarily observed until the Captivity, Baron.
Annal. an. 34. n. 41.
is not improbably observed by others. And though that honorable way of
discumbing at meat, was of ancient use in the Roman, Grecian, and Persian
Empires, especially amongst the Asians: Killets Tricaen. l. 1. c. 7. Sect. 13.
Exerc. in Baron. 16. n. 22. Grot. in Mat. 26.20.
yet the most ancient instance of its practice and usage, is by one of our own
Nation thought to be in those words of Ezekiel. 23.41. by Casutbone in Am. 2.8.
which is also approved by Grotius, unless the use of the word (...) in the
Septuagint in Cant. 2.12. may possibly import, that they esteemed it to be of
as great Antiquity, as from the time of Solomon. But all these instances were
of a date very far inferior to the Passover Institution.

4. A second instance concerns the Garments, used in the attendance upon the
Tabernacle or Temple Worship. The holy Garments of the High Priest, and the
other Priests, and those only were appointed of God. But when the Ark of God
was brought to Zion, David, to express his honor to the Service of God, made
use of a peculiar Habit dancing before the Lord, in a Linen Ephod, 2 Samuel 6.14.
And the Levites who carried the Ark, and who were Singers in that Solemnity,
were also arrayed in Linen Robes or Ephods, 1 Chronicles. 15.27. as is most clearly
and fully expressed by Vatablus, and by the Syriank and Arabic Versions: and
Grotius there notes the ancient and ordinary use of white Garments in
Religious Worship. And when the Ark was brought into the Temple, the Levites
who were Singers were all of them arrayed in white Linen, 2 Chronicles. 5.12. Ant.
Jud. l. 8. c. 2.
And Josephus says that Solomon made for the Levites (...) two hundred
thousand Garment, of white Linen, Indeed Capellus justly accounts this number
to be incredible, Capel. Templ. Delineatio ex Villalpando.
and it is very probably, that either the number is depraved, or else Josephus
hyperbolizeth therein (as is frequent with the Talmudists) for the honor of
his Nation. But that the use of white Linen Garments for the Levites, was more
ancient than the times of David, may be collected from 1 Samuel 2.18. where
Samuel being yet a Child, is said to have ministered before the Lord, being
girded with a linen Ephod: and yet Samuel was only of the Levitical, but not of
the Priestly race, and was not as yet known to be a Prophet of the Lord.
Wherefore these Scriptures do speak the allowableness of these Levitical
Garments, especially considering that they were used at the removal of the Ark,
by David himself and the Levites, after the time that Vzzah was smitten,
because they served not the Lord after the due order. Yet is there not so much
as as any direction in the Law of Moses, that any such garments should either
be made for, or used by any other of the Levites, besides the Priests.

5. A third instance is the Altar of Witness, built by the two Tribes and half
when they went over Jordan to their own pos2ession; which after a jealous
inquiry by Phinehas and all the Congregation, was well approved of, when it
appeared that it was not a forsaking the God of Israel, or a disobeying his
commands, and renouncing his Temple Worship: but was only a monumental Memorial
of their profession of the true God, and having a right to do his service at
the Temple; and thereupon did include an inciting and engaging them to the true
Religion, Jos. 22.31, 32, 33.

6. A fourth instance is the Temple it self, as it was designed by David, for
the greater splendor of Gods Service, and higher honor of his Name. For
though God had commanded a Tabernacle to accompany Israel in their sojournings,
and had given no Commandment concerning a Temple, as himself expresses, 2 Samuel
7.7. that holy man had designed to build a Temple to the Lord, humbly judging
it greatly unreasonable, that he should dwell in an house of Cedar, while the
Ark of God dwelt within Curtains, 2 Samuel 7.2. And this design of David was well
approved of by Nathan, verse. 3. and God himself declared, that he did well in
that it was in his heart, 1 King. 8.17, 18. and thereupon God promised David,
that he would make him an house, and set up his seed after him and establish
his Kingdom, 2 Samuel 7.11, 12. and did command, that the thing which David
purposed should be effected, not by himself who was a man of wars, but by his
Son Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.8, 9, 10. Chap. 28.3, 4, 5, 6. And it must be
considered, that the Tabernacle of Meses was never enjoined, 1. Chr. 16. 1.
Chr. 17.5.
to be the perpetual habitation of Gods presence so long as the Jewish
Dispensation should continue: and therefore though David did not build the
Temple, yet he pitched another Tent for the Ark of God at Jerusalem, where it
abode many years, while the Tabernacle of Moses was at Gibeon, 2 Chronicles. 1, 3,
4. but neither was that action nor his design to build a Temple, contrary to
any command of God; but was only a determination of 2omewhat external, relating
to the Service of God, to express his higher honor and reverence of God and
Religion; which was therefore approved of God, though it was not particularly
commanded by him. Seder Olam Rab. c. 11.
And if we may herein credit the Jewish Chronicle, when the house of God was
set up at Shiloh, there was a soundation laid of stone (which God had not
enjoined nor forbidden) upon which the Tabernacle made of Boards, Curtains, and
Skins was erected.

7. I know that the Jewish Writers do assert, that the Law of Moses did command
the building the Temple; (by which I here understand a house of stone and Cedar
as distinguished from the Tabernacle) this seems to be affirmed by
Maimonides, Maim in Praec. affirm. 20. Gemar. in San. hedr. c. 2. Sect. 6.
Joseph Ant. Jud. l. 7. c. 4.
and is asserted by the Talmud, and Josephus says, David designed to build a
Temple; (...), as Moses had foretold. But this is not agreeable to what God
himself declares to the contrary, 2 Samuel 7.7. Spoke I a word with any of the
Judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people Israel, saying, Why build
ye not me an house of Cedar? and the ground upon which these Jewish Writers
build is mistaken. For 1. that place which the Gemara insisteth upon, Deuteronomy.
12.10, 11. concerning the place which God should choose, only enjoyneth a fixed
place for the Tabernacle of God and his Service, where he should choose it,
after he had placed them in Canaan, as may appear by comparing Deuteronomy. 12.1, 5,
11, 12. Josh. 18.1. Jer. 7.12. and the Tabernacle is expressly called (...) the
house of choice, in the Seder Olam. Seder Olam Rab. ubysupra.
And those words, Exodus 15.2. I will prepare him an habitation, being spoken
before the building of the Tabernacle, do refer thereto; and the Tabernacle is
expressly called his habitation, 1 Samuel 2.29. 2 Samuel 15.25. and in diverse other
places: as it was also very frequently called by the name of the Temple, both
in the Psalms and in the Books of Samuel: and the Sanctuary in the place
produced by Maimonides, Exodus 25.8. and in many others.

8. Thus I have now showed, that even in the Temple Worship of the Jews, some
external Rites not appointed by God, were lawfully practiced; and amongst
others, a Sacramental gesture, which was not used in the institution of the
Sacrament, a decent Vesture of white Linen, for them who attended the Service
of God therein, and a memorative and engaging sign of the Altar of Witness or
the Altar Ed. and the Reader will easily conceive, how nearly the nature of
these three things, resemble and justify our gesture at the Communion, the use
of the Surpless and the Cross at Baptism.

9. Secondly, I shall consider the Synagogue Worship of the Jews, which has a
nearer alliance to the Christian Worship. In their Synagogues they assembled to
profess and own God and his Law, to hear his Word, to praise his Name, and
call upon him, and to perform other such like Duties. And this was not chiefly
a Ceremonial Worship, as that of the Temple was; but a Moral Worship, or such a
Worship as consisted of Duties, which in the general nature of them, are
perpetually obligatory upon all the Servants of God in this World, and not upon
the Jews only, nor were they peculiar to the Mosaical Constitutions. And
concerning this which was their ordinary, weekly, and indeed a principal
Worship of God, it is truly observed by Mr. Thorndike, Of Religious Assemblies.
c. 2.
that there was very little established by God in the Book of the Law. And they
were also in some particulars left to their own prudential determinations,
where the Christian Church is not.

10. A first instance I here give of the liberty of the Jewish Church, making
determinations concerning things external velating to Religion, is touching the
Ordination of the Ecclesiastical Officers of the Synagogal Assemblies, by
Imposition of Hands. The Officers Ecclesiastical in these Assemblies, were
those who were anciently called the Sons of the Prophets; or their Elders,
Scribes, Rabbis and Doctors of the Law. Neither the nature of their Office and
Authority, nor especially the manner of their Admission thereto is any where
determined in the Law of God, but depended upon the Churches Constitutions, for
the preserving order and authority in its Assemblies. And yet that all who were
the Synagogal Officers, or who were admitted to teach there, (except the
extraordinary case of Prophets) were ordained thereto by Imposition of Hands,
and what their different manners of Ordination were, according as they
committed to them different power or authority of teaching or judging, is
sufficiently from the Jewish Forms declared by Mr. Seldom. De Syned. l. 1. c.
7. Sect. 2, 4.
And this authority of Ordination was so far approved by our Blessed Savior,
that he declared concerning the Scribes and Pharisees, Mat. 23.2, 3. That they
sit in Moses seat; all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe
and do. But though this Ordination of Elders or Rabbis among the Jews, was
founded upon no Divine Institution, as is truly asserted by Mr. Seldom, Seld.
ibidem.
the state of the Christian Church is herein under the determination of Divine
and Apostolical Constitutions.

11. A second instance is, concerning the Habit of the Prophets and the Sons of
the Prophets. That the Prophets used a rough or hairy garment or Mantle, which
was peculiar to them, may be collected by the practice of Elijah, who was known
by his hairy garment; and whose Mantle fell from him, when he was taken into
Heaven, 1 King. 1.8. Chap. 2.13. and from the appearance of Samuel in his
Mantle, 1 Samuel 28 14. And even the Annotations composed by the Members of the
Assembly, do probably assert, that when Isaiah is said to go naked, Annot. in
Is. 20.2.
Isa. 20.2. no more is intended, but that he put off his Prophetical Robe or
Mantle, such as fell from Elias. It is also generally acknowledged, that the
Prophet Zechary speaking of wearing a rough garment to deceive, Zech. 13.4.
does thereby intend the ordinary Prophetical garment; so Munster, Vatablus,
Castalio, Clarius, Drusius, and Grotius do assert, and Calvin calls that
garment, habitum Propheticum; Junius styles it communem amictum prophetarum;
and Bochartus thinks that it was vestis prophetarum propria. Bochart. Hieroz.
l. 1. c. 2.
That the Sons of the Prophets used a particular habit, by which they were
easily discernable from other men, may be probably collected from 2. Kin. 9.5,
6, 11, 12. and is more manifest from 1. Kin. 20.35, 41. And besides these
habits which were of ordinary use in their converse, there may some particular
evidence be given, of garments peculiarly used in their Synagogal Assemblies:
that such was their practice about our Saviors time, may appear from
Suetonius, Sueton. in Tiberio, n. 36.
who declares that Tiberius commanding all Jews to depart from Rome, forced
them Religiosas vestes comburere, to burn their garments which they used in
their Religious services, which at Rome could be none other than their
Synagogue Worship, or School Assemblies: Phil. de Cherubim.
and Philo Judaeus speaks of their attendance thereupon. (...) arrayed in
white apparel. Phil. de Vit. Contempl.
And declares the same concerning their Religious Feasts.

12. A third instance is, their practices and injunctions, of decent gestures
in their Religious Assemblies. At the reading of the Law. Neh. 8.5. Ezra opened
the Book in the sight of all the people, and when he opened it all the people
stood up. And when they praised and gave glory to God, the Levites commanded
the people, Neh. 9.5. stand up and bless the Lord your God, for ever and ever.

13. A last instance I shall here give, is in the admission of their chief
Proselytes, or Members of the Jewish Church from amongst the Gentiles: where
besides Circumcision which God particularly enjoined in this very Gase, Ex.
12.48. and Sacrifice whereby they declared themselves professedly to
communicate with the Temple Service, and to be partakers of the Altar; Seldom.
de Syn. l. 1. c. 3.
they also made use of washing, or a kind of Baptism in initiating these
Proselytes; Hor. Hebr. Mat. 3.6.
of which we have a large account in diverse modern Authors. This rite among the
ancient Jews did principally express the defilement and pollution of the
Gentile World, which could alone be cleansed by undertaking the true Religion,
and the right service of God. And though there might be some rational ground
for the expediency of this practice, because washing was under the law of
frequent use, in many particular Cases of uncleanness, as being a means
appointed for their cleansing: yet neither from hence, nor from Moses
sprinkling the Israelites, to confirm Gods Covenant to them. Ex. 24.8. (which
place the Jewish Writers do much urge, though that action was not performed
with water, but with the blood of the Covenant which had water mixed therewith,
Heb. 9.19.) do contain any special command of God, that washing the Proselytes
should be a rite attending their Circumcision: nor do we find that when Abraham
and his Family received Circumcision, that any such Attendant rite was joined
therewith. And yet it has been frequently acknowledged, that our Savior
choosing washing or Baptism to be the initiative rite under the Gospel, did show
thereby some allowance and approbation, of this way of admission under the Law.

14. Buxt. Syn. Jud.c. 5. etc.
And it is manifest from Buxtorf Synagoga Judaica, that the Jewish practice did
receive diverse other Synagogal Rites, even such whereof some were questionable
and doubtful; and other manifestly vain and ridiculous. But even these
miscarriages, under the degeneracy of their Religion, cannot render those other
observances unallowable, which have so considerable testimonies of their
approbation in the holy Scriptures. And thus in their Synagogue Worship from
the instances I have mentioned (to which more might be added) we have evidence
of the lawful use of external Rites, which may conduce to preserve the order of
Church Society, to the distinction and Ornament of Ministers, reverend
behavior in the service of God, and some expression of solemnity in the
sacramental admission into the Church.

15. Thirdly, We may consider the natural worship among the Jews or Hebrews; or
their general Religious profession, which was neither appropriated to their
Synagogues or Schools, Bux. Syn. Jud. c. 2.
(where they were ordinarily Circumcised as Buxtorf observes) nor to their
public Ceremonial or Temple worship; where diverse instances may be produced.

16. First, in the taking an Oath; Abraham's Servant used the Rite of putting
his hand under his Masters thigh, which Aben Ezra observed to be also a Custom
among the Indians. Nehemiah upon the like occasion did shake his lap, desiring
God so to shake out every man from his house and his labor, who performed not
that promise. Petit. Var. lect. l. 1. c. 16. Fag. in Gh. Par. Ex. 23.1.
Except^ex Hom. Chrysostom. de Juram. Tom. 6. Fr. Duc.
Neh. 5.12, 13. At other times lifting up the hand was used, in that solemn and
Religious invocation, Genesis 14.22. And it has been observed, that it was an
ordinary Rite among the Jews in taking an Oath, to lay their hand upon the Book
of the Law, (as the ancient Christians even in S. Chrysostomes time laid their
hand upon the Book of the Gospel.) But he must be satisfied with very little
evidences, who thinks that he has found a divine institution for these
observations; which are only outward signs of Religious invocation as our words
are; and therefore such expressive signs (so far as expediency and due
solemnity shall require) may be lawfully used, though they be not particularly
determined, by a Divine commmand.

17. Secondly, we may observe Rites of Memorial. Thus we not only read of
Samuel setting up a stone as a Monument of Gods praise, and a token of
remembrance that he had helped them. 1. Sam. 7.12. but Laban and Jacob erected
a heap, to be a solemn memorial and testimony of their Oath, Genesis 31.46, 47.
and when Joshua made a Covenant with the people of Israel, to serve the Lord,
he set up a stone under the Oak by the Sanctuary of the Lord, to be a witness
and memorial of their duty and engagement, Jos. 24.26, 27.

18. To these might be added, the use of sackcloath and ashes, as a testimony
of humiliation and repentance; the use of imposition of hands in their ordinary
benediction; which also our Savior practiced: and I shall in another Chapter
show that the Ring in the contract of Marriage was used among the Jews. And yet
none of these things were enjoined in the Law of Moses; further than what
concerns the Priestly benediction of Aaron with hands lifted up, which some
conceive to be a rite appointed in the Law.

19. And from what I have hitherto observed, it may be reasonably concluded,
that it is no encroaching upon, or opposing the Authority of God, if some
indifferent and expedient things be determined, and received in the Church as
things useful, but not as Divine Sanctions. And he who will deny the lawfulness
hereof in the Christian Church, must also assert and prove, that the coming of
Christ has deprived his Church, of a very considerable part of that liberty
and authority, which the Jewish Church always possessed. But against the
rashness of any such positions, the following Sections will be a sufficient
defense.

SECT. III.
Showing Ecclesiastical Constitutions particularly concerning Ceremonial Rites,
to be warranted by the Apostolical Doctrine and practice.
1. The second main argument, is deduced from the Apostles practice and
doctrine. Now though what they appointed in the Church about any matters
external, cannot be easily proved to be determined by humane prudence and
Ecclesiastical Authority; because they were so wonderfully inspired and guided
by the holy Spirit: yet if it can be showed, that the Apostles themselves
appointed external Rites, attendant on the service of God, which were of an
alterable and mutable nature, this will manifest that the use of such things is
well consistent with the Gospel worship: and thence it will follow, that the
Christian Church has liberty (as well as the Jewish Church had) to determine
such observations, since God has give no special command to abridge that
liberty. Here I shall consider.

2. 1, The holy kiss, or kiss of Charity. It was a common friendly salutation
for men to kiss each other, both among the Jews; and in other Eastern Countries
as has been observed from Xenophon and Herodotus, and was also used in the
Western parts of the Empire in the time of Tiberius. But both S. Paul, Romans
16.16. and and S. Peter, 1. Pet. 5.18. required the practice of this holy kiss,
as a peculiar Christian Rite and observation; but when and how it was used we
must discover from the relation of the ancient Christian Writers. That it was
used at their public Assemblies, at the time of their solemn Prayers, Grot. in
Romans 16. c. 16.
is proved by Grotius from the testimonies of Justin Martyr, Clemens
Alexandrinus, and Tertullian who calls it signaculum orationis the seal of
Prayer; and speaking of it as it was their ordinary expressive attestation of
Unity, Peace, Tertul. de Orat. c. 14.
and Love, he says, Quae oration cum divortio Sancti, s^uli integra? What
Prayer can be perfect, which is separated from the holy kiss? Cassand. Liturg.
c. 39.
And Cassander has evidenced from S. Austin, Innocent, and diverse other
particular Authors, and ancient Offices, that it was especially used at the
time of the holy Communion, sometimes before but for the most part after the
Consecration of the elements and before their distribution; by which Ceremony
Christians expressed their consent to those administrations, and their love to
each other: and of this kiss at the Lords Supper, Calvin supposes S. Paul to
speak, Calv. in 1 Cor. 16.^0.
when he commands the Corinthians to greet one another with an holy kiss.
Indeed several modern Ritualists being willingly so short sighted, as to
discern no further than the dusky and false light of the Romish Decretals does
discover, do ascribe the use of the kiss (...) the Communion to a later
original; some from Leo the second, others from Innocent the first: but this
appears to be a fond and vain imagination, because this Custom was not only
mentioned by S. Chrysostom, but evidently referred to by the Laodicean
Council, Conc. Laod. Can. 19. Just. Mart. Ap. 2.
and is also expressed by Jestin Martyr in his Apology, written within less
than an hundred years after the Apostolical Epistles of S. Paul, and S. Peter.
Yet that this was an external mutable Rite, is so far agreed upon and
acknowledged, as that it is generally disused, because through the vanity of
men's minds it was discovered at length to promote impurity and obscenity,
rather than holiness and Christian love. And the Romish Custom introduced
instead hereof, of kissing the tabellam pacis, or the Table of Saints Pictures,
is quite another thing from the Apostolical Rite, and cannot be excused from
superstition, from the relation it bears to their Doctrine of the Adoration
of Saints. And if we enquire how this ancient use of the holy kiss was most
ordinarily practiced, it is manifest from the testimony of the Author of the
Constitutions, Constable. Apost. l. 8. c. 11.
concerning the more early times of Christianity, and from Amalarius describing
its use about 800. Years ago, Amalar. de Deccl. Offic. l. 3. c. 32.
that it was not promiscuously used, by men and women toward each other, but
separately and distinctly by men toward one another, and by women among
themselves alone.

3. 2. Their Agapae or Feasts of Charity (which were appointed in part for the
relief of the poor, Zonar. in Conc. Trul. 74. Gang. 11. Chrysostom. in 1 Cor.
but especially to express, continue, and increase Christian love and
fellowship, which is also one great design of the Lords Supper) were in and
after the Apostles times used either immediately before as some affirm,
concerning some Churches, or immediately after it, as others assert, and which
was the more general practice, and even in the places of public Assemblies.
That they were celebrated at the same time and place with the Lords Supper,
has been usually observed and collected from 1. Cor. 11.20. -- 23. and from
Act. 2.42, 46. and from thence appears to have been used as an Ecclesiastical
Rite. The use of these Feasts of Charity was mentioned with approbation by S.
Jude, v. 12. and according to some Greek Copies by S. Peter, 2 Pet. 2.13. and
amongst the ancient Writers by Ignatius Ep. ad Smyr. Tertullian, Apol. c. 39.
Clemens Alexand. Paedag. l. 2. c. 1. Orig. Cont. Celsum l. 1. Conc. Gangr. c.
11. and by S. Chrysostom, Augustine, and diverse others, some placing them (as
the Passover was eaten) before the Lords Supper others comparing them to the
Jewish Feasts eaten after the Passover. But when these Feasts of Charity became
greatly abused, the Canons both of Provincial and general Councils, Conc.
Laodic. c. 28.3. Carth. 30. Trul. 74.
excluded them from the public places of Church Assemblies; and as Baronius
observes they were abolished in Italy, by S. Ambroses Authority; as they were
also not long afterward in Africa, by S. Augustine and the other Bishops of
the Carthaginian Province: Baron. an. 377. n. 14: Aug. Ep. 64.
and they became generally disused, though some appearances thereof may
possibly be discerned in later times, in the Communion upon Maundy Thursday in
diverse Churches, and in the practice of the Greek Church upon the day of the
Resurrection or Easter Day, Cassand. Liturg. c. 4.
when (as Cassander relates) after the holy Communion, allatis in Ecclesiam
epulis communiter convivantur, they have a common Banquet brought into the
Church, of which they all partake.

4. But against that part of this observation that the Agapae were anciently
joined with the holy Communion, it may be objected; Albasp. Obj. lib. 1. Obj.
18.
that Albaspinus does on purpose undertake to prove, that in Tertullians time,
the Agapae and the Eucharist were not observed together, but that the former
was celebrated at night, from Tertul. Apol. c. 39. and the latter in the
Morning, from Tertul. lib. 2. ad Vxor. c. 5. and de Coron. Mil. c. 3. But in
answer to this we may consider, that in that very observation, Albaspinus
himself admits, with a Non inficias iverim, that the Agapae were in the time
of the Apostles celebrated with the Eucharist: and concerning the time of
Tertullian, he neither undertaketh to prove that there were no Agapae in the
Morning, nor no Communion in the Evening: for those very words of Tertullian de
Corona militis. c. 3. Eucharistiae Sacramentum etiam antelucanis caetibus
sumimus, do intimate, that that Sacrament was administered also at other times,
besides those early Morning Assemblies, and S. Cyprian as Pamelius notes, Cyp.
Ep. 63. n. 48.
expresses their communicating the that Carthaginian Church both in the
Morning and the Evening; Socr. Hist. Eccl. l 5. c. 21.
as Socrates long after relates the Custom of Evening Communions in the
Churches of Egypt, and those nigh to Thebais. And therefore the Eucharist and
Agapae might be and were joined together, as is manifest from another place of
Tertullians Apology. Apol. c. 7, and 8.


5. And that these things were mutable Rites, and no perpetual Laws to the
Christian Church, is manifest not only from general Ecclesiastical practice,
but also because the Scriptures give no command for the love Feasts, though
they mention that practice with approbation: and the kiss which was a token of
love and friendship according to the Custom of those Countries, was thence
directed to be observed by those Christians, only as a token of their Christian
greeting and salutation, and a testimony of their Unity and Communion. Yet
because these things were used at the time of the holy Communion, as outward
actions representing part of that Christian duty, practice, and engagement,
which was signified by that holy Ordinance it self, and undertaken therein,
they were in this use properly Ecclesiastical Rites, and do justify the use of
such external actions in the service or duties of Religion, which are useful to
excite or promote Christian practice.

6. And besides these, the Apostles direction for men to pray or prophecy with
their heads uncovered, 1 Cor. 11.4.
was the determining an external Rite for order and decency, and not without
some respect to the common expressions of Reverence in Greece, and other parts
of the Roman Empire. The Jewish Priests performed their Temple service with
their heads covered with their Bonnets, as did the High Priest also in his
Mitre, and it was his honor and dignity that he might not uncover his head,
Lev. 21.10. he representing hereby the glory and honor of the Messiah. In the
Jewish Synagogue worship, their men constantly prayed with their faces veiled,
V. Hor. Hebr. in 1. Cor. 11.4.
in token of shame; as is manifest from diverse testimonies of the Talmudists:
agreeably to which Custom, the holy Angels in Isaiah's Vision, are represented
standing before God, and worshipping with their faces covered. Is. 6.1, 2, 3.
The ancient Romans used uncovering the head as an expression of honor to
great men; but yet from the time of Aeneas, Plutarch. Prob. Romans q. 10, 11, 13.
as Plutarch affirms, they had their heads covered in most of their Religious
solemnities. The Grecians worshipped with their heads uncovered, as did the
Romans also in their adoration of Saturn. But S. Paul considering the
Christians relation and encouragements, and the customary use of vailing among
women, as fitly becoming and expressing their shamefastness, modesty, and
subjection; he thence from the consideration of comeliness determines that the
expression of reverence which most befitteth the state of men, in their
Religious service is to uncover their heads, and not to vail them both in
praying and in prophesying (or praising and glorifying God chiefly under
extraordinary or prophetic raptures; in which sense the Chaldee Paraphrast often
expounds the Phrase of prophesying in the Old Testament, and R. D. Kimchi,
Chapter Par. in 1. Sam. 10.5, 6, 10, 11, 13. Chapter 19, 20, 21, 23, 24. Drus. in 1.
Sam. 10.6.
also as he is cited by Drusius). And the consequence hereof is this, that such
outward actions as tend to express a comely reverence in the service of God,
may be filty appointed and used therein, under the Gospel dispensation.

7. But because I shall in the following Chapter give some other instances of
Apostolical practice, I forbear in this place to urge any more, and therefore
shall not insist upon S. Peter submitting to have his feet washed at our
Saviors command; which some have noted to be a Jewish Paschal Rite, then
practiced under an Evangelical signification; nor upon the observations
enjoined to the Gentile Christians by the Council at Jerusalem, Act. 15. nor
upon those other manifestly ancient Rites which are not mentioned in the
Scriptures, but were by the Fathers of the Primitive Church called Apostolical
Rites, or Apostolical Traditions. But instead of prosecuting what is contained
in this last instance, I shall observe that it was a current position, among
the chief Protestant Writers of the Churches beyond the Seas, that in points of
external rite, order, and decency, some things were appointed by the Apostles
in the Churches of Christ, which were not recorded in the holy Scriptures.
Kemnit. Exam de Tradit. 7m. Genus.
Thus Kemnitius asserteth, that it is manifest from the Apostles writings, that
they did ordain and deliver some Rites unto the Church, and verisimile est
quosdam etiam alios externos ritus qui in scriptura annotati non sunt, to
Apostolis traditos esse. And it seems true that there were other external
Rites delivered by the Apostles, which are not mentioned in the Scripture. Beza
upon those words of S. Paul. The rest will I set in order when I come, 1 Cor.
11.34. grants that the Apostle did in that Church detemine other things, not
mentioned in that Epistle, but pertinent ad ordinem Ecclesiasticum, non ad
dogmata; they were not matters of Doctrine but of Ecclesiastical Order. And
upon the same words he says that they appointed things referring to order, as
time, place, forms of Prayer and such like; as times, places, and persons did
require. Zanch. Tract. de Sacr. Script. Qu. 8.
Zanchy also citing the same Text by way of Objection, in his Treatise of the
holy Scripture answers, That concerning matters of order and decency, we
acknowledge many things to have been appointed in the Churches by the Apostles,
which are not written. Concedimus multa fuisse instituta ab Apostolis in
Ecclesiis quae non sunt scripta.

8. That command of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14.40. Let all things be done decently
and in order; does manifestly suppose a power, and command its exercise in the
Church of Corinth, for the appointing what is requisite to those ends: and is
to this purpose urged, not only in the Church of England, but by those other
modern Writers, who are in high esteem with most Non-Conformists. Infst. l. 4.
c. 10. Sect. 27.
Calvin in his institutions, from this Scripture asserteth, a necessity of laws
made by Ecclesiastical Constitutions, because order and decency cannot
otherwise be kept, nisi additis observationibus tanquam vinculis quibusdam: and
in his Commentaries he thence asserteth, In 1. Cor. 14.40.
that God has left external Rites unto our liberty that we might not account
his worship to consist in them. Zanchy, Zanch. Compend. Doct. Christianae Loc.
16.
considering this Text, enquireth what the Apostle means by decency and
order? and says among other things, one end of decency is, that while certain
Rites are made use of to conciliate reverence to sacred things, we should by
such helps be the more excited unto piety. Illyricus himself declares this
command, to be a foundation, Gloss. Illyrici in Loc.
first Frinciple or Rule, upon which Church Government and Polity is to be
built, and according to which it is to be modelled. Part. 2. Chapter 4.
And the same commandment is produced by the London Ministers, in their Jus
divinum Regiminis Ecclesiastici, as giving allowance for the ordering the
circumstantials of Church Government. And then it must especially warrant the
orderly determining things circumstantial, concerning Ecclesiastical Assemblies
and divine worship, which is the special matter about which the Apostle
treats in that Chapter.

SECT. IV.
The practice and judgment of the Primitive, and many Protestant Churches
concerning Ceremonies.
1. The third Argument is, from the judgment and practice of the Church of God
in all Ages, both in its Primitive Purity, and since the Reformation. And, as
Christian Prudence and Sobriety requires a reverend esteem of the judgment or
the Universal Church; so Christian Charity, Humility, and Modesty, will forbid
the rast censuring the generally received practices in the best times of
Christianity. In the Primitive times, all their Canonical Constitutions of
Synods supposed a liberty reserved to the Church of determining things
expedient; their observation of some Rites appointed by the Apostles is clear
enough from the foregoing Section; and of their use of the sign of the Cross,
of distinct Garments in Religious Worship, of their gesture at the Communion,
and of imposition of hands in Confirmation, and the Ring in Marriage, Chapter 4.
I shall give a particular account when I come to consider the particular Rites
of our Church. And that in the early times of Christianity they stood at Prayer
on the Lords Days, and from Easter to Whitsunday, as professing the hope of the
Resurrection; that they prayed with their faces to the East (while in the
Jewish Temple Worship they always worshipped with their faces to the West);
that they used various impositions of hands on the Penitents; and gave some
initiatives Symbols, as Salt, Honey and Milk to the Catechumens, and newly
baptized persons, with others of the like nature; is so manifest, that no man
who has read the ancient Writers can possibly make any doubt thereof. And such
Rites as were orderly and fitly established by Ecclesiastical Authority,
without any divine institution, were frequently justified and defended by
diverse of the Fathers; as Tertullian, S. Ambrose, Basil, Austin, as their
testimonies might be largely produced.

2. For instance sake I shall single out S. Austin, who (though he piously
complained of the overgreat number of Ceremonies in his time, when they were
indeed very numerous) in his Epistle to Casulanus writing concerning fasting on
the Saturday, Aug. Ep. 86.
he gives this general Rule; that in those things where the divine Scriptures
determine nothing certainly, the custom of the people of God, or the
institution of our Ancestors is to be reputed as a Law. And afterward he
advises to be careful, lest the clearness or calmness of Charity, be (about
such things) Clouded over with the tempests of contention and disputation. Ep.
118. c. 2.
And in his Epistle to Januarius, after many other things to the same purpose,
he expresses the advice of S. Ambrose, which he always esteemed as a Divine
Oracle; that in things which neither opposed Faith nor a holy life, every one
was to conform to the Observations and Custom of that Church, where he had his
present abode: cum Romae sum jejuno Sabbato, cum hic sum non jejuno; sic etiam
tu, ad quam forte Ecclesiam veneris, ejus morem serva, si cuique non vis esse
scandalo, nec quenquam tibi. Ep. 119. c. 18.
(and in his next Epistle he gives a like direction about the same matter,
which is by him called saluberrima regula.) And he says he had often perceived
with grief and sorrow, much disturbance of the weak, per quorundam fratrum
contentiosam obstinationem, and superstitiosam timiditatem; through the
contentious obstinacy, and superstitious fearfulness of some brethren, who stir
up such contentious questions, (about Ecclesiastical Rites of an indifferent
nature in particular Churches) that they judge nothing right, but what
themselves do: and in the same Epistle, Ep. 118. c. 6.
he defends the Custom of the Church in his time of receiving the Eucharist
fasting, which Christ instituted after meat, but gave no command that it should
be afterward so celebrated.

3. Amongst the Protestant Writers Calvin at Geneva, Calvin Tom. 7. Ver a
Ecclesiae Reform. Ratio.
makes this formal protestation: Lest any man should raise a calumny, -- I
would have all pious Readers here to bear me witness, that I do not contend
about Ceremonies, which do serve only for decency and order, nor yet against
such which are either Symbols of, or incitements to, that reverence which we
bear to God. Vrsin Eaepl. Catec. q. 103.
Vrsin in the Palatinate asserteth the Ecclesiastical appointment of some Rites
not only to be lawful, but to be a duty; potest (says he) ac debet Ecclesia
quasdam Ceremonias instituere. Rivet in the Dutch Church says that in the
Church we use Ceremonies, Cathol. Orth. Tr. 2. q. 37.
ut gestibus, and actionibus solennibus; Ceremonies, as gestures and actions of
solemnity: and concerning such things which are appointed for decency and
order, he declares his approbation of that Rule of S. Austin, above expressed
from Ep. 118 c. 2. Among the Lutherans, Kemnitius not only asserteth the
Churches liberty, Exam. Conc. Trid. de Sacram. Can. 13.
in appointing adiaphorous Rates: but also for order sake he disalloweth all
liberty of varying from them: Et sane ordinis and decori gratia etiam in
externis adiaphoris, non est cuivis sine Ecclesiae judicio and consensu
permittendum, ut ex petul^nlie pro libidine, quid vis vel omittat vel permutet.
Ger. Conf. Cathol. Lib. 1. Gener. Par. 2. c. 5. de Traditionibus.
Gerard both acknowledges the Authority of the Church for the ordaining
samethings about the external part of worship, and yields that not only the
Church, but even the Aposiles themselves, did institute in the Church, ritus
quosdam liberos, some free indifferent rites, appertaining to order and
decency, which in specie and in particular are neither written, nor imposed by
a perpetual Law, as necessary for the whole Church. And in another place he
shows that they readily receive these adiaphorous things for order and
decency, C. 12. de consuetudine Eccles.
etiamsi sola Ecclesiae consuetudine nitantur; though they only depend upon the
Custom of the Church. Illyr. Glos. in 1. Cor. 11.16.
And Flacius Illyricus himself when he was out of the humor of opposition, did
at last in his Gloss published from Strasburgh 1570. upon those words of the
Apostle. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such Custom, nor the
Churches of God write thus. The Apostle (says he) rejects morose and
contentious answerers, showing that profitable rites received by grave
authority, ought by no means to be contemned or plucked in pieces, though they
be not built on solid demonstrations. But if any man will be stiff in his
opinion, the Apostle will not contend any longer with him, but will acquiesce
in the Custom of Godly and worthy men, and of the Churches of God themselves;
idemque (says he) alios omnes pios facere debere, and that all pious men ought
to do the same is acknowledged there to be an Apostolical direction by
Illyricus when he was out of the heat of contention in a cool and calm temper.

4. If we view the pulick writings of the Reformed Churches, Conf. Bohem. Ars.
15.
the Bohemian Confession declares them to teach, that humane Traditions,
Rites, and Customs, which do not hinder Piety, are to be preserved in the
public Christian Assemblies. And in their account of the Discipline and Order
of their Churches, they divide the matters of Religion into three heads; the
Essentialia, which contain the matters of Faith, Love, and Hope; the
Minisierialia which enclude the means of Grace, as the word of God, Rat. Difc.
and Ord. c. 1.
the Sacraments, and power of the Keys; and the Accidentalia by which they say
they mean what others call Adiaphora, or external Ceremonies and Rites of
Religion. In these matters Adiaphorous, they say, they may have some things in
use among them which are different from other Churches, and yet are they not
willing, upon any small occasions, to allow any alteration therein; neque ob
leves causus quicquam mutare aequum putamus, and nemini apud nos licet insuetas
ceremonias inahoare. Ibid. c. 2.
And in their Ordination both of their Bishop, and their Consenior (who is
designed to represent the Chorepiseopus in some ancient Churches) whose Office
is like that of our Arch Deacon, and their Minister, and their Deacon; those of
the same Order give to the person then ordained, their right hand of
fellowship, and those of the inferior Order (when one is ordained to any of
the higher degrees) give him their right hand, in token of subjection testified
and assured by that external Rite.

5. The Augustane Confession, in several expressions, asserteth it lawful for
the Bishops or Pastors, Conf. August. de Ecc^^ (...). and Art^^^, and 21 and de
descrimine cibor.
to appoint things for Order in the Church; and declares that they do retain
many ancient Rites or Ceremonies, though they complain also of the abuse of
others in the Romish Church, as the Church of England does: and it asserteth
also ritus illos servandos esse qui sine peccato servari possunt, and ad
tranquillitatem and bonum ordinem Ecclesiae conducunt. Conf Saxon. de Tradition.
The Saxon Confession treating of Rites appointed in the Church by humane
Authority, declares, that nothing ought to be appointed against Gods word, or
in the way of superstition, but that some blameless Rites for good order, both
ought to be and by them are observed; ritus aliquos honestos boni ordinis causa
factos, and servamus and servandos esse docemus. And the Ceremonies most
opposed in the Church of England, with more besides them, are retained both in
that and in other Lutherane Churches. Conf. Helv. c. 27.
The Helvetick Confession asserteth, that the Church has always used a liberty
about Rites, as being things of a middle or indifferent nature. The French
Church allows, that there be singulis locis peculiaria instituta, Conf.
Gallic. c. 32.
prout commodum visum fuerit; peculiar Constitutions for several places, as it
shall appear profitable. And the Strasburgh Confession discoursing about humane
Traditions, or external Rites and Observations, which conduce to profit, though
they be not expressed in the Scriptures, Conf. Argent. c. 14.
says, that many such the Church of God at this day does rightly observe, and
as there is occasion does make new ones; adding these sharp words, quas qui
rejecerit, is non hominum sed Dei, cujus traditio est quaecunque utilis est,
authoritatem contemnit, that whosoever rejects these things, does not contemn
the authority of men but of God, of whom is every profitable Constituion.
Wherefore he who will yet disclaim all Ceremonial Rites under Christianity, and
will esteem them to be a pestilential and dangerous Contagion in the Church,
must undertake to affix both to the ancient, and latter most famous Churches, a
Miserere nostri.

SECT. V.
The ill consequences, of denying the lawfulness of all Ecclesiastical Rites
and Constitutions in things indifferent observed.
1. Though the condemning the practice and rule of the Church in all Ages, and
even in the time of the holy Apostles and Prophets, be inconvenience sufficient
for any opinion to stand charged with: yet besides this (which has been
evidenced in the two former Sections) the denying the lawfulness of any
external Rites. 1. Debarreth the Church of what is really advantageous unto it:
for some fit external Rites of order and decency, (provided they be not
over-numerous) do promise solemnity in the service of God, and tend to excite a
greater degree of seriousness, reverence, and attentiveness. It was S. Austins
observation, De Curia pro mortuis c. 5.
that in Religion the outward actions of bowing the knee, stretching forth the
hands, and falling on the ground, though they be not performed without the
preceding actions of the Soul, do much increase the inward affections of the
heart. In the common affairs of the World, the boaring his Ear with an Awle,
who was willing to undertake a perpetual service; the giving possession among
the Jews by the pulling of the shoe, and amongst us by diverse other ways, of
livery and seisin; the delivering some ensign of authority at the enstallment
of a Magistrate, and the giving the hand as a pledge of fidelity, have by the
common prudence of men been judged useful Rites, to render those undertakings
and actions the more solemn and observable. Nor can there be any reason, why
some external actions may not obtain the like effect in matters of Religion;
especially considering that both Prophets and Apostles in delivering their
extraordinary Messages from God, thought fit frequently to make use of visible
representations, that their words might thereby take the deeper impression.
Thus Ezekiel carried out his stuff in their sight, and Isaiah walked naked
(without his ordinary Garments) when they denounced Captivity; and Agabus
foretelling the imprisonment of S. Paul, bound himself with his girdle; Act.
13.51. Mar. 6.11.
and the Apostles according to the commandment of Christ shook of the dust of
their feet, as a testimony against those Cities who received them not, V. Hor.
Hebr. in Mat. 10.14.
which was a rite the Jews made use to toward the Cities of the Gentiles, to
express their defilement and uncleanness.

2. 2. The denying the lawful use of external Rites, and humane observations in
the worship of God, is ordinarily attended with partiality of judgment. For it
is almost generally acknowledged, that in taking a Religious Oath, some
external Ceremony adds a solemnity and reverence to that sacred action:
whence when other Ceremonies in public worship were laid aside, there was an
Act of Parliament as it was entitled, that in taking an Oath it might be
lawful for any man, either to lay his hand upon the Book, or to hold up his
right hand (which was the way made use of in taking the Covenant.) And Bishop
Saunderson to this purpose judiciously declares, DeJuram. Obl. Pral. 5. Sec.
12.
that he could never receive any satisfaction, though he had often considered
with himself, and enquired of others, why a prescribed form of words, and the
use of the solemnity of external Rites, either ought not as things
superstitious to be removed from the Religious use of an Oath; or else may not
as useful helps of piety, be retained in the other parts of Gods worship. I
know that some have told us, that an Oath is not a part of the natural worship
of God, belonging to the first commandment; nor of the instituted worship in
the second Commandment; but of the revrend use of Gods name in the third
Commandment; and that the principal use of an Oath is to confirm truth and end
strife, and therefore it is not primarily an act of worship, but secondarily
and consequentially. But indeed all this is but a plausible mistake. For an
Oath as it is distinguished from a bare assertion, encludeth a direct
profession and particular acknowledgment of the Omniscience of God, and his
searching the heart of man, and of the justice of God in the punishing evil,
and that he is a God of truth, and invocateth him as such: and this is part of
the natural worship of God, or of the honor which is due to God, as being
founded in the nature of God, and the natural estate of man. And since God has
instituted this way of Religious appeal to himself, an Oath must be
acknowledged to enclude also part of the instituted worship of God. And the
Rite of laying the hand upon the Book, and kissing it, or holding up the hand,
being designed as a testimony to others, of a man's appeal to Gods Omniscience
and Justice; the end of that Ceremony, is primarily to manifest this religious
application to God, and therefore it is attendant upon an Oath, as it is
properly an act of worship.

3. 3. If no external observations not commanded by God, might lawfully be
admitted in the worship of God, then must the public exercise thereof cease.
For God who did expressly determine the time and place, for the Jewish
Tabernacle and Temple worship, has not prescribed the same circumstances for
the Christian service. Nor has he prescribed in all things the method and
gesture for our Religious addresses, nor the kind of Bread and Wine at the
Lords Supper: yet these things must necessarily be determined, where these
Ordinances are celebrated. Disp. of Humane Cerem. c. 2.
Wherefore Mr. Baxter acknowledges that such things as these, and the decent
habit for the service of God, be left to humane prudence to order, and may be
determined for order, decency, and edification. But Mr. Rutherford undertaking
to fix the right bounds for the Churches authority, distinguishes things
moral, Introd. to Div. Right of Gh. Govern. Sec. 1.
and Physical circumstances; and these latter only he grants may be
determined and ordered by the Church, but not the former. These Physical
circumstances he says are only eight and there can be no more enumerated. viz.
time, place, person, name, family, condition, habit, gesture. Now to omit the
examining the terms of that distinction, and the considering that most of our
Ceremonies (as they are called) are encluded under habit, and gesture, it is
manifest that he has pitifully shackled himself, in endeavoring the undue
confinement of the Churches Power. For as there can be no possible account, why
those eight things and no more can be determined by the Church, so it is very
obvious to discern how monstrous this enumeration is; having needless
redundancy, in adding as distinct circumstances from the person, the name,
family, and condition; to which he might with as much reason have added, the
age, stature, and complexion of the person: and they have likewise a great
deficiency, since according to his position it is unlawful to determine, what
version of the Bible shall be read in the Church, what Vessels shall be used in
administering the Sacraments, and in what method Prayers, Praises, Psalms,
Sermons, and other Offices shall succeed to each other; the appointing of which
was a chief design of the Directory. And some men who undertook to decry every
think referring to the worship of God as unlawful, unless it was particularly
injoined in the Scripture, did advance this false position so far, In Edw.
Gangrena. Par. 2. Er. 172.
as to assert that the Directory was a breach of the second Commandment; and
that there was no word of God to warrant the making that Book, more than
Jeroboam had, when he set up two high places, the one at Da^, and the other at
Bethel. Nor can such a charge be avoided, nor Religion be secured from
confusion, unless it be admitted (which is certainly true) that some things
^^ternal may lawfully be appointed, about the exercise thereof, though may be
not particularly enjoined of God.

4. The reason why I have in this Section conjoined the inconveniency attending
the disallowing Ecclesiastical Constitutions and Observations, together with
those consequent upon the disclaiming external Rites and Ceremonies, is,
because both these are equally impugned by almost all the arguments produced
with special respect to the latter of them.

SECT. VI.
Some Objections from Reason, and from the Old Testa^^^^ examined.
1. Against the (...) use of some Ceremonies in the Christian Church, there are
mustred up a (...) Army of Objections (if a weak (...) be so called); a
particular answer (...) every of which, would be tedious and needless. For the
affirming that such establishments oppose the Sovereignty of Christ, or accuse
him of negligence or unfaithfulness; and that they make men the Masters of our
Religion and such like; manifestly appear to be false accusations, by
considering that these external Rites are such things of an indifferent nature,
that their appointment by humane authority has been allowed of God, both under
the Old and New Testament, as has been above evidenced. To assert that the
allowance of any Ceremonies ordered by Ecclesiastical Prudence, V. Hooker.
Eccles Pol. l. 3.
charge the Scripture with insufficiency, and leaves us at a loss (as some
tell us it does) for a Rule of Faith Proceeds from a gross misunderstanding;
as if these indifferent things particularly considered, were matters of Faith,
and that the Scripture could not be a sufficient Rule. For Faith and Holy Life,
unless it enclude a determination of all prudential circumstances, that none
should be ordered in the Church which are not there appointed. To decry all
such things as Unlawful, because in our Church there has been much strife and
contention about them, to the breach of the Churches Peace; may appear to be a
very weak argument, from observing that both the Jewish and the Apostolical and
Primitive Christian Churches, and several Lutheran Churches of late have
enjoyed a very peaceable state, together with such Ecclesiastical
Constitutions: but the more manifest cause of strife and contention, is from
misunderstanding in some, and from want of humility and obedience in others;
and these persons have found matter sufficient for them to make a breach of the
Churches Peace, in other points besides Ceremonies.

2. As to that Objection, that the allowing any Authority for the appointing
such things in the Church, will leave its power in a boundless and unlimited
state; if this was of any force, it would equally oppose all other commanding
Authority in every superior relation in the World. And as secular Rules have
Authority to make Laws for the Peace and Order of Kingdoms, but not to exercise
oppression nor to change the nature of Good and Evil, nor to make any divine
Precepts; so Rulers in the Church are allowed to direct and appoint what
tends to good order and decency; but may not deliver any thing as Gods
command which is not, nor alter any of his Precepts and Institutions, nor to
enjoin things needlessly burdensome. How the allowing some Ceremonies in the
Christian Church is a quite different thing from the reducing the Ceremonial
law of the Jews, has been showed in the first Section of this Chapter;
Wherefore I now come to examine the Scripture evidence which some plead against
Ecclesiastical Rites and Constitutions.

3. Obj. 1. The sin of Nadab and Abihu, for which fire came out from the Lord
and devoured them, was their offering strange fire before the Lord, which he
commanded them not. Lev. 10.1, 2. And this is supposed by them who urge this
Objection, to be only an outward rite or circumstance of worship, in making use
of that fire in the service of God which was not enjoined, and about which he
had made no determination.

Ans. 1. Cypr. Ep. 73. and de Unit. Eccl.
It was much more truly acknowledged of old, that the sin of Nadab and Abihu
was, that what they did, was Dei traditione contempta, Iren. adv. Haer. l. 5.
c. 44.
in despite of what God had declared to the contrary; and therefore their sin
has been frequently paralleled, with the sin of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram. And
whereas the Scripture declares their sin, to be a doing that which God
commands them not: that Phrase in the holy Scriptures (which I commanded them
not) does not denote, gods having enjoined nothing about that particular
action, but ordinarily by a Meiosis intimates, Gods having severely prohibited
it. Thus God declared their building high places of Tophet and of Baal, to burn
their Sons and their Daughters, to be things he commanded them not, Jer. 7.31.
Jer. 19.5. and the same expression is used, concerning committing Adultery with
their Neighbors Wives, and speaking lying words in the name of the Lord, Jer.
29.23. and concerning the serving other Gods, and worshipping the Sun, Moon,
and the Host of Heaven, Dent. 17.3. all which things were vehemently forbidden
in the Law of God. Wherefore some have thought that the sin of Nadab and Abihu
consisted in Offering strange Incense, Fag. in loc.
which God had expressly forbidden, Ex. 30.9. Which opinion is declared by
Fagius; and doubtless this was the judgment of Josephus, though the ordinary
Copies of Josephus express it to be their Offering other ((...)) Sacrifices than
Moses had commanded; Joseph. Ant. l. 3. c. 10.
but that it should be read (...) Incense, is manifest by comparing Josephus
with the Hebrew, and the Septuagint. Others have observed, that before that
time God had appointed Aaron only, and not his Sons to offer any incense unto
him; and therefore it might be an act of great presumption in them: and when
Corah presumed to invade the Priests Office to offer incense, botht he
Samaritan Version, and the Septuagint, reading the Hebrew with a little
variation of the points in (...) Number. 16.37. called that which he offered,
strange fire. And some others have thought them so boldly irreverent, as
against the command of God, to thrust themselves into the holy of holies. This
is collected by some of the Jewish Doctors from Lev. 16.1, 2, 3. and is
admitted by Junius. Jun. in Lev. 10.1.


4. Ans. 2. But admitting that their sin consisted in making use of that fire
which God did not allow, we must further assert with Munster, that God having
caused fire miraculously to consume the Sacrifice uon the Altar, Lev. 9.24. and
commanded that the fire upon the Altar should be continually burning (to wit,
for the use of Gods service) and should never go out, Lev. 6.12, 13. their
offering other fire, was an opposing of Gods command. For if any should imagine
that when God had commanded incense to be offered, which must be offered with
fire; he did leave it undetermined what fire they should make use of: and that
in this case the choice of any sort of fire, because it was not commanded was a
grievous sin; this would represent the holy and righteous will of God, as
contradictory to it self, and as inevitably forcing the Priests to be guilty of
sin, because upon this unreasonable supposition their offering incense with
fire, which was their duty and commanded of God, must necessarily be accounted
a sin and displeasing to God And if such positions were admitted, they will
bring after them a numerous train of manifest absurdities and contradictions;
as that the Priest ought as God had commanded to burn wood upon his Altar, but
might in no wise make use of any sort or kind of wood to that purpose, because
God had not particularly enjoined it; and the like may be said of the kind of
Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper; and of diverse other things under the time
of Christianity.

5. Obj. 2. God commanded Deuteronomy. 12.32. Whatsoever I command you observe and do,
thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it. Ans. 1. That these words do
properly condemn on the one hand superstition, of the making any thing a part
of Religion and the Law of God, which indeed is not; and on the other hand want
of Religious reverence, in neglecting obedience to what God had enjoined and
commanded. But that diverse things referring to the worship of God, were
allowably under the J^^^sh despensation ordered, as matters (...) expediency,
by humane prude^^^ (...) ^^ve in a former Section given su^^^^ (...) ^^^^mony:
and if such appointment (...) been allowable, their Synagogue w^^^^^ which was
thereby guided and d^^^cted, must necessarily have been altogether
impracticable, or at least utterly confesed. Tr. 2. Chapter 6. div. 1.
And it is not amiss observed by B^^hop Whitgist, that that command D^ui 12.
did as well concern the Judicial part of the Mosaical Law as the Ceremoni^l;
and therefore it may with as much plausibleness be urged, to prove that no
se^^^^ar laws may be made under Christianity, as that no Ecclesiastical
Constitutions should be therein established; unless it can be showed, that
under the Gospel the Divine Law has particular (...) joined all circumstances
of worship, and Rules of Order in all Ecclesiastical Cases, where it is
presumed he has not prescribed a Platform of civil polity. And yet even in
matters judicial also the Jewish Doctors, as is manifest from their Bava Kama,
Sanbedrin, Maccoth, and other Talmudical Treatises, did give diverse resclutions
of various particular Cases and circumstances, not expressed in the Law of
Moses: and both these decisions, and their (...) or their Constitutions to be a
bedge of the Law, Macc. c. 1. Sect. 1, 3.
(as when the Law did not allow above forty stripes to him who was to be
adjudged to be scourged, their Doctors required them never to exceed thirty
nine, not thereby altering Gods Law, but taking care lest it should by mistake
be violated) are well allowed of by Christian Writers. However, Grot. in Deuteronomy.
25.3. and 2. Cor. 11.24. Coccei in Mac. c. 3. n. 12.
Since the Gospel requires a care of order and decency in the Christian
Church, to deny this liberty, would be a diminishing from its commands, but to
grant it is no addition to them. Wherefore though superstitious placing
Religion where we ought not, and irreverent neglect, or making no Conscience of
any Divine Institution, are sinful, prudential Constitutions remain lawful.

SECT. VII.
Other Objections from the New Testament cleared.
1. From the New Testament it has been objected. 1. That our Savior defended
his Disciples, for not obeying the tradition of the ^lders, which required them
to wash before meat. Mat. 15.2. Ans. As this tradition did not refer to the
order of the public worship of God, in Religious Assemblies: so the true
reason why our Savior defended his Disciples in their practicing against this
tradition, was because washing before meat was enjoined by them, as a proper
rule of Religion and of Purity. In Loc.
For as to general it has been observed by Drusius and Dr. Lightfoot, that
many of the Jews esteemed not the written Law, but that given by tradition to
be their foundation, and chief Rule of Doctrine, and declared, that he who
transgressed the words of the written Law was not guilty, but he who
transgressed the words of the Scribes was guilty: so in this particular
discourse our Savior charge them with teaching for Doctrines the
commandments of men, v. 9. and declares against their error and falt^
Doctrine, v. 20. that to eat with unwashen hands defiles not the man. So that
the question between our Savior and the Scrib^s and Parisees was this, Whether
it was to be admitted as a Doctrine, that eating with unwashen hands defiles
the man? and our Saviors justifying his Disciples in this Case. does declare,
that wheresoever salse Doctrines are obtruded as parts of the Law of God, it
can be no man's duty to receive them, and practice upon them: which is that our
Church also professes.

2. But our Savior was so far from opposing prudential Rules and Observations,
for the orderly performance of Religious services; that himself frequently
practiced such things, according to the Custom and Constitutions of the Jews.
Thus as the Jewish Doctors sat in their Synagogues when they taught the people,
our blessed Lord ordinarily used the same gesture in teaching. He also
ordinarily joined in their Synagogue worship, which was ordered by the Rules of
Ecclesiastical Prudence, and observed the gesture and other Rites of the Jewish
Passover, which the Authority of their Elders had established for order and
decency. And whereas in the Jewish Synagogues, and Schools, their Doctors used
to sit about in a Semicircle; and their Scholars before them upon lower Seats,
to whom the asking of Questions was allowed: our Savior also n the Temple
(which in the holy Scriptures often encludeth the whole Court and building of the
Temple, among which were Religious Schools and Synagogues) sat (...) in the
middle of the Doctors hearing them and asking them Questions. Luke 2.46.

3. Some have also against the use of external Rites in the worship of God,
urged those words of our Savior. Joh. 4.23. The hour comes and now is when
the true worshippers, shall worship the Father in spirit and truth: collecting
thence, that the Gospel worship is so wholly spiritual, that it does not admit
outward Rites and signs. Ans. 1. This must needs be a false construction of
these words, which would tend to disclaim the two New Testament Sacraments, the
open and visible profession of Faith, the public meeting in Church Assemblies,
the praising of God and praying with the voice, the reading and hearing Gods
word, reverent gesiures in Religious service, and such like necessary parts of
Religious duty, in all which there is use of bodily actions and external signs.
2. Our blessed Lord by these words of worshipping the Father in spirit and
truth, expresses that worship which the Gospel directs; this is often called
the truth, and the worshipping of God in the Spirit. Gal. 3.3. Phil. 3.3. and
is opposite to the false worship of the Samaritans, and different from the
serving of God in Jewish Figures, yet it both admits and requires external
expressions of reverence. And in this place our Savior declares, that under
the Gospel, the worship of God should be so properly suitable to God who is a
Spirit, that it should not be confined to any one particular place, and
therefore neither the Jewish Temple nor Mount Gerizim (about which places of
worship Christ then discoursed with the Samaritan Woman) should be the peculiar
place for divine adoration. Because God who is a Spirit would under the Gospel
be so spiritually known and honored, that he would not in any singular and
peculiar place, six any special outward Symbol of his divine presence, as in
the Jewish dispensation he had done in the Temple, over the mercy Seat: nor
would he endure to be worshipped under the representation of a corporeal image,
as the Samaritans in Mount Gerizim did worship God, in the form or image of a
Dove; as has been observed by Mr. Mede, Mede Disc. en Jo. 3.23.
and is declared concerning them in the Talmud in Cholin, and by the Jewish
Chronicler in Tzemach David, whose testimonies and words are produced by
Bochartus. Bochart. Hieroz. Part. pester. l. 1. c. 1. Vossius de Idololatr. l.
1. c. 23.
Indeed the Learned Eochartus (as did also Vossius) accounts this charge upon
the Samaritans to be a Fable, because it could not consist with their owning
the Law of Moses, and is not mentioned either in the Scriptures, or in
Josephus. But considering how little Josephus wrote, that has any kind of
relation to the Samaritan worship, and that our Savior charge them with a
miscarriage about the object of their worship, Joh. 4.22.
Ye worship, says he, ye know not what; considering also that the worshippers
at Bethel, by whom the Samaritans were instructed, did before their Captivity
worship God there by an Image, and that the Assyrians, Syrians, and others
Neighboring upon the Samaritans, as Bochartus shows, Bochart. ibidem.
did choose the form of a Dove to be the Image and resemblance of God; there is
no just reason to question the evidence of the Jewish Writers concerning the
Samaritans.

4. It has been also objected against all Ecclesiastical Constitutions, that
the Apostle blamed the Colossians, Col. 2.20, 21. Why as though living in the
World are ye subject unto Ordinances, such as he mentions in the next verse,
Touch not, (or eat not) taste not, handle not. Ans. This place concerns not
prudential Rules of order, Davenant. and Zanch. In Loc.
but it blames the Colossians, that they should suffer their minds to be
deluded, Whitak. Cont. 4. Qu. 7. c. 3.
and their practices to be enshared and perverted, by false positions delivered
as Doctrines; and this is observed to be the sense of (...) v. 20. and these
things were called the Commandments and Doctrines of men, v. 22. and
will worship, v. 23 because they were delivered as proper divine Commandments.
And that this was the cause of the Apostles reproving the Colossians, may be
further manifest, because the Apostles themselves upon a prudential and
Christian account, enjoined the Gentiles to forbear some sorts of meal, the
observing of which Apostolical Constitution (which did not doctrinally declare
those things themselves to be unclean) was in no wise condemned by S. Paul
writing to his Colossians.

5. That place of S. James. Jam. 4.12. There is one Lawgiver who is able to
save and to destroy, does appropriate to God the Authority of establishing, and
executing such Laws, the obeying or disobeying which, is the sure way to
eternal life or destruction, because they are his Laws: but this Scripture
having no peculiar respect, to the worship of God in public Assemblies, does
no more condemn Ecclesiastical Constitutions of Creder in the Church, than
either the civil sanctions of secular Governors, or the Domestic commands of
Parents or Masters. Inst. l. 4. c. 10. Sect. 7, and 30.
And even Calvin with some respect to this place of St. James, aserteth in his
Institutions, that in the great matters of Christianity, there is unicus vitae
magister, one only who is to rule and command our life; but in externa
Disciplina and Ceremoniis, in matters external concerning Discipline and
Ceremonies, he has not thought sit to prescribe every particular thing, but
has left us to be guided by general rules.

6. I know that some who urge this place of S. James, would thence conclude
that none besides God, have any power or Authority, by their commands, to
him^^^^ Consciences of men. Now though this TExe speaks nothing expressly of
Conscience or its obligation, I shall concerning that matter add, that
Ecclesiastical Constitutions do no otherwise bind the Consciences of men (so
far as concerns the nature of the obligation) than the commands of
Magistrates, Parents and Masters do, though they have ordinarily the stronger
motives, with direct respect to the Peace and Order of the Church, and the
edification of its Members And it must be acknowledged that no humane
Authority, can bind the ^^^ing power of Conscience, so that it is (...) that a
duty, which is whereby ^^^^^^ded, without having liberty (...) of its
lawfulness: and this is ^^^if^^tly the sense of several (...) Writers, when
they say that Go^^^^ly has power to bind the Conscience. But that humane Laws
and commands do secondarily and consequentially bind the Conscience, to take
care of practicing what is lawfully commanded, is that which can (...) be
denied. It would certainly sound harshto a Christian Ear, if any shall assert,
that a Child is not bound in Conscience, to do any particular lawful thing
which his Father commands him; it being all one to assert that it is not his
duty, and that he is not bound in Conscience to do it. But if he be bound in
Conscience to do that upon his Fathers command, which he was not bound to
undertake without that command, it must needs be his command, which lays that
obligation upon Conscience, secondarily and consequentially, or with a respect
unto Gods general command of obedience.

7. In this sense it is not unusual with Protestant Writers beyond the Seas,
(as well as with diverse of our own Nation, as particularly Bishop Saunderson de
Obligatione Conscientiae, Duct. Dubit. l. 3. c. 1. rule 1.5. and Chapter 4. rule 5.
and Bishop Tailor very largely in his Ductor Dubitantium) to assert, that the
injunctions of our Superiors bind the Conscience, Vrsin in his Explicatio
Catechetica, asserteth the Constitution of the Magistrate to bind the
Conscience, that is (says he) by reason of the command of the Magistrate, Ex.
Cat. qu. 96.
it becomes necessary to be performed, and cannot be neglected without the
offense of God, though it be no case of scandal. In praec. 2. de Cultu Dei.
And in his Loci Theologici he to the same purpose declares, edicta
Magistratus obligant conscientias, and absque scandalo obligatur conscientia ad
harum legum observationem. To the same purpose may Paraeus be produced. Alsted
Theol. Cas. c. 2. Reg. 2.
And Alsted very well notes that humane laws mediately or under God do bind
the Conscience even as an Oath, Vow, or promise made by a man's sely does.

8. I shall not insist upon that objection from Heb. 3.5, 6. which expresses
the faithfulness of Christ to be more glorious than the faithfulness of Moses,
from whence it has been with more manifest violence, than strength of
argument, concluded, that under the Gospel which is perfectly and completely
delivered by Christ, there is no place left for any prudential Constitutions,
which were (say they) wholly excluded under the Mosaical law. But I suppose I
have beyond all contradiction evinced, that under the Mosaical Law, there were
diverse things appointed by Ecclesiastical Authority. And that Moses's
faithfulness consisted in delivering the Law as he received it, and not in the
compleatness of enjoining every particular circumstance in the Church, will
appear evident; because otherwise he could not be accounted as faithful, with
respect to their Synagogue worship as to their Temple worship. And it may be
further noted, that the numerous divine commands about matters external,
referring to the Temple worship, V. Sanders. de Obl. Cons. prael. 6. Sect. 30.
which was the Law of Commandments contained in Ordinances, was no part of the
privilege but of the bondage of the Jewish church, in which the Gospel Church
was not designed to be conformable thereto.

9. What is usually produced upon this subject from the fourteenth Chapter to
the Romans will fall more directly under consideration in the following Chapter
where I design to give a particular account of the true sense thereof.

10. But what has been here said, can be no pretense of excuse for the Rites
of the Romish Church; where besides their unreasonable and burdensome number,
diverse of them are evil in their nature: many of them being Sacramental and
designed to be operative of Grace and spiritual help: and others being opposite
to plain duties of Religion, such are the making images of the Trinity; and of
the Saints for adoration; the suppressing the Cup to the Laity, a Rite of
Christ's appointment in the Eucharist; the adoration of the Sacrament as
transubstantiated: and diverse others being manifestly superstitious, as might
be evidenced in their various consecrations (as they account them of Bells,
Candles, Water, Salt, Chrysm, etc.) Processions and such like.

CHAP. II.
Of external Rites and Constitutions, as significant, enjoined, scrupled, or
having been abused.
SECT. I.
Of external Rites as significant.
1. Com. Pray. of Ceremonies.
OUR Liturgy declares the Ceremonies retained in our Church, to serve to a
decent order and godly Discipline, and to be such as are apt to stir up the
dull mind of man, to the remembrance of his duty to God, by some notable and
special signification, whereby he might be edified. Thus kneeling at the
Communion is designed to express Humility and Reverence; the Cross at Baptism
to be a memorative taken of engagement to the Christian Life, and the
Ministerial Habit to be a testimony of peculiar respect and honor, to the
worship and service of God. And if any from the White Linen take occasion to
meditate, and think of the purity of Divine Worship, and the Christian Life;
and that as White Linen is changed from its natural greenness and moisture, to
become useful and comely, through much industry, washing, and the influence of
the Sun; so the corrupt state of fallen man, may become renewed unto holiness by
the power of divine Grace, and serious Christian diligence: such considerations
as this, though not commanded in this Church, may well be approved and defended.

2. T. C. Repl. p. 136. Linc. Apol. 1605. Alt. Damasc. c. 9. p. 522. Mr. Baxt.
Disp. of Cerem. c. 2. Excep. of Presb. p. 9.
But such external instituted signs which by their signification do either
teach any duty, or excite to the performance thereof, have been generally
decryed with some earnestness by the Non-Conformists, under the name of
Mystical teaching signs, sometimes as Jewish Rites, and sometimes as new
Sacraments. Whereas it seems very strange that an useful significancy, or its
conducibleness to promote good, should become a crime. Surely it is altogether
as reasonable, that such an Ornament of the body which might otherwise be
approved, should become utterly intolerable, if it be of any advantage for
warmth or health; as that any appointment for order and decency in matters of
Religion, should be thought altogether insufferable, because of its tendency
toward edification, or any spiritual benefit. Wherefore

3. Consider. 1. That the denying all lawfulness of using any external thing
not commanded of God, as a sign either to help our understandings or excite our
affections, does very much tend to the prejudice of Religion and Christianity.
For this would condemn the use of Parables and Similitudes, which our Savior
following the Custom of the Jewish Teachers, did frequently express. And this
would condemn a very useful part of Christian meditation; as if he who looks
upon the Earth no otherwise than the Beast does, might be well approved of;
while he who fixing his eyes thereupon, considers that he was taken out of
the Earth, and must return thither, and thence enters upon in humble
thoughtfulness of his own frailty, must be condemned; or as if it was a heinous
thing for a Christian when he looks up to Heaven, immediately to entertain
thoughts thereupon, of Christ's being ascended thither, and how much he is
obliged that his affections and conversation should be above.

4. Cons. 2. The lawful use of some other visible signs besies gestures, is
necessarily allowed in the right exercise of Christianity. I suppose none will
condemn our kneeling at Prayer, though it be primarily designed to testify our
lowlyness, reverence, and humility; and to own and acknowledge the Sovereignty
and Majesty of God; or standing to hear, thereby to express or excite Christian
attention: the lifting up the hands or eyes in Prayer out of true devotion, is
not therefore blameable, because it is a sign of a stedsast hope and confidence
in God, and of expectation from him; nor may the Publican's smiting his hand
upon his breast, be thought the worse of, because it encluded a pathetick and
affectionate acknowledgment, of his unfeigned humiliation and sorrow for sin.
Act. 21.40. Chapter 26.1.
We often read of the Apostle beckning with his hand, to move his Aditors to
attention; and I suppose few will be so bold, as to censure the Custom of the
Primitive Christians, Tertul. Apol. c. 30.
who prayed as Tertullian declares, manibus expansis quia innocuis, capite
nuclo quia non erubescimus, and who frequently stretched out their hands in
Prayer composing themselves thereby to a suitableness to Ch^^^ dying on the
Cross, Tertul. de Great. c. 13.
Dominica passion^^^ (...) and having in that posture an (...) intea^uess of
mind upon our Saviour^ Passion, when his hands were stretched out. But dare any
undertake to blame that woman, whom our Savior commanded and approved, who
kissed the feet of our Lord, and anointed them with Ointment, Luke 7.38.-50.
and who washed them with her tears, and wiped them with the hair of her head,
as a testimony of religious reverence, honor and vehement love to the Son of
God by whom she obtained remission of sins? or to condemn her who to a like
purpose poured that Ointment of spikenard upon his head, concerning which he
declared, that wherever the Gospel should be preached, throughout the whole
World, that which she had done should be spoken of for a memorial of her Mar.
14.3, -- 9. Wherefore outward voluntary actions, designed to signify some
Religiouis thing, ought not universally to be disclaimed. And it will concern
them who condemn external Rites merely upon account of their signification,
which might otherwise be admitted; to consider how they can allow according to
this opinion, the use of proper and expressive words in the service of God, to
be preferred before nonsense and impertinencies: (since words are properly
signs of things as S. Aug. and Rabanus have noted, Aug. de Doctr. Christ. l. 3.
c. 1, 2, 3. Rab. Maur. de Inst. Cler. l 3. c. 8. etc.
and the particular words appropriated to all parts of Divine worship are not
enjoined by God himself) and whether this position will not go far, toward the
condemning Religious and devout behavior in Christian Assemblies, because it
is an outward and visible expression of a pious frame of mind; whereas such
external actions rightly used with a due significancy are testimonies and
incentives of Piety and Religion, but without such a signification, are either
Hypocritical, or at least vain and empty.

5. But some distinguish here between such things which have a natural
significancy, as Religious gestures; and such things as signify by humane
Constitutions and consent; the former they do admit but not the latter. But
this distinction is to little purpose; partly because there can be no
sufficient reason given, why the latter should be universally disallowed, while
the former are approved; partly because most things supposed to have a natural
significancy, did derive their original signification from humane custom and
consent, as reverent gestures, and uncovering the head; and partly because
diverse particular things abovementioned, which cannot be disapproved, cannot
be pretended to have a natural signification, to which laying the hand on the
Book in an Oath, and others more may be added.

6. Cons. 3. The disallowing all external significative Rites in Gods service,
is a thing opposite to the general sense of the Church of God in all former
Ages. That diverse signfiicative Rites were lawfully used in the Jewish Church
without any divine Institution, is sufficiently manifest from the instances
given in the former Chapter, and such were also the Apostolical Rites of the
Love-kiss, the Feasts of Charity, and the having men's heads uncovered, and not
veiled. The judgment of Calvin and Zanchy approving such Ceremonies of
Ecclesiastical appointment were also in that Chapter produced; and the same may
be observed in Vrsin Explic. Catech. q. 103. and P. Martyr, Ep. Hoopero. Art.
15.
The Bohemian Confession teaches that such Rites by whomsoever they were
introduced, ought to be preserved which advantage Faith, the worship of God and
other things that are good amongst Christians; with which agrees the
Strasburgh Confession Cap. 14. Some significative Rites of the Ancient
Christian Church, were also mentioned in the foregoing Chapter, to which may be
added, the frequent use of the Trinal Mersion in Baptism, as a profession of
the Trinity and of Conformity to the Death of Christ, which continued three
days; and this is used in diverse Protestant Churches at this day: they also
sometimes purposely used the single Merscon, to testify the Unity of the
Godhead. In c. 2. q. 1. c. legum.
Sometimes as appears by the words of Hincmarus the person to be baptized
(supposing him adult) was to give up his name in writing, to signify by that
action his willingness and desire to undertake Christianity; and to obtain
Baptism. And very anciently the person receiving Baptism did then change his
Garments, arraying himself in white, as an admonition to him that he then
changed his state, and undertook the innocence of the Christian profession: De
Consecr. Did. 4. c. post baptismum and Accepisti.
this Custom was observed by Gratian, from Rabanus, and S. Ambrose; and is
thought by a learned man of our own Nation, to be as ancient as the Apostles
themselves, and to be alluded unto, in the use of those Scripture Phrases, Mr.
Thorndike Right of the Church c. 4.
of putting of the old man with his deeds, and putting on the new man. Col 3.9,
10.

7. The main Objection peculiarly directed against signisicant Ceremonies, is,
that such things have a resemblance of Sacraments; but no Ecclesiastical
Authority, nor any person below Christ himself, can constu^^te or appount a
Sacrament. Cont. Faust. l. 10. c. 16.
Indeed S. Augusline sometimes speaks of Sacraments as being nothing else but
verba visibili^, visible words; and other where says, Ep. 5 Marc.
that signs referring to divine things are called Sacraments: but these
expressions were noted by Kemnitius as instances to show, Kemnit. Exam. de
Sacram. Can. 1.
that S. Augustine used the word Sacrament, in a great latitude of sense; this
being an Ecclesiastical word, not always taken in the same strictness of
signification. And S. Aug. does there peculiarly speak of a certain kind of
signs, viz. the Jewish Ceremonies appointed by the Divine Law, which I have
above observed to enclude somewhat Sacramental.

8. But that we may rightly apprehend, (...) significative signs are lawfully
(...) in the Church, I shall distinguish (...) signs referring to matters of
Religion, into so many several ranks or Classes, as may be sufficient for the
clearing my present enquiry. Wherefore

9. First, Some external signs are appointed to ratify, seal and confirm the
Covenant of God, and to tender and exhibit the Grace of that Covenant, or
Christ himself unto us. And these signs are properly Sacraments, according to
the definition thereof in our Church Catechism; to be outward and visible signs
of inward and spiritual Grace, given unto us, ordained by Christ himself, as a
means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to assure us thereof.
Accordingly Baptism as a means of Grace does exhibit remission of sins. Act.
22.16. and Salvation. 1 Pet. 3.21. and the Lords Supper exhibiteth the New
Testament in Christ's blood, and is the Communion of the body and blood of
Christ. 1 Cor. 10.16. Chapter 11.25. And Rabanus Maurus describing a Sacrament,
says, De Instit. Cler. l. 1. c. 24.
that therein sub integumento rerum corporalium, virtus divina secretius
operatur salutem. And that this is the common Doctrine of the Protestant
Writers concerning Sacraments, (which they defend, against the Calumnies of the
Papists, who charge them with asserting the Sacraments to be only significative
signs, but not exhibitive; and also against the fond opinion of the Anabaptists
and other Sectaries, accounting Sacraments to be chiefly professing signs) may
be evidenced by perusing Bishop Cranmer in his Preface to his Book of the
Sacrament. Bishop Ridley de Coena Dom. p. 28, 29. Bishop Jewel Apol. and Reply
Art. 8. Dr. Whitaker de Sacr. Qu. 1. c. 3. Bucer. Conf. de Euchar. Sect. 45.
and Epist. ad Michael. N. Hispan. Kemnit. Exam. de Sacr. Can. 5, 6, 7. Vrsini
Apol. Catech. ad 3m Calumn. and adv. Anabapt. Chamier de Sacram. l. 1. c. 10.
Sect. 13. Rivet. Cath. Orth. Tr. 3. q. 1. with many others. Now none can
appoint any such sign as this, but he who has power of giving the Grace
exhibited thereby: and if any humane authority constitute any sign to this end
and purpose, it would therefore be an high intrenchment upon the Sovereignty of
God, and the authority of Christ; and the expecting this Grace from any such
sign is great superstition.

10. Secondly, There are signs appointed, not to exhibit and tender the Grace
of Gods Covenant, but to testify in Gods name the certainty of some point of
Faith, (as the Star in the East was a witness of Christ's Birth, and an
assurance thereof to the Wise men) or to tender some particular special favor
or help from God, or to give assurance thereof in his name: and such were the
Priestly Unctions under the Law, and the anointing of a King by Gods special
Commandment; the brazen Serpent in the Wilderness, and the sign of Gideons
Fleece, and the shadow going back on the Dial of Ahaz. And though these signs
were not properly Sacraments, they were a kind of Sacramentalia, and upon the
same account with the former sort of signs, these could never be appointed by
any power upon Earth.

11. Thirdly, There are some properly called Mystical teaching signs; intended
to inform the understanding of man, concerning some mystical or spiritual
divine truth, by Hieroglyphical or visible representations. Sacerdotalis Par.
3. de processione in Parasc. and in die Pasch.
Thus in the Romish Church to declare the death and resurrection of Christ, in
a formal Procession on Good Friday, the Host is laid in the Sepulcher, and the
Sepulcher shut and sealed; but the Priest on Easter Day in the Morning, with
other of the Clergy takes the Host out of the Sepulcher, and leaves it open:
whither when the Clergy and people do come in a solemn Procession and find the
Sepulcher open, and the Host not there; their Rector declares that Christ is
risen, which they hear with joyfulness. But how manifest is it that this
procedure, is more sitted to confirm the Jewish error, that his Disciples came
by night and stole him away, than to express the glory of the divine power in
raising Christ from the dead. And some as has been declared by Balsamon have
let fly a Dove, Bals. in Conc. Trul. c. 82.
to represent the coming of the Holy Ghost, and dressed a bed to express the
ineffable Generation of Jesus Christ: but these are such fond and foolish
things, that (besides the great sin of resembling God by an image) they are
justly called by Bishop Tailor, Theatrical gayeties; and such things tend to
darken and debase the divine Mysteries, and to render Religion contemptible, by
the sordid lowness of such representations. Such things as these might justly
be exploded by Didoclavius; Altar Damasc.
but it is falsely insinuated that herein he has matter of controversy with
the Church of England (as if all significant Rites were of a like nature)
whereas it neither practices nor approves such irreligious vinity. Spiritual
Mysteries of Christianity, can be fitly exprissed by the words of divine truth,
but the more spiritual they are in their own nature, the more they are
adulterated and depraved by visible corporcal representations.

12. Fourthly, Others are professing and engaging signs. Such signs whereby we
visibly profess the Christian Faith, and Doctrine in general, cannot reasonably
be disallowed, by them who acknowledge the visible profession of Christianity
to be a duty. And though such a profession is encluded in receiving the
Sacraments, yet it is not so peculiar thereto, that it should not be usefully
made in such other outward actions, as the lifting up the hands or eyes, and
bowing the knee to God in the name of Jesus Christ, standing at the Creed,
particular attendance upon a Christian Assembly, or (where the state of
Religion requires it) the yielding to be Confessors or Martyrs for
Christianity. Nor are such extern^^ signs condemnable, whereby a profession of
some particular doctrine of Religion, is upon a weighty occasion expressed; as
the Rite used in an Oath, contains an acknowledgment of the righteousness and
Omnisciency of God; the imposition of hands frequently used of old toward
Penitents, encluded a declaring, that Christ and the Gospel Doctrine does
graciously receive Sinners, upon their hearty and unfeigned repentance; and to
testify the same, Fus. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. ^^.
S. John the Apostle kissed the hand of that Ephesian Penitent, of whom we have
an account in Eusebius, from Clemens Alexandrinus. And as outward actions are
ordinarily fit, with many advantages to give evidence of the mind and
profession of men; so some Now Conformists have accounted it a thing expedient,
that those who receive the Holy Sacrament, should by their subscription profess
their resolution, to believe and live as becomes the Gospel: and the Author of
the Admonition in the first edition thereof, In Ris^^p Wb^^ft Tr. 15. Chapter 1.
did declare sitting (...) the Lords Supper to be the more commendable, because
it signified rest, and therefore might enclude a profession of the Ceremonial
law being finished, and that a perfect work of redemption is wrought which
gives rest for ever. Some professing signs have principally expressed the
Communion of Christians amongst themselves, which must also be allowed lawful;
such were the love Feasts, the kiss of Charity; the ancient manner of
Christians owning one another as brethren, and receiving them as such in their
Houses and dismissing them with peace. And of this nature were the Symbols
anciently given to the Catechumens, Albasp. Observe. l. 2. Obj. 36.
(which Albas pinns very probably proves, to be taken out of the Oblations of
the Christians) which encluded an acknowledgment, that they (though they were
not yet complete Christians) had some relation to the Church of Christ, as a
more full right of Communion was owned among the Fideles by the Feasts of
Charity.

13. Other professing signs do enclude some solemn engagement of persons,
either to undertake or to prosecute true Christianity: this (if we charitably
separate it from other attendant mistakes) is designed in the way of the
Independent Church Covenant, and in the conclusory part of the Presbyterian
League and Covenant, and some persons have done the like by some particular
writing of their own. All I shall say concerning these signs, is, that such a
serious engaging profession can be no other way so allowably and usefully
pertormed, as in attendance upon and with reference unto the Holy Sacraments;
because they are Gods own institutions; because the proper and principal act
and work of him who receives the Sacrament, is to prosess his owning, and to
engage himself unto the Faith, Hope, and practice of true Christianity; and
because divine grace and fellowship with Christ, is also in the Gospel
Sacraments tendered unto us. And it is to the honor of the Church of England,
that it appoints no other way of solemn engagement to Christianity, besides
the use of the two Sacraments of the New Testament, and Confirmation, which as
it is an Apostolical Rite, so it contains a ratifying and confirming the
baptismal vow, by persons come to some capacities of understanding; and
therefore it is to be considered with reference unto Baptism, so far as
concerns the solemnity of Engagement.

14. Fifthly, There are exciting signs, which should recall to our memories some
profitable object or duty, and stir up our hearts and affections to a more
serious practice of Religion. Such was Joshua's stone set up, to be a witness
or testimony of their profession, lest they should deny their God. Jos. 24.26,
27. and the trinal Mension in Baptism was to mind Christians that their Baptism
engaged them to acknowledge and worship the Father, the Son, and the Holy
Ghost. Baxt. Disp. of Gerem. c. 2. Sect. 58.
And whereas it is objected against the use of any such external signs, that
this is to set up something to work Grace in the same manner that the
Sacraments do, which do only objectively teach, remember, and excite; and
thereby work on the understanding, will, memory, and affections: all this is
grounded upon manifest misapprehensions. For the holy Sacraments do not only
stir us up to the exercise of Grace already received, but do tender to us a
Communion with Christ, and a Communication of further Grace from him; which no
humane Rites can do: Artic. 25.
Whence our Articles declare them to be effectual signs of Grace and Gods good
will toward us: by the which he does work invisibly in us, and does not only
quicken, but also strengthen and confirm our Faith in him: In Sect.
and agreeably hereunto is the Doctrine of all the Protestant Writers
abovementioned. But to condemn all objective incitements to the exercise of
Grace, as humane Sacraments; where there is no pretense of their being direct
means of conveying further Grace from God; would enclude a censuring any
particular becoming actions, gravity, and due expression of affectionateness in
the Minister or people in Christian Assemblies, because it is a means to excite
others to the greater reverence, and Religious devotion; and would condemn any
actions as sinful and evil, merely from their being useful to promote good. And
for example, hereupon he who looking into a Register Book, where his Baptism is
recorded, shall only take notice of his Age, should be commended: but he who
upon the sight of his name in that Book, is put in memory concerning his
Baptismal Covenant, and excited to a care of answering that Covenant, by a
Christian and pious life, should be guilty of grievous sin, as if this was to
make that Book to be a kind of Sacrament. And they who reject all exciting
signs as being Sacramental, may find almost all the same pretenses to dislike
all words not instituted of God, which do excite men to Religious Piety;
especially when they are accompanied with any outward action though it be but a
gesture: because not only Sacramental signs but Sacramental words in their
Sacramental Use, as in Baptism, I baptize thee in the name, etc. do both
exhibit and excite Grace as an essential part of that Sacrament; and there is
not much more reason to conclude all exciting signs to be Sacramental signs,
than to account all exciting words to be Sacramental words.

15. Sixthly, Other external things in Gods worship are properly significant of
reverence toward him, and of high esteem of him, and his Ordinances. Such are
a humble and devout behavior and gesture, which are Hypocritical actions,
where no such signification is intended; but when designed to this end, they
are truly religious, but far from being Sacramental. O^ this nature are the
preparing and preserving decent structures, and other things comely (as
Communion Table, Cup, etc.) which are set apart for Religious service. And to
this sixth head, belongs the use of the Ministerial Garments appointed in our
Church, as the use of the Cross in the Office of Baptism, is of the nature of a
memorative and exciting sign, under the former head. And to dislike these
things solely because of such signification, is to account the actions of man
(who in Gods worship acts as a reasonable Creature) to be the worse, merely
because he is able to give a good and rational account why he does perform them.

SECT. II.
Of Ecclesiastical appointments, considered as imposed, and enjoined.
1. Having proved in the former Chapter the lawfulness of some external Rites,
and having showed in this Chapter that they do not become unlawful by being
significant, we may hence infer, that nothing can be said against the enjoining
some such lawful Rites but what will equally oppose all Ecclesiastical
Injunctions and Constitutions in things indifferent. For if these things be in
themselves both lawful and in their due circumstances useful, (as I have above
showed) and if there be a power in the Church of enjoining lawful things to
useful purposes, then cannot the establishing these things thus directed be
disallowed. But to deny the lawfulness of Ecclesiastical Sanctions and
Constitutions is to charge all the ancient famous known parts of the Church of
Christ, with a sinful usurpation of Authority in the Church: for that they
enjoined what they judged useful, both in General and Provincial Synods, is
manifest from the Canons of the Code of the Universal Church, and of the Roman
and African Churches; and from the more ancient Canons among those called the
Apostles, and from other Ecciesiastical Rules of Discipline frequently
mentioned in Tertullian. S. Cyprian, and other ancient Writers. And that this
practice of the Church was used ever since the Apostles, is not only manifest
from the instances given in the former Chapter; Sect. 3.
but is also evident from the Synod at Jerusalem and its decisions concerning
somethings indifferent mentioned, Act. 15.

2. Concerning the Decrees of that Council at Jerusalem, I shall Observe, 1.
That some part of the matter of them, was not contained under the Divine
Precepts of perpetual obligation, but was enjoined only as Ecclesiastical laws
of mutable Constitution. I should willingly acknowledge, that not only that
part of the Apostolical Decree, which concerned Fornication, but that also
which concerned things offered unto Idols, did contain an immutable Law to all
Christians, and that what S. Paul writes upon this subject, in his first
Epistle to the Corinthians, did not at all invalidate or dispense with the
Decree of the Apostolical Synod (as diverse worthy men have judged) but only
declares how far that Decree intended to oblige. That which renders this
opinion probable, is because it is evident by comparing Act. 15.20. with Act.
15.29. that the Apostles in commanding to abstain from meats offered to Idols,
designed only to prohibit the (...) pollutions of Idols; and because after the
writing the Epistles to the Corinthians, it was still in as general terms as
that Synod did express it, accounted a duty to abstain from the (...), or
things sacrificed to Idols; not only by diverse particular ancient Writers, but
by one of the Canons of the Greek Code, Conc. Gangr. Can. 2.
and even by S. John in the Revelations. Rev. 2.14. But that that Decree
concerning things strangled and blood, was no perpetually binding Law of God,
may be evinced from the general judgment of the Church of God, Aug. cont.
Faust. l. 32. c. 13. Binius in 4. Syn. Apost. de Immolatis.
which does not now account it binding; (some very few persons excepted) from
such general expressions of holy Scripture as that nothing is unclean in it
self, and to the pure all things are pure; and from the Apostles expressing
their Decree to be a laying a burden upon the Churches. Act. 15.28. Wherefore
when the whole matter of this Decree, is in that verse called necessary things;
we must thereby understand, that some things indifferent, yea under the Gospel
inconvenient in their own nature, being judged of use for the avoiding scandal,
and promoting Peace and Unity in the Church, became necessary to be practiced
in the Church, after that Decree and Injunction. And though the end of
designing the Unity and increase of the Church, did require, that in some
things the Gentile Christians should yield a compliance to the Jews; yet in
what particulars this compliance should consist, was determined by the
authority of this Apostolical Synod, whereby the practice thereof became
necessary.

3. Obs. 2. That Apostolical Decree concerning these matters indifferent, was
designed to lay an obligation upon the practice of all Gentile Christians, in
those Apostolical times. There are indeed some very learned men who have
reputed this Decree to be a local constitution, confined to Syria, Cilicia and
the Territories of Antioch and Jerusalem. And if it had extended no further, it
had been a sufficient instance of an injunction in things indifferent; but if
it was intended to oblige all the Gentiles, it is thereupon to be esteemed a
more full and large example. Now that this Decree contained in the first
Canonical and Apostolical Epistle of the New Testament, was of general
concernment to the Gentile Christians, though its inscription referred (...)
those places abovementioned, may be concluded, because S. James declared it in
general to have respect to the believing Gentiles, Act. 21.25.; because S.
Paul, Silas, and Timotheus delivered this Decree even unto the Cities of
Lycaonia, Phrygia, and Galatia, to be observed by them. Act. 16.1, 3, 4, 6. and
because the Primitive Christians did in all places, account themselves bound by
this determination of the Apostles, to abstain from blood, and things
strangled, as appears from the testimonies of Tertullian, Tertul. Apol. c. 9.
Minut. in Oct. Orig. cont. Cells. l. 8 Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 1.
Minutius Felix, Origin, the Epistle from France, concerning their Martyrs
recorded in Eusebius, and the Canon of the Greek Code abovementioned.

4. Obs. 3. It is acknowledged upon good grounds (and granted by the
Presbyterians,) that this Apostolical Sanction does evidence a power in the
Church, of enjoining in lawful things, what may be conducible to the good and
welfare of the Church; both because the successive practice of the Church did
thence-forward exercise such a power; and because (though the Apostles might be
inspired extraordinarily after they met together in this Synod), yet they did
not account a particular divine inspiration, necessary to make an
Ecclesiastical Constitution; but in that great question whether and how far the
Gentiles should undertake the Law of Moses, they came together to consider of
this matter. Act. 15.5, 6. and proceeded therein by way of disputation, v. 7.
Hence Gillespy in his assertion of the Government of the Church of Scotland,
Gillesp. Par. 2. Chapter 4. and Chapter 8.
concludes the authority of Synodical Assemblies, and that they have a
diatactick power to make Decrees. The London Ministers in their Jus Divinum
Regiminis Ecclesiastici, Part. 2. c. 14.
declare this Apostolical Synod to be a pattern and platform for others, and
thence allow a Synodical power of imposing things on the Church, which they
assert to be encluded in the (...). Act. 15.28. And the Assemblies Consession
does from hence assert a power in Synods, to make Decrees and determinations,
Conf. c. 31.
which ought to be received with reverence, as from Gods Ordinance; and to set
down rules and directions, for the better ordering the public worship of God.
Yet it may be observed, that some of that way have in this particular
manifested great partiality: as Mr. Rutherford, Ruth. Introd. to Div. Right of
Chapter Gov. Sect. 5. p. 81. Disp. of Candale and Libert. qu. 5.
when he disputes against our Church, and against the lawfulness of external
Rites, he denies any power in the Church, to prescribe Laws touching things
indifferent: Plea for Presbyt. Chapter 14. p. 199.
but in his Plea for Presbytery, he asserteth their Synods, to have power to
make Ecclesiastical Canons and Decrees, which tie and bind particular
Congregations to observe and obey them

5. Wherefore if the Apostles did make injunctions concerning things
indifferent, and imposed them upon all the Churches of the Gentiles, and
accounted their authority of Ecclesiastical Government, guided by prudential
consideration, to be sufficient without extraordinary inspiration, to establish
such a Sanction: then must this power remain in the Church, (taking in the
Princes supremacy) where the Authority of Church Government abides permanent.

6. And if we consider the Church under the General Notion of a Society; as it
is ordinary in all Societies, for the Rulers thereof to exercise a power of
making Rules and Constitutions, not contradictory to any superior Government,
for preserving a due order in that Society; so this does especially take place
in the Christian Church, where there are special divine Laws, which require
care to be taken for order and decency, and command Christians to obey them who
have the rule over them. And that those who will enjoy the Communion of any
particular Church, must submit to the Rules of order appointed therein, is but
the proper result of orderly Constitution, and is of general practice; insomuch
that the French Reformed Churches, as has been observed by Mr. Durell, Durelli
Vindic. Eccl. Angl. c. 22. and in Praf.
would not suffer Mr. Welsh who came thither from Scotland, to continue in
administering the Sacrament, without using the prescribed form of Prayer, and
admitting the standing gesture, according to the order of that Church, but he
being enjoined Conformity by the Synod at S. Maixant, 1609, left that Church
and Realm rather than he would embrace it.

7. But it is by some pleaded against the lawfulness of Constitutions
Ecclesiastical, that these are an infringing of Christian liberty. But whereas
Ecclesiastical Rites and Constitutions are in themselves lawful, as has been
proved; prudential determinations about such indifferent things, can no more
incroach upon Christian liberty, than do the political Sanctions of Civil Laws,
and the Domestic commands of Parents and Masters. And surely every man's
apprehension must needs acknowledge it a gross mistake to imagine, that when
the Precepts of Christianity do earnestly enjoin the practice of self-denial,
meekness, submission, and obedience to superiors, it should be the privilege
of Christian liberty to disoblige men from any or these things, which would
represent our most excellent Religion as contradicting it self. But true
Christian liberty conveyeth a privilege of freedom, from that which the
Christian Doctrine abolisheth, (the Mosaical Covenant and Ceremonies of the
Law) from that which its Precepts prohibit and disclaim, (the life of sin, and
bondage to the Devil, and being under any other as our Sovereign and supreme
Lord besides Jesus Christ) and from that, from which its promises tend to
secure us, (the curse, and wrath to come, and thereby from Hell and Death.) But
it was S. Peter's Doctrine, that we should obey every Ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, -- as free, Conf. Chapter 20. Sect. 4.
1 Pet. 2.13. -- 16. And it was truly expressed in the Assemblies Confession,
That they who upon pretense of Christian Liberty, shall oppose any lawful
power, or the lawful exercise of it, whether it be Civil or Ecclesiastical,
resist the Ordinance of God. And as for those strange spirited men, who account
the practicing things indifferent to be the worse, because they are enjoined;
they are guided by such dangerous Principles, of false imaginary Liberty, as
would teach Children and Servants that things otherwise lawful are sinfully
performed, when they are commanded by their Parents and Masters.

8. Ruth. Introd to Doctr of Scandal.
But Mr. Rutherford objecteth that the nature of things indifferent are not
capable of being enjoined by a Law. For (says he) what wise man will say, the
Church may make a law that all men should cast stones into the water, or (as he
in another place instanceth) that a man should rub his beard. Whether these and
other such like words, proceeded from gross mistake of the Question about
things Indifferent, or from wilful misrepresentation thereof, to please the
humors of scornful men, I cannot affirm. For things called Indifferent in this
Question, are not such as can tend to no good, but are a mispending time, when
purposely undertaken as a designed business; and enclude also such a levity and
vanity as is inconsistent with gravity and seriousness, and much more with
Religious Devotion. But the things here called matters indifferent are such,
where many things singly taken are in their general nature useful, but because
no one of them is particularly established by any Divine Law, the appointing
any one in particular is called the determination of a thing Indifferent,
because some other might have been lawfully appointed. Thus the use of one
special form of Prayer prescribed, not condemning all others as unlawful is the
use of an indifferent thing to an useful end. And the ordering some proper
Hymns or Psalms of praise for the glorifying God, and decent gestures of
reverence in Gods service; and the appointing a fit translation of the Bible
for public use, and a particular visible sign of Christian profession, are
things of good use, but are called Indifferent, because these particular things
are not so established by Divine Precepts, but that some other Prayers, Hymns,
Gestures, Translation, or token of profession, might have been (without sin and
breach of any particular divine commands) chosen and appointed in the Church:
and the like may be said of other things. So that such things as these which
may manifestly have a profitable use, where they are observed without
misunderstanding and prejudice, but are no special matters enjoined by any
Divine Laws immediately given from God himself, are the most proper and most
accountable matter for Ecclesiastical Laws and Constitutions, and are fit to be
ordered by those who are invested with Power and Authority; especially when the
particular things so established, may be peculiarly recommended upon good
considerations, of Antiquity or manifest usefulness.

9. But some have further Questioned, whether things concerning the Church and
the order thereof, may be established by secular Sanctions, the transgression
of which is attended with civil penalties? This Authority has been exercised
by the most Religious Kings and Rulers of Israel, in the Old Testament, who
were therefore commended in the Holy Scriptures; and also by the Christian
Emperors as appears by their Laws in the Codex and Novellae; and by diverse
Kings of our own and Foreign Nations in former times; it is acknowledged by the
Articles of our Church, Article 37.
and by the Doctrine and practice of the ancient Church; is established by our
Laws, and has been defended by diverse good Writers concerning the Kings
Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical. But some there are both at home and abroad,
joining herein with the Spirit of the Anabaptists who have undertaken to deny
the lawfulness of any such proceedings, under pretense of advancing
Christianity thereby, and of pleading for due liberty in matters of Religion:
but their grounds and reasons on which they build, are not strong enough to
bear the weight they lay upon them.

10. For they who tell us, that the use of such civil Laws and penalties,
tends to declare, that the motives and arguments of the Gospel are weak, and
insufficient to recommend the Christian truth, and preserve the order of the
Church, without the help of the secular power; do seem not to consider that
Treasons, Murders, Adulteries, Thefts, and Perjuries, with other great crimes,
are vehemently prohibited by the Precepts of Christ, and yet are upon good
grounds punished by the power of the Sword, which is also Gods Authority; not
because of any insufficiency of the arguments propounded by the Doctrine of
Christ, but because the corruptness of many men's Spirits is such, that diverse
persons are prone to overlook the most weighty motives and arguments, which are
of an Heavenly and spiritual nature, when they are more affected with sensible
things of much less concernment.

11. And as for them who say, that all temporal laws and penalties about Church
matters, will never make men truly Religious, but may make them Hypocrites, and
cause them to profess and practice what they do not heartily approve; this is
manifestly untrue; for though I grant that these means have sometimes
accidentally this ill effect upon some men, yet even Laws ad Penalties rightly
dispensed, are a proper and effectual means in themselves to make men seriously
and rightly Religious. Aug. Ep. 48.
This effect as S. Augustine upon his own knowledge declares, they obtained
both in his own Church, and diverse other African Churches, where many of the
Donatists from thence took occasion, seriously to consider and embrace the
truth, and rejoiced that by this means they were brought to the right knowledge
thereof. And thus all well-ordered Government in a Realm or Family, the
encouraging what is good, and the discountenancing errors, profaneness, and
all disorders, by great men or others, may have this accidental ill consequence
upon some men, that it may occasion them hypocritically to pretend to be better
than they are, out of affection of applause, and designs of advantage: yet
these things being duties, (as the Magistrates care to promote Religion is
also) they ought not to be neglected, because they may possibly be abused.

12. And whereas some urge, that in the Apostolical times which were the best,
there were no secular sanctions or outward penalties used in matters of
Religion: they might also have observed, that Kings and Emperors were then no
countenancers, favorers, nor yet Professoes of Christianity; which is not to
be a pattern for succeeding times, when it must be esteemed a blessing to the
Church, to have Kings her nursing Fathers, and a duty to all Rulers upon earth
to acknowledge their subjection to Jesus Christ. And yet even in the Apostles
times, there were corporal punishments miraculously inflicted, to awaken men to
mind the practice and careful exercise of Christianity, not only in the
particular instances of Saul going to Damascus, of Ananias and Sapphira, and of
Elymas: but the delivering a person to Satan has been ordinarily observed to
enclude with the sentence of the Church, a giving him over to some outward
bodily calamities, to be inflicted on him by the evil spirit, of which a
particular instance is given concerning the Servant of Stilico, Paulin in Vit.
Ambr. prope fin.
by Paulinus in the life of S. Ambrose.

13. But that this Question may be resolved, we must note, 1. That it
concerns only secular authority when it is rightly informed in these matters
of Religion about which such Laws are established. For according to the Rules
of Conscience, as no authority upon earth may lawfully countenance or join in
the profession of an error, so neither may it by commands, constitutions or
penalties, design to advance it. But it is as unreasonable, that the use of
secular authority to advance what is good and commendable, should hence be
condemned, as that the holy action of Abraham. Genesis 18.19. commanding his
Children to keep the way of the Lord, should be disliked, because it is
certainly unlawful for any Parents to command and enjoin their Children, to
entertain sin and embrace error. For it is every man's duty to close with that
which is good, and to favor and prefer it, but it is his sin to oppose it, or
to make use of his interest in the behalf of that which is evil. 2. Bishop
Whitgifts Defense of his Ex. to Magist. ion fin.
Nor is this Question about the lawfulness of designing the ruin and
destruction of any persons, only because they err in matters of Religion, which
is a thing by no means allowable: and not only the use of Fire and Faggot for
pretended Heresy, but the inflicting capital punishments for the sole crimes
even of real Heresy, or notorious errors in Religion, have been sufficiently
disclaimed by the great defenders of our Political and Ecclesiastical
Constitutions.

14. 3. To establish such Laws backed with penalties, about good and useful
matters Ecclesiastical, which may be a proper and fit motive (respect being had
by the prudence of Superiors, to the nature of the things enjoined, and to the
temper of the persons to be dealt with) to excite men to consider and mind
their duty, is not only allowable, but it is the natural result of Rulers
discountenancing evil, designing their subjects good, being careful of the
Churches welfare, and of serving God in the use of their authority; and is
contained under that Apostolical Rule, Rom 13.4. If thou do that which is evil
be affr^^d of the power. But if any shall to word that outward punishments are
no way useful, to direct men's minds to a sense of their duty, he must
contradict the common experience of a considerable part of Mankind, and must
disclaim any advantage for amendment of life from paternal correction, the
constitution of Magistracy, and diverse providential chastisements of God,
against the frequent expressions of holy Scripture. And he must also undertake
to assert, that the condition of Israel was not better, when all the people
engaged themselves to the service of God, moved by the zeal for true Religion
in their Kings, attended with their denouncing temporal punishments on them who
neglected or refused, than when every one (...) and professedly walked in the
(...) of his own heart.

15. And whereas several expressions (...) Writers speak against the use of
external force in matters of Religion: diverse of them are intended against the
Pagan or Heretical powers oppressing the truth; others against over-rigorous
severities and extremities toward some persons under error; some were the
expressions of those who were themselves abetters of Schism, as Socretes was;
and there are some few expressions of others who were men of greater affection
than consideration, whose words may be over-ballanced both by reason and other
Authorities.

SECT. III.
Of Ecclesiastical Constitutions about things scrupled.
1. That such things which some persons scruple, oppose and dispute against,
may be practiced without sin, by them who discern and are well satisfied of
their lawfulness, is a thing that needs not much proof. For if this be denied
Christianity must be accounted a state of bondage, where every man's mistaken
apprehensions would lay an obligation on the Consciences of others. Wherefore
in that Case, when some Christians judged it unlawful to eat all sorts of meat,
S Paul allowed him who discerned his liberty to make use thereof. Romans 14.2, 6.
Yet because both in that Chapter of the Epistle to the Romans, and in 1 Cor.
10. he gives command to Christians to beware of grieving and offending their
brethren the general case of Scandal in things Indifferent will in this place
come under some consideration, concerning which it may be sufficient to observe
three things.

2. First, That the offending others prohibited in those places by the Apostle,
consisted not in displeasing others only, but in performing such actions which
tended to occasion some to fall from Christianity, or others not to embrace it
This sense of these Precepts, Right of the Church c. 4.
is observed as a thing manifest by Mr. Thorndike. Thus S. Paul declares the
using liberty about things offered to Idols, so as to be a stumbling block to
the weak. 1 Cor. 8 9. to consist in emboldning them toward the Idol, v. 10.
whereby the weak Brother perishes, v. 11. And though the Apostle sometimes
mentions this sin of offending others, under the name of grieving them, Romans
14.15. he thereby intends an occasioning them to disgust the Christian
Religion; and therefore in the same verse commands Destroy not him with thy
meat, etc. And when he recommendeth in this Case the pleasing of others, it is
in designing their profit that they may be saved. 1 Cor. 10.33. Yet it must be
further acknowledged, that according to the expressions of other Scriptures, it
is a sinful scandal or giving offense, when any one by the use of his liberty,
does knowingly induce others to the commiting any sin, being under no
obligation to determine this use of his liberty: for according to S. Hierome
that is scandal where a man dicto vel facto occasionem rui nae cuiquam dederit.

3. But the mere displeasing or grieving others about matters indifferent, is
not always a sin; for our Savior himself greatly grieved his Apostles, when he
told them that one of them should betray him, but as yet concealed the man.
Mat. 26.21, 22. Yet Christianity will not allow a morose and pievish temper;
but directs men to be loving, amicable, and kind, and to be ready to please
others, where duty or prudence do not otherwise engage us: but out of
compliance to the mind of others, to neglect due reverence to God, or Rules of
order in the Church of God, is not allowable. And there lies a much higher
obligation upon us to please others, where we are engaged thereto by the bond
of justice, subjection and obedience, than where we are only inclined thereto
by the influence of love and common kindness; whence the Child or Servant who
will provoke his Father or Master, by acts of disobedience contrary to his
duty, merely to please other persons, acts irregularly and sinfully; and upon
the same account, he who will displease and disobey his Rulers and Governors,
whether Civil or Ecclesiastical, to gratify other persons of inferior
capacity, acts contrary to Christian duty.

4. Secondly, The Plea of scandal must then necessarily be ill used, when what
is undertaken under pretense of avoiding offense, does it self become the
greater offense. In the Case mentioned in the Epistles to the Romans and the
Corinthians there was no giving offense to the Jews, Gentiles, or the Church of
God, by their present forbearance of any sort of meat, under the circumstances
in which they then were; and therefore this forbearance out of charity to
others became a duty. But when S. Peter and Barnabas at Antioch, did for a time
forbear to eat with the Gentiles, which seemingly encluded an urjust censure of
the way of Christianity, as it was embraced among the Gentiles; and was like to
be a great offense to the Gentiles; this action though undertaken out of an
appearance of charitable respect to the Jews, that they might not be offended,
was sinful and contrary to the Gospel. And upon the like account the disobeying
Ecclesiastical Constitutions, but of respect to some other persons, while it
encludeth an appearance of ungrounded censuring of our Rulers who appointed
them, and the Church who practices them, and a want of care of its order,
Peace, and Unity, besides other ill consequents above expressed is not
allowable, nor can it be justified by the rules of Religion, but by the bad
example of neglect of duty it gives the greatest occasion of offense.

5. And if any persons shall in such a case take offense so far as to distaste
the Religious worship of God, V. Tertullian. de Virgin Vel. c. 3.
because others observe established Orders, this is an offense taken but not
given. For in matters indifferent and left altogether to our liberty, he who
without any care of his Brothers good, acts what he knows will occasion him
to fall, is guilty of a scandal, against the rule of charity: but he who acts
nothing but what is his duty, lawfully commanded by his superior, or
undertaken with respect to the greater good and order of the Church, is guilty
of no scandal nor breach of charity, though others may take occasion to fall
thereby. 22 ae. qu. 43. Art. 2.
It is well resolved by Aquinas that every scandal or offense encludeth sin;
that which is a scandal given or an active scandal is the sin of him who gives
the occasion; but the scandal taken or the passive scandal is the sin of him
only who takes the occasion to fall. Thus there were diverse things which our
Savior spoke and did, at which the Pharisees were offended, the sin of which
must be charged upon themselves, in being alienated thereby from the Doctrine
of Christ.

6. Thirdly, The duty of forbearing the use of some things lawful and
expedient, because others account them sinful, has likewise peculiar respect
to that case when the erring persons have not had sufficient opportunity of
being fully instructed, and steadfastly established in the truth. Thus in the
time of the Apostles when the Doctrine of the Gospel was first divulged, the
Jews could not be presently satisfied concerning the liberty and freedom of
Christians from the rites of the law of Moses; and many of the Gentiles were
not so firmly established in all the Doctrines of Christianity, that they might
not be led aside by mistaking the practices of other Christians: and in such
cases the use of things lawful and indifferent, must be restrained from the
consideration of others weakness. But where there has been sufficient means
and opportunity for better instruction; if some still retain their erroneous
opinions, they who understand the truth are not obliged in this case, to
forbear their practicing according to their true principles, in matters of
indifferency and Christian liberty: because this practice is in this case a
profession of truth against error, and the forbearance thereof may frequently
be interpreted a compliance with error. Vrsin Loc. Theol in 3m. Prac.
And it is truly observed by Vrsin that it is scandalum datum in rebus
adiaphoris errores in animis infirmorum confirmare, to add confirmation to
erroneous opinions in the minds of the weak about indifferent things, is a
giving offense, or being guilty of an active scandal. Upon this account though
our Savior knew that his heating, and commanding the man who was healed to
take up his bed on the sabbath day, his eating with Publicans and Sinners, and
his Disciples eating with unwashen hands, were things in the highest manner
offensive to some of the Jews; he practiced and allowed these things in
opposition to the Scribes and Pharisees, who in their censures of him proceeded
upon erroneous and corrupt Doctrines vented by them for divine dictates.

7. But it may deserve a more full enquiry, whether Ecclesiastical
Constitutions and legal Injunctions, may be allowed concerning things which
either are or may become matter of dispute and opposition? Commis. Papers
passim.
because this is a thing which is in the substance of it much insisted upon. In
order to the resolution hereof I shall assert, 1. The peace and Unity of a
Church (which must both respect the Union of its members among themselves, and
with the Universal Church) is of so great value, that to that end, it would be
very desirable that any particular constitution about matters merely
indifferent should be altered, where peace with a well ordered state of the
Church can only by that means be firmly secured: because the principal end of
them is to promote Unity, order and edification.

8. Assert. 2. Where minds are prone to raise disputes, and entertain
prejudices and jealousies about matters of Gods worship; the most innocent
things cannot be long secured, from being opposed and scrupled. For in this
case when men of greater parts do without just cause propound doubts and
arguments against a thing, (which may easily be done about any subject) men of
lesser understanding, if they have also unsettled and unestablished minds, are
apt either out of weakness of judgment, to take their fallacies to be solid
reasons; or from the earnestness of their affections, to esteem such persons to
be the ablest and faithfullest guides. And he who observes the World, will
discern that there is scarce any truth of Religion even in matters most
Fundamental, which has not been disputed and opposed by men of corrupt minds,
who have by this means drawn Disciples after them. For besides the
consideration of Papists and other Sectaries abroad, where multitudes of their
followers have really believed their errors, and with a misguided zeal opposed
the truth, as S. Paul did while he continued in Judaism: we have also
sufficient evidence hereof at home in our former times of licentiousness.
Saints Rest. Part. 1. Chapter 7. Sect. 14.
Insomuch that Mr. Baxter then complained, that professors of Religion did
oppose and deride, almost all that worship of God, out of Conscience (which
must then be grolly depraved and corrupted) which others did out of
profaneness. And the provincial Assembly (as it was called) at London, then
declared, That there was scarce any truth of Christ but was charged in those
unhappy times, Jus. div. Min. Evangel. Pas. 2. c. 3.
(so they called them) as Antichristians; and that the Doctrine of the Trinity,
of Christ being equal with the Father, of the immortality of the Soul, of
repentance, humilitation, sanctification, and good works out of obedience to
Gods commands, with other Doctrines were condemned as Antichristian: and also
that the places where they met together to worship God, the worship they there
performed, their Church Government and Ministry was also (say they) called
Antichristian. Now if (amongst other things opposed and condemned) the most
essential Doctrines of Christian Religion have not escaped these vehement and
unjust censures; it cannot be expected that the best Constitutions of the
Church should be generally entertained, without all scruple and suspicion;
especially so long as through the itch of of dispute, things ordered in the
Church are thought blameable for being significant (that is useful; (for all
insignificant things are here useless) and for being enjoined, that is
recommended by the highest authority which God has set in and over (...)
Church.

9. Assert. 3. As all Ecclesiastical Constitutions must be in themselves
certainly lawful, not needlessly burdensome, and such as the Governors of the
Church judge to be unquestionably useful and expedient; so where they are such,
their lawfulness would not be so much contended against, as it is, by them who
are concerned to obey, provided they humbly and calmly made use of the best
rules to direct their own practice: which rules are here the same, which must
be received in other practical controversies of Religion. viz. First, That he
who has sufficient capacity of understanding, to judge clearly and solidly of
the things questioned, and of the strength of the arguments produced, should
without any prejudice or passion, embrace and entertain what appears
manifestly allowable: and such an understanding so proceeding, can neither
condemn the right way, nor embrace the wrong, because truth only can be clearly
evidenced, to an unbyassed and able judgment; and for such a man to follow any
authority whatsoever, against this manifest evidence of truth, is to put
himself under the blind Leaders of the blind. Secondly, Men ought to be so
humble, as not to account their own judgments sufficient rationally to decide
any matters of dispute, or determine the force of any argument, when they
really are not; and this will direct men of mean capacities, not overforwardly
to engage in controversies above their reach; nor violently to espouse what may
be wrong, or oppose what may be right, but humbly to desire and seek for
clearer apprehensions, or the best directions and informations. Thirdly, That
in these matters, those whose own weakness of understanding is not able to
conduct them through the mists of dispute, ought to make use of the best and
safest guides to direct and lead them, and should follow their counsel and
advice. Aug. de Vtilit. credendi c. 12. etc.
For it is manifestly the case of great multitudes of adult Christians in the
World, as has been long observed, that their judgments are not so strong and
clear, but that especially in diverse matters of dispute (which are no part of
the Christian Creed) they must and do follow the guidance of others, and are
led by their judgment, direction, and authority, where themselves have not
capacities to judge of the evidence of proofs. But here as the man who chooses
an ill guide for his way, or an ignorant Physician to advise for his health, or
an unskilful Lawyer for his Estate; so he that follows a bad Leader in
matters concerning Religion, must bear in some respects the consequents of his
own bad choice.

10. And whereas some would have persons to forbear practicing in matters of
dispute, until themselves be able by the capacities of their own judgments,
thoroughly to solve the difficulties objected: they ought to have considered,
that in most practical disputes (as concerning Infant Baptism, the observing
rules of order, and keeping Communion with a particular Church, and obeying the
commands of Rulers) to forbear practicing what ought to be performed, is to
yield to sin, and with choice to act against a duty; and to require this is
also to proceed upon a principle, which will leave such men's Consciences under
inextricable difficulties. For instance, if men were taught that none ought to
bring their Infant-Children to be baptized, until they were able themselves
judiciously to answer all that is urged to the contrary by the Anabaptists;
this (if practiced) would tend to make considerable numbers of weak Christians,
whose heads are not capable of managing disputes, to neglect their ^^ry herein,
and in practice to close (...) ^abaptists. But if again they were taught (which
must needs be as reasonable as the other) that they may not safely choose to
forbear the bringing their Infants to Baptism, (because even that choice is a
moral action) unless they could clearly refute all those great arguments, which
prove this to be their duty; it will be manifest, that in this case there can
be no way to disentangle the Consciences of such men of mean capacities, but
only by following the directions above given. And the like may be said
concerning other instances.

11. But that such persons who cannot themselves search into disputes, may not
be dangerously misguided, two rules are to be observed. V. Aue. cont. Crescon.
l. ^. c. 33.
First That for them to be directed by the general judgment, principles, and
practices of the primitive Church, where that can be evidently and without
contradiction discovered, by skilful and faithful relaters thereof, is a more
safe course in any matter of dispute, which themselves cannot fathom, than to
be led merely by the judgment and authority of any men, or company of men, who
oppose the same; because the greater authority is to be preferred before the
less: and by this rule many errors of Papists and Sectaries may be rejected.
Secondly, That where such persons of weak judgments cannot clearly understand
either the grounds of truth under present debate, or the judgment and practice
of the ancient Church (whether through defect, or diversity of information) it
is their best and surest way, ordinarily to be directed and led by their
superiors who are over them in the Church, in the things they command, or the
truths they recommend, rather than by the opinions of any other persons
whomsoever. 1. Because God has appointed them to be teachers, leaders, and
guides to us: and therefore it is against the duty of our relation to them, and
of the due submission we owe to them, and inconsistent with the duty of
honoring our Rulers, to censure their appointments or instructions as evil,
merely upon the credit of any other persons contrary opinion. 2. Because they
who disobey the Constitutions of their Superiors, only out of respect to the
contrary judgment of any other persons, do not disobey out of Conscience, but
out of prejudice and disaffection: because no principle of Conscience can
ordinarily bind men, who are not able to judge fully of the Case, to conclude
their superiors or Ecclesiastical Governors to be in the wrong, and those who
oppose them to be in the right: and Gods command to obey them who have the rule
over us, cannot safely be overlooked, out of respect to men's own prejudices and
disaffections. Disp. of Cerem. c. 15. Sect. 3.
In this case it was well declared by Mr. Baxter, that the duty of obeying
being certain, and the sinfulness of the thing commanded being uncertain and
only suspected, we must go on the surer side, with much more to the same
purpose. Now the observing these rules abovementioned, See Dr. Ferne's
Considerations of concernment. c. 1.
will both preserve the true freedom of judgment and Conscience, which when it
proceeds upon unerring evidence, is to be preferred before any humane
authority, and it will also provide for the establishing of Truth, Unity, and
Peace in the Church, and will be the best security to the Souls and Consciences
of men: because they who hold fast the Fundamentals of Christian Faith and
Life, though in matters of a lesser nature they should mistake, where they
sincerely design to practice their duty, so far as they can understand of
themselves, or are instructed by their teachers, without any willing neglect of
duty toward God or Man; such mistakes or errors are not destructive to
Salvation.

12. Indeed S. Paul tells his Romans, Romans 14.23. that he that doubts is
domned (or condemned, which some expound self condemned) if he eat, and that
whatsoever is not of Faith is sin. But as the Rules above-expressed are means
for the satisfying doubts, so this Apostolical Rule requiring a full and well
satisfied persuasion, of a man's own judgment and knowledge in what he acts,
must be applied to the special case intended, which is this; That wheresoever
the omitting any action is certainly free from sin, and the practice of it
appears to any person doubtful, there to do that action is a very dangerous
and evil practice; because it contains in it a choosing to run the hazard of
sin; which choice is always a sin: in such a Case the Apostle allows no man
to engage upon any such action, until he be certainly persuaded by an
undoubting knowledge of the lawfulness thereof: And the same rule must take
place when the practice of any thing is manifestly lawful, and the omission
doubtful. But the Case is very much different when both acting and forhearing
may be doubted of; where the one of them is a duty; and it is impossible that
both should be forborne: and such to some persons is the question
abovementioned concerning Infant Baptism, obedience to Rulers, etc. Nor does
the Apostle in this place design in general, that no Servant, Child, or
Subject, may eat any thing, observe any time religiously, obey any command, or
perform any other action; till he has obtained so much knowledge, as to
discern by an undoubting judgment, how these actions in their particular
circumstances are allowable by the rules of Christianity: for then the ignorant
person should be directed (till he becomes knowing) to be idle and do nothing,
and to be disobedient and under no command; but would scarce be allowed to live
so long as to obtain knowledge. But God having commanded Superiors to rule,
and Inferiors to obey, to suspend all action here, is to perform an inward
moral action of choice about a matter of duty, which if it be not regularly
managed, is a sin. And in this case so far as concerns the obedience of a
Child, Servant, or Subject, they ought to account their superiors command to
lay such an obligation upon them to duty, that they must be guided thereby,
unless they be able to prove themselves bound to act the contrary.

13. Assert. 4. It is neither necessary nor possible that Ecclesiastical
Constitutions should not be liable to be scrupled or suspected, where those
suspicions and scruples are admitted without sufficient evidence of evil in the
things themselves. Mr. H. Tract of Schism.
I know that some have asserted that the Church and its Officers are guilty of
Schism if they appoint any thing not necessary (or indifferent) which is by
others suspected. But that things in themselves lawful and expedient may
lawfully be commanded, though they be groundlesly suspected or scrupled,
appears. I. Because otherwise all rules of Ecclesiastical order would be
unlawful, where people are needlessly suspicious and scrupulous; and a great
part of the authority of Princes, Parents, and Masters would be abridged, if it
must be limited by all the unnecessary suspicions of inferiors.

14. Arg. 2. From the Apostolical practice. When S. Paul had directed his
Corinthians, that the men should pray uncovered, and the women covered, adding
1 Cor. 11.16. that if any man will be contentious we have no such Custom nor
the Churches of God; he does plainly enough express, that what is duly and
orderly established in the Church, must take place notwithstanding contentions
and oppositions. And when the Apostolical Synod required the Gentiles to
abstain from blood and things strangled; even that constitution might have been
scrupled, and opposed; especially considering that many Primitive Christians
were not presently satisfied, by the Declaration of the Apostles, concerning
Christian liberty, as is manifest from Romans 14.2, 14, 20. Had not Christians
then been of another temper than many now are, and made up more of Unity,
humility, meekness, and peace, than of heats, parties, and controversies; they
might have objected, that this was an encroachment upon Christian liberty,
whereby they were free from the whole Yoke of Mosaical Ceremonies; that it
might seem to countenance the distinction of things clean and unclean, and to
give occasion to the Gentile Christians to Judaize, as the Galatians did. It
might also have been said, that that Decree had an appearance of establishing
Christianity upon Judaism because the Jews had a sort of Proselytes called
(...) Proselytes of converse, Gemar. Sanhedr. c. 7. Sect. 5. Cocceius ibidem.
Buxt. Lexic Rab. in (...).
who were not circumcised, but only enjoined to observe the seven Precepts of
the Sons of Noah, to whom blood was prohibited. And this Apostolical Decree
together with other Christian Precepts, did bind the Gentile Christians to all
the same observations. And it might also have been said, that the forbidding
blood seemed a Rite peculiarl, typical of Christ to come, it being forbidden to
the Jews upon this account, because God had then appointed it to be the means
of making an atonement upon the Altar, Lev. 17.10, 11, 12. But notwithstanding
these things which are far from solid arguments, and yet to an indifferent
person may possibly seem as plausible, as many exceptions used by some men in
other Cases; that Apostolical Sanction was both lawful and honorable, yea
though it concerned things indifferent, and was established (as many think) by
that Ecclesiastical authority which they committed to their Successors in the
Church.

15. Arg. 3. Because there are many Cases where somewhat is necessary in genere
to be determined; and yet every particular under that general is liable to the
like inconvenience of opposition. Here I shall choose to give a Foreign instance
of that great unnecessary dispute, about the use of leavened or unleavened
bread at the Eucharist, where the one sort is necessary to be determined before
the administration, or otherwise the Ordinance it self must be omitted. This
has occasioned so great contest between the Greek Church, (who with the
Ruthenick or Russian contend for Leavened bread) and the Latin who would allow
none other but unleavened bread, Maxim. Margunius in Dialog^ adv. Lat.
Humbertus in Baron. Tom. 11. in Appendice. Rup. Tuitien. de Div. Offic. l. 1.
c. 22.
that they of the Greek Church have nick named the Latins Azymitas, and give
this difference as one account, why they refused Communion with them, and did
at Constantinople denounce an Anathema upon the use of Unleavened bread. The
Latin Church did give many testimonies of its like fierceness for the use of
Unleavened Bread only so far, that Leo the Ninth undertook in this quarrel to
excommunicale Michael the Patriarck of Constantinople. The main grounds of this
controversy (waving some frivolous things mentioned in Gemma Animae, Rupertus
Ti^tiensis, Durandux, Casaub. in Baron. Exerc. 16.
and other Ritualists) are these. 1. The Greek Church in a peculiar notion, as
Casaubon relates their opinion from Cedrenus and Xanthopulus, think that
Christ did eat the Passover, and institute the Lords Supper the day before the
Jews kept their Passover, Durand. Ration. l. 4. c. 41. n. 10.
and therefore they suppose he used leavened bread. But though diverse Christian
Writers, as Scaliger, Casauhon, Grotius, Hospinian, Kellet, and others both
ancient and modern referred to by them, Hieroz. P. 1. lib. 2. ^. 50.
have thought that Christ did not eat the Passover the same day with the Jews;
yet even that opinion is opposed by many others, and the arguments for it are
fully answered by Bocharius. And however the strict prohibitions both of the
Law. Ex. 12.18. Number. 9.11. Maccoth. c. 3. Sect. 2.
Deuteronomy. 16.3. and of the Talmud, against eating the Passover at any time with
leavened bread, are evidences sufficient, that this sort of bread was not used
by our Savior. 2. The Greek Church also urges that unleavened bread was one
of the Ceremonial institutions of the Law of Moses, Can. Ap. 70. Conc. Laod. c.
38. Con. Trul. c. 11.
and several ancient Canons of the Greek Church have forbidden them to have so
much Communion with the Jews, as to eat of their unleavened bread, as a Jewish
Rite; and Maximus Margunius a late Writer and Bishop of that Church, out of a
strange disgust, supposes that he smells the savor of many ancient Heresies
in Unleavened bread.

16. So that here is a Case, where some determination is necessary to the due
order and the regular administration of Gods Ordinance, where either leavened
or unleavened Bread must be received; both these have been hotly opposed; the
one side seeming to be favored by the institution of Christ, and the other by
the abrogation of the law, but neither of their arguments are conclusive,
against the lawfulness of the others practice. In like manner to administer the
Sacraments and other public Offices with a form of Prayer, may be opposed and
scrupled by some; and to perform this without a form may as reasonably be
disliked by others. And an Unform appointed gesture at the Sacrament, and a
decent fixed habit for Ministers may be suspected by some, who are ready to
take all occasions for suspicion; and the want of these things are deemed
irreverent and disorderly, and therefore unlawful by others. Both the French
and Dutch (as well as other Protestant) Churches, have these things determined;
though both in the habit and gesture, they differ from us, and from each other:
and yet there may be objections and pretenses of dislike raised against those
particular habits and gestures, as well as against ours (as may in another
place be showed): Wherefore either some things which may become or have been
matters of dispute may lawfully be ordered by Ecclesiastical Authority, or else
there can be no security for the orderly exercise of Religion.

17. To these arguments it may be added, that the prudence of the Church would
appear very contemptible to its adversaries, if either its rules or practices
about matters of order, should be as mutable and various, as the uncertain and
different thoughts of suspicious or scrupulous persons.

18. And the practice of all the Protestant Churches, who defended their
established Orders both against Anabaptists, and other opposers thereof, do
manifest their general judgment in this particular. And amongst other Churches
when diverse persons especially the Flacians raised vehement disputes and
contentions both against the Doctrine and the Ecclesiastical Ordinations (or as
Reuterus expresses it, Quirin. Reuterus in Praefat. praefix Vrsini Oper.
de rebus quibusdam externis) received in the Reformation of the Palatinate:
Frideric the third in his Confessession of Faith, contained in his last Will
and Testament, and received among the Corpus or Syntagma Confessionum
declares, how he had with good success withstood these oppositions, and makes
it in that his last Testament his principal admonition to his Sons after him,
to beware of such persons, Casimir. in Praef. Conf in Corp Conf. and in Vrsin.
Vol. 3. in fol.
with other earnest expressions both of his and of his Son Casimire.

19. And besides all this, this position that nothing may be established or
imposed, about which any persons pretend scruple, is destructive of it self, or
inconsistent with it self. For as its natural result tends to promote an
Universal toleration, of all practices and opinions, about which any persons
may pretend Conscience which would enclude all manner of Sects and Heresies: so
the urging such a toleration, where Governors either of Church or state judge,
(as they have reason to do) that it would be sinful in them to admit it and
countenance it; is not only to undertake to impose upon their Governors, what
is scrupled and opposed by them; but even to urge them to approve and allow
what is really sinful, and is rightly so esteemed by them.

20. But the main objection to be here considered, is, that S. Paul Romans 14.1,
etc. commands to receive them who are weak in the Faith, but not to doubtful
disputations; Commiss. Papers p. 70.
and allows no judging or despising one another, for eating or not eating
meats; and for observing or not observing days: and hence it is urged that no
such things indifferent ought to be imposed but to be made the matter of mutual
forbearance. Now it must be granted that Christian Charity requires a hearty
and tender respect, to be had to every truly conscientious person, so far as it
may consist with the more general interest of the Church of God: yet it is
manifest that the Apostle is not in this Chapter treating about, and therefore
not against the rules of order in the service of God. But in order to a right
understanding of this place I shall note three things.

21. First, that these directions given by the Apostle, in the beginning of
this Chapter, so far as they give allowance to the different practices therein
mentioned have a peculiar respect to those times only of the first dawning of
Christianity; when most of the Jews who believed in Christ did as yet zealously
retain the Mosaical Rites; abstaining from certain meats as judging them
unlawful and unclean, Romans 14.2, 14. and observing Jewish days and times out of
a peculiar esteem for them, v. 5. and yet this for a time was in this Chapter
allowed and indulged by the Apostle. But afterward the Rules and Canons of the
Church severely condemned all Christians whether of Jews or Gentiles, August.
Ep. 19. Conc. Gangr. c. 2. Conc. Laod. c. 29.
who observed the Mosaical Law, and the Rites and distinction of meats
contained therein, out of Conscience thereunto: yea S. Paul himself vehemently
condemned the Galatians who were Gentiles, for observing such distinctions of
days out of Conscience to the Law, Gal. 4.10, 11. and passes the like censure
upon the Colossians who distinguished meats upon the same account, Col. 2.20,
21, 22. Wherefore we must further observe, that in the Apostles times and
according to the Rules they delivered to the Church, The Gentile Christians
were in these things with others prohibited the observation of the Law of Moses
and its Ceremonies, though many of them (as the Galatians and Colossians) were
prone to judge this to be their necessary duty. Act. 21.25. Gal. 5.2. The Jews
among the Gentiles, who did not yet understand that the Law of Moses was
abrogated, were allowed to observe its Rites, and to practice according to the
Jewish Customs, Act. 21.21, 24. Gal. 2.12, 13. Act. 16.3. But the Jews who
lived in Judea (and S. Paul himself when he was there) were obliged or
enjoined, to observe the Mosaical Rites, though they were satisfied, that the
binding power of the Law was abrogated. Act. 21.24. Gal. 2.12. Now in these
different practices allowed, determined, and ordered by the directions and
rules given by the Apostles, as temporary provisions for the several sorts or
different Churches of Christians; the Apostle requires the Romans to receive
and not to judge one another.

22. 2. When the Apostle commands them to receive them who are weak in the
Faith he thereby intends that they ought to be owned and judged as Christians
notwithstanding these different Observations. v. 1. And when he commands that
he that eats should not despise him that eats not, and that he that eats
not should not judge him that cateth. v. 3. he forbids the weaker Jews to
condemn the other Jews or Gentiles, as if they were not possessed with the fear
of God, because they observed not the Law of Moses: and prohibiteth those
others from despising or disowning these weaker Jews as not having embraced
Christ ((...), v. 3. signifying here so to despise as withal to reject and
disclaim; as Mar. 9.12. Act. 4.11. 1 Cor. 1.28.) because they observed the
Rites of Judaism. And to this sense are manifestly designed the Apostles
Arguments whereby he enforces these Precepts. V. 3. For God has received him,
v. 4. to his own Master he stands or falls, for God is able to make him
stand. v. 6. he acts with Conscience to God; and v. 10. Why do thou judge
thy Brother, or why do thou set at naught thy Brother? We shall all stand
before the judgment seat of Christ. So that the main design of this part of
this Chapter is this, To condemn them who press their own practices or
judgments in things unnecessary, as being the essential and necessary points of
Religion and Christianity; and thereupon do undertake to censure all those who
differ from them in such lesser things, as having no true Religion or inward
relation to, or Communion with Jesus Christ, though they live never so
conscientiously, and act according to the best apprehensions they can attain.
Aug. Exp. prop. 78. ad Romans
To this purpose S. Austen expounded these words, Non far audeamus sententiam
de alieno cord, quod non videmus: Beza in Loc.
and Beza says upon them, Rudes non debent ut extra salutis spem positi,
damnari. And this which is the true intent and scope of the Apostle in that
place, does in no wise impugn the use of Ecclesiastical Authority, in
appointing what is orderly and expedient about things indifferent: but he will
by no means allow, that lesser things should be esteemed the main matters of
Religion and Christianity, to which purpose he lays down that excellent Rule,
in v. 17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace,
and joy in the Holy Ghost.

23. 3. The considering the Apostolical practice; in making Decrees at the
Council of Jerusalem; in S. Paul's setting orderly bounds to the use of the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, in the Church of Corinth, or limiting the
exercise thereof to avoid confusion; and his not allowing S. Peter, Barnabas
and other Jews, to practice without control what agreed with their present
apprehensions, under those circumstances, but was the way to disadvantage the
peace and welfare of the Church; and his giving commands for order and decency,
with things of like nature; do evidence that it is a great misunderstanding of
the Apostles Doctrine in this place, to conceive that he condemns the
establishing useful rules, for the order and edification of the Church, though
they do not always comply with every particular persons apprehension.

24. But if it be further objected, that if those things may be commanded or
enjoined, which some, persons though through mistake, judge unlawful, either
they must practice against their own judgments which would be sinful; or their
being conscientious, will be their disadvantage, which is not desirable. To
which I answer. 1. That if in some particular things, certain persons through
mere mistake accompanied with humility and designs of peace, should judge
things lawful and expedient to be unlawful, upon such evidence which they
apprehend to be full and sufficient; and thereupon cannot yield to practice
these things: it must be considered, that it is but the common attendant of
man's being fallible, that he should (out of respect to a greater good) bear
some outward inconvenience, as the result even of his most innocent errors.
Thus in secular matters, he who merely mistaketh the right way of legal
proceedings about his own cause, may suffer some damage thereby; and though his
case may herein deserve pity, yet it is better he should sustain this
consequent of his own mistake, than that no rules and orders of Law should be
observed. And the same may be said of matters Ecclesiastical.

25. 2. If the Rules abovementioned be observed, they will direct how men may
generally practice things lawfully enjoined, according to right principles of
Conscience. But if they be not observed, men must either resolve to follow
their own imaginations, in things they understand not, which is a manifest way
of error and walking in the dark; or else they must in these things practice
according to the directions of those, who speak most plausibly and takingly to
their affections, and are also strict in their lives: but this both
over-looketh the duty of obedience and the due relation to guides and teachers,
and is a very probable way to misguide men both in this and in other Cases. By
following this rule, or rather by being taken in this snare, many anciently
embraced the monstrous positions of manicheism, persuaded thereto by Faustus
who had eloquium seductorium (as S. Aug. ealleth it) the enticing eloquence of
seducing; Aug. Conf. l. 6. c. 3, 6, 13.
and whose words were observed by the same Father to have a more pleasing and
delightful sweetness than the eloquence of S. Ambrose which was more learned
and substantial: Baron. ad An. 377. n. 7.
and those who embraced that impious Heresy were always talking of God and
Christ, and the holy Spirit the Comforter. And to be guided in opinions or
doctrines by such respect to persons can be no safe way of conduct, because God
has not directed Christians thereto; for as to expression, Luther accounted
Julian the Pelagian to be a better speaker and Orator than S. Augustine;
Luther. Judicium de Erasmo. Tom. 2.
and as to practice Nazianzene declared even of the Macedonians who denied the
Divinity of the Holy Spirit, Naz. Orat. 44.
that they were persons whose lives were to be admired, though their Doctrines
were not to be allowed. And therefore that more ancient rule of Tertullian is
of necessary use; Non ex personis probamus fidem, sed ex fide personas, that we
are not to examine and esteem the Faith by the persons, but the persons by
their Faith. Therefore the best way to be rightly established, is by having a
Conscientious regard in the first place to the evidence of manifest truth
clearly discerned, and in the next place to spiritual guides and teachers, it
being one end why God appointed Church Officers. Ephesians. 4.11. -- 14. that we be
henceforth no more Children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
wind of Doctrine.

SECT. IV.
Of Ecclesiastical Rites which have been abused in any corrupt way of worship.
1. It is acknowledged that some gesture, garment, and action (though not the
same individually, but of the like kind or physical nature) established in the
Church of England, has been ill used in the Church of Rome; and this has been
much of old and by some of late objected against these appointments. Now we do
assert that the worship of God who is a jealous God, is to be preserved pure,
and not mixed with any sinful defilement whatsoever, whether of Idolatry or
superstition; and that things otherwise indifferent, which either in the design
of them who use them, or in their own present tendency, do directly promote or
propagate such corruptions, do in that Case become things unlawful. Hence that
which was in it self indifferent; and was used in the Pagan Idolatry, might
upon good grounds be disclaimed as unlawful to Christians, (by Tertullian and
other ancient Writers) where the present use among Christians might appear to
countenance and confirm those Idolatrous practices. But that the use of things
in themselves lawful and expedient, and known to be ordered to a lawful end and
purpose, should be condemned as sinful; because these things or the like, are
or have been, otherwhere sinfully abused, is a position by no means to be
admitted. Concerning which in general, (besides what shall be added concerning
our particular Rites, Chapter 4.) I shall content my self with these three
Observations.

2. Obs. 1. This position is not consistent with the principles of Christian
practice. It is a ground of hope in the Gospel Regeneration, that those bodies
and Souls which were once abused to the service of false Gods and Devils (as
according to Gr. Nazianzen was once the Case of S. Cyprian; Naz. Orat. 18.
and according to S. Paul, of the Corinthians, Thessalonians, and others. 1
Cor. 12.2. 1 These. 1.9.) and to the service of sin (as were the members of the
Roman Church, Romans 6.17, 18, 19.) may yet find acceptance with God in serving
him. Surely none can think that S. Paul's tongue was not to be allowed to preach
the Gospel, because it had been abused to blaspheme: nor is it amiss observed
by Durandus, Dur. Rational. l. 1. c. 1. Sect. 33.
that among other Scriptures there is a principal use made in the Church of
God, of what was written by David who was guilty of Adultery, S. Matthew who
was a Publican, and S. Paul who was a persecutor and blasphemer; and among the
Fathers of S. Augustine who was a Manichee. And surely it is much more
incredible, that through the ill use of some, the whole Species of actions,
gestures, and things should become unlawful and unclean. Can any possibly
imagine, that if other men have or do lift up their Eyes to Heaven, to adore
the Sun or Moon, or bow down their knees to give religious worship to an Idol,
or to Saints and Angels, this must render our lifting up our eyes to Heaven in
the worshipping of God, or bowing our knees in Prayer to him, to be sinful? Or
may not one man lawfully make use of the light of the Sun to read the holy
Scriptures, because another makes use of it to commit Villainies? or did Judas
his Kiss make the kiss of Charity sinful?

3. As Sozomen reports, Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. (...).
single Mersion in Baptism was used by Eunomius, who disowned the Trinity; and
the threefold Mersion which was the more general ancient Custom, was abused in
Spain, as Walafridus Strabo relates, to express thereby a denial of one
Essence in the three Persons of the Trinity; upon which occasion the Council of
Toledo enjoined single Mersion in Spain; Conc. Tol. 4. c. 5.
still declaring according to S. Gregory, that in the use either of single or
trinal Mersion there is sufficient Baptism. And it is well observed by Strabo,
that if we must relinquish the use of all things which have been perverted,
there will nothing of this nature remain allowable. And whereas God loses no
right of Sovereignty to any Creature by man's abuse, it was not without good
reason acknowledged and asserted by S. Austen, that the Christians did lawfully
use those Fountains, where the Gentiles drew Water for their Sacrifices; Theod.
Hist. l. 3. c. 14.
and as Theodoret declares they owned the same liberty under Julian the
Emperor, who designed to defile the Fountains and meats with Pagan pollutions.

4. Obs. 2. This position if granted, would be such an Engine which would do
more work, than they who place it would willingly allow of, and would extirpate
diverse useful things referring to religious worship, which are ordered by
humane Wisdom and Prudence. Of all external things the individual Temple or
Church, in which corrupt Religion was performed, may seem as much defiled
thereby as any species of action or gesture can be; and yet even the Directory
declared, Direct. of the day and place of worship.
that such places are not subject to any such pollution, by any superstition
formerly used and now laid aside, as may render them Unlawful or inconvenient;
and S. Austen declares, Aug. Ep. 154.
that even Idols Temples, when their use is changed to the honor of God, may
be lawfully so employed, as well as persons may be received to God, who are
converted to the true Religion. Ecclesiastical revenues for the support of the
Ministry and Universities, have been, and in the Romish Church still are
abused, as much as any other external thing, to be the great support of a
corrupt Religion: and yet the continuance of these things is well allowed of,
by dissenters from this Church. The same may be said, concerning the times of
attending upon the public service of God, Morning and Evening. And
notwithstanding the gross abuse of Bells in the time of Popery, Mr. Rutherford
declares it unreasonable and groundless, Of Scandal. Qu. 5. and Qu. 6.
that thereupon they should be disused. And if this position was admitted as
doctrinally true; the pretense of their convenient usefulness would be no
better excuse on their behalf; than was that Plea for sparing the best of the
Amalakites Cattle, that they might be a Sacrifice, when God had utterly devoted
them to destruction; and therefore the admitting this position it self, would
be as the coming down of a violent torrent, which instead of scouring the
Chanel, will overflow and drown all the Country.

5. Obs. 3. Where this is admitted, the general grounds of the Protestant
Reformation must be disowned. Conf. Boh. Art. 15.
The Bohemian Church which led the Van, openly professes that such Rites and
Ceremonies ought to be retained, which do advantage Faith, the worship of God,
Peace and order; whomsoever they had for their Author, Synodum, Pontificem,
Episcopum, Luth. Formul. Commun. pro Eccl. Witemb.
aut alium quemvis. And both Luther and the Augustan Confession, declare the
like purpose and practice to have been in the German Reformation. Conf. August.
c. 3. Abus. de Missa. Zanch. Epist. l. 1. in Ep. ad Craton.
And Zanchy asserteth, that this is the true way of reforming the Church,
(which he wishes all would mind, after the example of the Bohemian Brethren)
not to root out every thing that was found in the Church of Rome, but to reject
what was fit to be rejected, and to preserve what was fit to be preserved. That
this was designed in the Reformation of the Church of England, appears from
the Preface in the Book of Common Prayer concerning Ceremonies, from the
Apology of the Church of England, and from the Book of Canons, Can. 30.
expressing according to that Apology a very plain Declaration hereof.

6. The Arguments urged for the proof of this position, are such as do not need
any long answer. For whereas Jehn his breaking down the House of Baal is
commended in the Scripture, and neither he nor Jehoiada reserved the House of
Baal, to be a place of Synagogue worship. This action might be necessary for
the effecting a reformation, and the disentangling the people from their
Idolatry, and upon a like account Hezekiah brake in pieces the brazen Serpent,
Aug. de Civ. Dei l. 10. c. 8.
which God himself had appointed, when the people did colere eum tanquam
idolum, give worship to it as to an Idol, as S. Aug. expresses it: and to the
same end the ancient Christians, in some special Cases, where they feared that
the continuance of the Idols Temples, might tend to uphold the honor of the
Idol, Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 39.
did raze them to the foundations, and sometimes erected anew Christian
Churches in their places. But besides this the Jews had such positive Laws as
these, Thou shall quite pluck down all their high places. Number. 33.52. Ye shall
utterly destroy all the places where the Nations served their Gods. Deuteronomy. 12.2.
Ye shall destroy all their graven images. Deuteronomy. 7.25. Chapter 12.3. and the proper
extent of these Laws enjoined them utterly to destroy all Monuments and places
formerly used to Idolatry, out of the land of Israel. But whereas no such
positive commands are given to Christians, if they should think themselves
bound to follow these Jewish Patterns, Tr. of Scandal. Q 6.
Mr. Rutherford himself condemns them as Judaizing in this particular.

7. And when God commands the Israelites that they shall not do after the
doings of the land of Egypt, and the Land of Canaan. Ibid. Q 7.
Lev. 18.3. which Mr. Rutherford objecteth against our Rites: The design of
that place is, that the Israelites ought to be guided by the holy Laws and
Commandments of God, in their Conversations, and not to follow the debauched
examples of other Nations, mentioned in the following part of that Chapter, nor
the abominable idolatries of their worship. Hook. Eccles. Polity l. 4. Sect. 6.
But in matters in themselves lawful, where God had given them no particular
Ceremonial commands to the contrary, they were not tied to disclaim all
expedient things practiced by other Nations: in civil actions they might eat
bread and drink water, yea plow and reap in the same manner with other Nations;
Ex. 34.13. Number. 25.2.
and in circumstances of Religion, though sacrificing and bowing were
manifestly rites of adoration, used by idolatrous Nations, before the giving
the Law, they were still received under the Law, and appointed thereby; and
though the Philistines had long before the time of David an House or Temple of
Dagon, for the place of their Sacrifice, Judge. 16.23, 29, 30. 1 Chr. 10.10.
David's purpose of building an House or Temple to the Lord was never the less
allowable.

8. But besides this, it is chiefly to be considered, that the things designed
for the matter of this objection, are quite of a different nature, from the
Case and Question to which they are applied. It is acknowledged, that for any
persons purposely to design to model the Christian worship, according to the
Rites of Pagan and idolatrous original and use, (which would be to run parallel
with what is aimed at in this objection) is certainly wicked and intolerable.
But since the intent of the present enquiry, concerns ancient Christian Rites
used by us, and abused in the Romish degeneracy; it would be nearer to our
state to enquire, Whether ever God gave any command, that his Church should
relinquish, whatsoever even the Pagans imitated, abused, or profaned? as
Belshazzer profaned the Temple Vessels, many of which were only voluntarily
dedicated, 2 Chronicles. 15.18.; Nazianz. Or. 3. Sozom. l. 5. c. 15.
and Julian appointed among the Gentiles a resemblance of the order of the
public Christian service; and many things especially in the Grecian Idolatry,
have been proved a kind of apish imitation of some things in the Jewish
worship. Delph. Phaenic. cap. 11.
Yet since the Papists are not Pagans, but Christians of a corrupt profession,
that the Case of the Jews may fully answer ours, it must be thus stated:
Whether the things laudably used in the service of God, in the ancient times of
the Jewish Church, which were not directly instituted of God (as their rules
for the ordering their Synagogue worship, and Officers) ought to be rejected in
the reformation of Hezekiah or Josiah, so far as these things were received or
imitated in the corrupt worship of the ten Tribes? and this is that which I
presume no man will have the confidence to assert. And as it is manifest, that
the ten Tribes did in their worship designedly imitate many things in the
Jewish Temple worship, Amos. 4.4, 5. Chapter 5.21, 22, 23. so they retaining among
them the Sons of the Prophets, it is not to be doubted, but they reserved an
imitation of the Jewish Synagogue worship, or Weekly Assemblies.

9. But it is time to consider the particular things, actions, or gestures,
appointed in our service. Gestures are so necessary, as inseparable attendants
to the body, that there is no reason to place expedient gestures among the
number of Ceremonies: yet because kneeling at the Lords Supper is especially so
esteemed, and thereupon by some opposed, it will be requisite to express
somewhat concerning gestures as well as other Rites; and to manifest how little
reason there is for the Censures passed upon these particular Rites, by diverse
at home, and some few persons abroad, who for the most part proceeded upon some
misinformation, or misunderstanding of our affairs.

CHAP. III.
Of devout and becoming gestures, in the service of God.
SECT. I.
Of the Gesture at Prayer, praise, and Christian profession of Faith.
1. THat a reverent behavior is a duty, in our approaches to God in Prayer and
other religious exercises, is ordinarily acknowledged, but by many too much
neglected. And as the most devout and humble gestures were ordinarily used in
Prayer under the Old Testament, so under the new our Savior himself prayed
upon his knees, Luke 22.41. and so did S. Paul with the Disciples both of
Ephesus and Tire. Act. 20.36. Chapter 21.5. And though the Primitive Church, upon
the Lords days, and from Easter to Whitsunday prayed standing, manifesting
thereby their abundant joy and hope by Christ's Resurrection; yet kneeling was
esteemed their ordinary gesture of Prayer? Eusebius. Ec. Hist. l. 5. c. 5.
whence Eusebius declaring the admirable effect of the Prayers of the Christian
Legion, (called the thundering Legion) in the Army of Aurelius, says, that they
kneeled down upon the ground, (...) according to the ordinary custom the
Christians used in Prayer; Ad Scapul. c. 4.
upon which account Tertullian calls their Prayers Geniculationes, or their
falling on their knees; and from hence diverse Christians contracted upon their
knees an hard brawniness like that of the Camels, as S. Hierome relates
concerning S. James, and S. Gregory, Greg. in Evang: Hom. 38.
concerning Tarsilla his Fathers Sister. And that the great and good Emperor
Constantine, did in his Closet four times every day put up his Prayers to God
upon his knees, De Vita Constable. l. 4. c. 21.
is expressed by Eusebius; and these things are the more worthy our imitation
because it needs no other proof but common experience, that where there is a
neglect of external reverence in the service of God it tends to abate the
inward fear of God, and the devoutness of Religion, and therefore Kneeling at
Prayer which is enjoined with us, is very useful.

2. The injunction of this gesture in Prayer was esteemed so warrantable by
Calvin, that he declares it to be such an humane Constitution, as is grounded
on the word of God; and to be so humane, Inst. l. 4. c. 10. Sect. 30.
that it is also divine, being a part of that decency the Apostles commended.
But no more need be added in so plain a Case: only it may be here observed,
that the expediency of kneeling at the absolution, at the commandments, and the
receiving imposition of hands is hence also manifested; because (besides what
may be said from the proper subject matter of each of them) to every
Commandment, in our Liturgy is adjoined an humble Petition for pardon and
grace; the absolution is intended to enclude a concomitant Prayer, as may be
collected from the Rubric following the absolution in the Morning Service; and
the imposition of hands encludeth a benedictory supplication.

3. Standing to praise and give glory to God is sometimes enjoined in our
Liturgy. Now this duty of giving glory to God, is sometimes performed in a way
of humiliation and Confession, under a sense of the glorious Sovereignty,
majesty, and justice of God, in which respect the gesture of kneeling or
falling down is suitable thereto, being practiced Rev. 4.10, 11. And frequently
in the Christian Assemblies, the giving glory to God is performed in magnifying
the Glorious Trinity in a way of joy, praise, and thankfulness, and with
reference to the grace and mercy of God; and to this end the gesture of
standing up has been thought proper to be practiced and enjoined both under
the Old and the New Testament. The Levites were appointed by David to stand
every Morning to thank and praise the Lord, and also at even. 2 Chr. 23.30. the
Jews were commanded by the Levites to stand up and praise the Lord. Neh. 9.5.
and in S. John's Vision of the increase of the Christian Church to so great a
multitude, which no man could number of all Nations, Kindreds, and people, he
saw them standing before the Throne and the Lamb, and saying, Salvation to our
God which sits upon the Throne and to the Lamb. Rev. 7.9, 10. In the former
times of the Christian Church when the Psalms were sung by all the Assembly,
they ordinarily performed this service in a standing posture as Amalarius
declares, Dum cantamus Psalmos, Amalarius de Eccles. Offic. l. 4. c. 3.
solemus stare: but when they were sometimes sung by one person alone (the
usage of the Church in such indifferent things not being always the same) in
the Western Church, Cassian. Inst. l. 2. c. 8.
in the time of Cassian they all stood up at the end of the Psalms, with joint
voices to render glory to God.

4. Standing at the Creed is a visible sign or token of the profession of the
Faith therein contained; which profession is a duty much required in the holy
Scripture, and is one part of our glorifying God, for which Religious
Assemblies of Divine Worship are intended. In the Creed we professedly
acknowledge the three persons in the glorious Trinity to be the only true God,
and our only Lord; and a standing posture well becomes a Servant, in his
professed owning and attending upon his Master: we openly declare every one for
our selves (I believe, etc.) the ground of our Christian hope and comfort, that
believing in the Father who made the World; in the Son who died, rose again,
ascended, and shall judge all men; and in the Holy ghost we have expectation in
the Church of God, and the Communion of Saints, of obtaining forgiveness of
sins, resurrection and everlasting life; and do also acknowledge all these
Articles of the Christian Faith: and a standing gesture is very suitable to any
solemn Declaration of our minds, in matters of moment and concernment. And as
the profession of Faith encludeth a steadfast resolution, to continue firm in
the acknowledgment of the Christian Doctrine, this is so properly signified by
the standing gesture, according to the general apprehensions of the World, that
both (...) in Hebrew, and (...) in Greek (which are words expressing the
standing gesture) are in the holy Scripture used to signify an asserting with
resolution, Deuteronomy. 25.8. 1 Chr. 34.32. 1 Cor. 16.13. 2 These. 2.15. and the like
Idioms of speech are in some other languages as well as our own designing to
express what we resolve to stand to.

SECT. II.
Of standing up at the Gospel.
1. Standing at the Gospel is appointed in our Liturgy, of which a very
reasonable, true, and good account may be given. Some Ritualists have told us
that the Western Church stood up at the Gospel and not at the Epistle, because
the Gospel contains matters of Faith and belief, the Epistle consists of
Rules of life and practice; and that the Gospel and not the Epistle expresses
the very words spoken by Christ. But I account not these reasons sufficient,
partly because the Gospels for some days do not contain, and the Epistles for
some days do contain, the points of Christian Faith, and the express words of
Christ, and partly because by insisting on these things alone, we can have no
reason antecedent to the appointment, why standing at the Gospel should be
required with us, and not at the second Lesson in the Morning Service.

2. Wherefore I observe, 1. That in the devouter times, both of the Jewish and
Christian Church it was frequently observed by the people to manifest their
reverence unto the holy Scriptures by standing up at the reading thereof When
Ezra opened the Book of the Law, Salian. Annal. Eccles. A. M. 3447. n. 16.
all the people stood up. Neh. 8.5. and the Children of Israel stood up in
their places to read the Law of the Lord, Neh. 9.3. and our blessed Savior who
according to the Custom of the Jewish Doctors taught sitting, stood up to read
the words of the Prophet. Ecclesiastici lib. 1. c. 4.
Luke 4.16, 20. Junius observes this as one thing wherein the practice of the
Jewish Synagogue and the Christian Church did agree, si verbum Dei ipsum
legitur stat erecta Auditorum corona, that when the word of God was read the
whole Assembly stood up; which observation was true concerning sometimes of the
Jewish Church and of the principal parts of the Christian Church. Sozom. l. 7.
c. 19.
Wherefore though Sozomen relates that the Alexandrian Bishop did not stand up
at the reading the Gospel; yet he notes it as such a peculiar usage, that he
had not seen nor heard the like any where else.

3. And though in the Jewish Church the people (and among them our Savior,
Luke 2.46.) usually sat to hear their Doctors; and the ancient Christians
sometimes heard their Sermons and Exhortations in the same gesture, as may be
collected from Justin Martyrs second Apology; Eusebius. de Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 33.
yet Eusebius acquainteth us that Constantine that famous Emperor (whose
practice doubtless was not singular) would not hear a Sermon or Treatise about
divine things in a sitting, but only in a standing posture, as judging it not
allowable to do otherwise. And that in the African Churches they did even until
S. Austens days generally stand, Aug. Hom. 26.
both at Sermons and all Lessons out of the Scriptures, is manifest from what
he expresses to that purpose. And such respect was showed even among barbarous
Nations to what was dictated from God, that Eglon King of Moab, when Ehud told
him he had a message from God unto him, did arise out of his seat. Jud. 3.20.

4. Obs. 2. Out of tenderness to the weakness and infirmity of many Christians,
liberty was granted to them that they might hear the longer Lessons, or
portions of holy Scripture sitting; Aug. ibidem.
but as a testimony of their honor to the whole, they were required at the
reading other portions of Scripture to stand up. S. Austen tells us how he
gave Counsel and in some sort made supplication, that those who were infirm and
not well able to stand, might humbly and attentively hear the longer Lessons
sitting: but in the same place he makes complaint, that this liberty granted
only to the infirm in those African Churches, was taken by others more
generally than was intended or allowed. And to somewhat a like liberty the
words of Amalarius in the ninth Century seem to refer, Amalar. de Eccles.
Offic. l. 4. c. 3.
who says in recitatione lectionis sedere solemus aut silendo stare, it is our
Custom either to sit, or to stand with silence when the Lesson is read. And
whereas in the Christian Church, the Law and Prophets (with some of the
Apocrypha) and the Gospels and Epistles were publicly read in their
Assemblies, as is manifest both from Councils, Fathers, and Ritual Writers: the
Latin Church enjoined standing up at the Gospel only (which was ordinarily
short) for many hundred years past, Microl. c. 9.
the Greek Church as Micrologus relates, stood up also at the Epistle which
was likewise short, Cassand. Liturg. c. 5.
and so did also the Churches of Russia as Cassander observes from the History
of Sigismundus Liberus. For though a posture of reverent respect to the word of
God is very suitable whenever it is read; yet that the Church should allow a
liberty to hear the longer Lessons sitting while this particular reverence is
expressed only at the reading some shorter portion of the Scripture, De Eccl.
Offic. l. 3. c. 11.
is very allowable; because it is well observed by Amalarius, that the Apostles
themselves did sometimes hear the Scriptures read in the Jewish Synagogue
sitting, as is evident from Act. 13.14, 15, 16. Where they entered into the
Synagogue and sat down, and after the reading the Law and the Prophets, Paul
stood up.

5. Obs. 3. Standing at a short portion of the Gospel, rather than at any other
portion of the Scripture, is reasonably chosen to express reverence to the holy
word of God, because the actions and words of our blessed Savior are for the
most part therein contained. In the Primitive Church while the servour of true
devotion did continue, they heard the Writings of the Apostles read with that
high esteem and veneration, as if they had then seen the Apostles faces and
received those words from their mouths; which Tertullian thus expresses,
Tertul. de Praescrip. c. 36.
Authenticae literae eorum ( sc. Apostolorum) recitantur sonantes vocem, and
representantes faciem uniuscujusque eorum. And in like manner they heard the
words of the Gospel as if they had seen Christ himself, and received these
words from his mouth. And though all divine truth be therefore highly valuable
because it is from God; yet so far as concerns the deliverer, it was
requisite (and warranted by the Scriptures. Mat. 21.37. Heb. 2.1, 2, 3. Chapter
3.3.) that those who lived when Christ was in the flesh, should show the higher
respect of the two, to Christ himself speaking (whose words are ordinarily in
the Gospel) than to his Apostles who were sent by him. Ign. Ep. ad Philadelph.
Wherefore Ignatius accounts the Gospel to have this excellency in it, viz.
the presence of our Savior Jesus Christ, and his suffering and resurrection.
And out of special respect to our Lord and Savior, it was the Custom of the
ancient Greek Church, to stand up when ever the Book of the four Evangelists
was opened, Chrysostom. de Circo. Constable. Apost. l. 2. c. 57.
or any Lesson read from thence, though the gesture of sitting was allowed at
the hearing any other Books of Scripture: so that the liberty of sitting even
at any Lessons from the Gospel was not there indulged (the practice of diverse
Churches being in these things not always the same) where the same liberty was
allowed concerning the other Scriptures.

6. Wherefore to show that outward respect to the holy Scriptures, which both
the Jewish and Christian Churches have owned, and wherein our blessed Lord has
given us an example to stand up at the reading them, is reasonable and
unblameable. And the liberty allowed for sitting at the other Scriptures, which
for order sake is sit to be used, does not countenance any want of high respect
to all Divine truth, which is expressed by manifesting this respect to a
particular short part thereof; and that part is to this purpose chosen wherein
the words and actions of our Lord and Master do frequently occur.

SECT. III.
Of the fitness of kneeling at the Communion, and the gesture at the
institution of that Sacrament considered.
1. To kneel at the receiving the holy Communion, has been judged a gesture
very expedient and commendable upon diverse respects. 1. Because this Sacrament
does in a special manner exhibit a mystical and spiritual Communion with
Christ, or the Communion of his body and blood; and the greatest reverence and
most humble gesture is very convenient for so solemn an Ordinance, and so near
an approach to Jesus Christ, especially since in this great Ordinance there
ought to be a devout religious worship performed unto Christ himself. Kneeling
therefore is a fit gesture of adoration performed in this Ordinance unto God
and Jesus Christ, which is the more inoffensively performed, because our Church
has openly declared against any adoration either of the Sacramental Bread and
Wine, Rubr. after Communion.
or of any corporal presence of Christ's natural flesh and blood therein. 2.
Because of the greatness of the benefits conveyed in this Ordinance to the
worthy receiver, such as the Grace of God and remission of sins in the blood of
Christ: and if he who receives some great gift, or some great pardon from his
Prince, does fitly receive it kneeling; and the Poenitentes in the ancient
Church, always received Ecclesiastical absolution from the Rulers of the Church
upon their knees, in token of their submissive humility; much more he who
comes unto Christ in this Sacrament, to receive from him the remission of his
sins, tendered in his blood of the New Testament, should appear before him with
humility. Ibidem.
To this purpose, Kneeling at the Sacrament is in our Liturgy declared to be
for a signification of an humble and grateful acknowledgment, of the benefits
of Christ therein given to all worthy receivers: and Mr. Hooker says very well
coming as receivers of inestimable Grace at the hand of God, Eccles. Pol. l. 5.
c. 68.
what does better beseem our bodies at that hour, than to be sensible witnesses
of minds unfeignedly humbled?

2. 3. Kneeling is a suitable gesture for solemn Prayer and humble
thanksgiving, both which may be sitly exercised at the receiving this
Sacrament. For religious Prayer becomes him who there affectionately desires
to be made partaker of the benefits of Christ's Passion: and therefore the
Communicant should devoutly join in, and in heart say Amen to those Petitions
at the delivery of the Elements, which peculiarly refer to himself. The body of
our Lord Jesus Christ which was given for thee, preserve thy Body and Soul to
everlasting life, and The blood of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And humble
thanksgiving at the holy Eucharist for the benefits of the New Testament there
tendered, the love of Christ in his sufferings here remembered, and for the means
of Communion with the Father and the Son in this Ordinance encluded, with
reflection on our own guilt, Ans. to Admenit. Tr. 15. c. 1. div. 11.
pollution, and infirmity; is a fit exercise for this Ordinance. And upon this
consideration Bishop Whitgift declared, the kneeling gesture to be very meet
for the receiving this Sacrament.

3. But against the lawfulness of this gesture, diverse things are objected. 1.
That Kneeling is no Table gesture as sitting is, nor does it so properly
express our fellowship with Christ, Rutherf. Divine Right of Chapter Gov. p. 196.
and the honor and privilege of Communion with him as Coheirs. Ans. 1. As the
Lords Supper is no common Feast, but a Heavenly Banquet prepared by Jesus
Christ, which principally consists of spiritual graces and benefits, and
Communion with Christ, signified by and tendered under the outward Elements; so
the administration and participation of this great Ordinance, ought not to be
guided by the Rules of common Table fellowship, but by more religious
considerations. At other Tables the attendants are in office inferior to the
guests; but in the institution of this Ordinance he who was Lord and greatest,
was among them as one who served, and all after administrations of that
Ordinance must be performed by the special Officers of Christ's Church, because
the consecration of the Elements encludeth the power of the Keys and a solemn
benediction. Nor may this Communion be lawfully taken seperately of every
single Family, or by any single person as other Suppers may be: and whereas men
having the head covered, is an ordinary posture at other Tables; to assert that
men men ought to have their Hats on at the Holy Communion, Gangr. Part. 2.
error. 112.
was justly condemned, as an error vented by some wild Spirits, in our former
times of licentiousness: and yet this cannot be avoided, by those who will
assert, that the postures of the Lords Supper ought to be correspondent to
those at ordinary Tables. Wherefore this objection though earnestly insisted
upon, is built upon an unsound Foundation. But when S. Paul reproved the abuses
at Corinth about their Agapae which attended the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.22.
saying, Have ye not Houses to eat and to drink in? it was well from thence
observed by Zanchy, Zanch. Tom. 4. in 2. Praecept. c. 16.
that not only internal but even external reverence ought to be expressed at
the holy Sacrament, otherwise than at our common Tables, out of respect to
Christ who instituted it. 2. It is acknowledged that the great privilege of
Communion with Christ, as Members and joint Heirs (which yet is not a Communion
of equality to him, but still encludeth deriving from him, and subjection to
him as our head and Lord) is encluded in the right partaking of this Ordinance,
and is sufficiently signified by the Ordinance it self in whatsoever sit and
becoming gesture it be administered. And in all Christian services in which we
have access to God by the mediation of his Son, Christians enjoy some
considerable degree of Communion with God as his Children, which is an high
privilege; but still they are his Servants and Creatures, and must humble
themselves before him, and kneeling is still a fit and proper gesture for
Prayer, and therefore so it may be at the Communion.

4. Obj. 2. But it is more generally by many amongst us objected, that kneeling
at this Sacrament is contrary to the example and practice of Christ and his
Apostles, who sat at the institution of the Lords Supper. Ans. 1. There is no
certainty concerning the gesture used by Christ and his Apostles at the Lords
Supper. There are some good Writers both ancient and Modern, who speak either
variously or doubtfully, concerning his gesture at the Passover: but I think it
sufficiently evident, especially from S. Luke 22. v. 14, 15. and John 21.20.
that he did eat the Passover with his Disciples in a discumbing gesture (which
gesture because it is wholly out of use with us, is expressed in our English
Translation by sitting, because it was a Table gesture). Now they who urge this
Objection take for granted, because the Lords Supper was instituted before the
Paschal Solemnities were fully ended, that our Savior continued all that time
in the same gesture; against the certainty, yea or probability of which, I
allege three things. 1. That it was the ordinary Custom of the Jews, V. Hor.
Hebr. in Mat. 26.20.
to change their gesture during the continuance of the Paschal Feast. At the
beginning of their Feast, they did discumb and so continued till they had eaten
the Cake of Unleavened Bread, and drunk the two former Cups of Wine, as both
the Talmud and Buxtorf do relate; Buxt. Synag. Judaic. c. 13.
but at the time of the two latter Cups of Wine, and at the eating their bitter
Herbs the same gesture was not required, nor used, as the Talmud in Berachoth,
and Pesachin does express; and here Buxtorf says, reclinati non comedunt. 2.
That the Jews who in their solemn Feasts did eat discumbing, yet in their
giving thanks before those Feasts, Phil. de Vit. Contemp.
they were (as Philo relates) in a standing gesture, with their eyes and hands
lifted up toward Heaven; and therefore it is no way probable, that Christ and
his Apostles should continue in their Table gesture, (which this objection must
suppose) at the blessing the holy Supper, which is an higher Ordinance than the
Passover was, because this would be very unsuitable to so great a solemnity. 3.
That there anpeareth no footsteps of any Custom of the Primitive Church, of
receiving the Lords Supper either sitting or discumbing, (of which the
following Section will give some further account.)

5. Ans. 2. There is no obligation of duty upon the Christian Church, to keep
to that gesture in the Lords Supper, which was used by Christ and his Apostles,
though it could be evidently discovered: because 1. Christ has given no
command concerning the gesture, and S. Paul when he tells his Corinthians,
what he had received from the Lord and delivered unto them concerning this holy
Sacrament, makes no mention at all therein of any gesture. 1 Cor. 11.23, 24,
25. Bishop Jewel therefore well asserteth, that Christ said not. Reply to Hard.
Art. 2.
Do this after Supper, or sitting, or being so many together, neither did the
Apostles ever so understand him. 2. Christ and his Apostles observed that
Passover gesture which was usually received among the Jews though it was
different from the gesture at its first institution; of which I have discoursed
somewhat in a former Chapter. 3. Other circumstances of like nature attendant
upon the institutution of the Lords Supper, Chapter 1. Sect. 2. n. 3.
are generally acknowledged to be of no necessary obligation unto Christians in
after times. Bishop Saunderson notes that whereas those four last
predicaments, ubi, De Oblig. Consc. Prael. 3. Sect. 16, etc.
quando, situs, habitus; where, when, the gesture, and the habit, are of a like
nature; it is almost generally acknowledged that we are not obliged to make use
of a like place for the celebrating the Lords Supper, (an upper room) nor the
same time, (at night at the end of Supper) nor of the same habit, (a seemless
Coat woven throughout) but only the gesture is urged as necessary, for which
there can be no more reason than for the other; yea though there be more
uncertainty concerning the gesture, than concerning any of the other three.

6. Ans. 3. There is no reason at all to conclude that Christ and his Apostles
sat at this institution. Now though I know no evidence against our Savior his
using a gesture of Prayer and Worship at the time of celebrating the Lords
Supper; which is the more probable, because such was the general practice of
the ancient Primitive Church, I shall for the present suppose that he used the
same gesture at the Lords Supper, and at the Passover; yet then I must observe,
1. That this discumbing gesture was vastly different from sitting. 2. That if
this supposed gesture used at the institution was essential or of necessity to
the Sacrament, they who undertake to change discumbing into sitting, upon
pretense that that is the ordinary Table gesture in these Countries, must
undertake to assert that the introducing new Customs among men-may have power
to alter the necessary and essential duties of Gods Ordinances; which is a
position destructive to Religion and Christianity: for if any Company of men
should enure themselves to a diet wherein they ordinarily allow themselves
neither Bread nor Wine, this will in no wise warrant their undertaking to
celebrate this Sacrament in any other Elements, where these Elements may be as
easily had and used, as men may compose themselves to a reclining or discumbing
gesture.

7. Wherefore he who urges the necessity of any gesture at this Sacrament,
upon pretense that it was used by Christ and his Apostles, does declare, that
for a duty which is none; and pretends to follow their example where probably
he may be mistaken in it; but he who conformeth to that gesture which is by
authority established, Dr. Kellets Tricaen. l. 3. c. 5. Sect. 3, 6. Chapter 7.
Sect. 1.
though it were certainly different from the gesture at the institution, (which
yet some have conjectured to have been a kneeling gesture) does manifestly
follow the example of Christ and his Apostles, who did embrace that Passover
gesture which was at that time of common practice among the Jews, but could not
be pretended to be the gesture at the first celebration thereof.

SECT. IV.
Of the Communion gesture observed in the Christian Church, both in the purer
and the more degenerate times thereof.
1. Obj. 3. It is urged by some Non-Conformists, that the Universal Church in
the Primitive times used sitting and not kneeling; Holy Table Chapter 5. p. 134.
and that the holy Communion was then received sitting, is thought not
improbable by some others. Of Relig: Assemb. c. 4.
Now though this if it were true, would not prove our gesture unlawful, because
the Church is not bound to observe always the same indifferent rites and
gestures: for though Christ, and his Apostles after his Ascension, sat when
they taught the people, Act. 16.13. all Ministers are not thereby obliged to
the same gesture. Yet I further assert. 1. There is no evidence that ever the
Primitive Church used any ordinary Table gesture, at the receiving the Lords
Supper; but considerable proof may be made of the contrary. We read indeed of
the seats for the Bishop and Presbyters in the Christian Assemblies; but as
this cannot respect the whole Assembly, so it gives no more evidence of their
gesture at the Communion, than the same thing with us does of our gesture.
Apol. c. 39.
That place of Tertullian which Rhenanus sometime understood of the Eucharist.
( Non prius discumbitur quam oration ad Deum praegustetur, etc. that they do not
discumb, V. Pamel. ibid.
or use the reclining gesture till they have first prayed) does manifestly
refer to their love feast only, whereas it follows in Tertullian, they eat as
much as satisfies hunger, and drink as much as becomes sober persons. Cyp. Ep
42.
When Cyprian writes to Cornelius, that he would not allow the Letters of the
Novatian party to be read, considentibus sacerdotibus Dei, and altari posito,
while the Priests of God were sat together, and the Altar prepared; he does
not express their usual gesture at the Lords Table, but the manner of their
holding Synods, as may be collected from that and the foregoing Epistle. Ep.
41. Petit. Var. Lect. l. 3. c. 4.
And it is well observed by Petitus, that the Canons and practice of the
ancient Church, required their annual Synods to assemble upon the stationary
days at the close of which stations they always received the Communion.

2. But that the Primitive gesture at the Communion was not such as they used
at their ordinary Tables, may be partly collected from Tertullian, Tertul.
Apol. c. 8.
who relating and refelling the impudent slander of the Gentiles, occasioned as
Eusebius says by the Gnostics; first against the Eucharist, Eus. Hist. Eccl.
l. 4. c. 7.
and then against the Love Feasts, (as is manifest by comparing this with Cap.
7. and with Minucius Felix) he proceeds from the former to the latter saying,
Minuc. Fell. edit. Oxon. p. 26, 98, etc.
interea discumbens, etc. or then falling to a Table gesture, etc. which
shows, that such a gesture was used at their Love Feasts, but not at the holy
Communion. This is also expressed by Justin Martyr, Just. Mart. Ap. 2.
who declares, that after the end of their Sermon or Exhortation, they all
rise up and give thanks, and receive the holy Sacrament: which words show that
though they sat before at the time of the Sermon, they changed that gesture on
purpose, when they came to attend the receiving the holy Communion.

3. I assert. 2. The Primitive Church did practice and require at the receiving
the Communion, such a gesture as was usual to express humility and reverence,
and worship toward God. Cyr. Hieros. Cat. Mist. 5.
Cyrill directs the Communicant to take the Cup, (...) bowing down, after the
manner of worshipping and adoring. Chrysostom. Hom. 24. in 1 Cor. (...).
S. Chrysostom required more worship and reverence to be expressed toward
Christ at the receiving the Sacrament, than the wise men of the East showed to
him; when they fell down and worshipped him with fear and trembling. A humble
frame and behavior was thought so agreeable to this Ordinance by Origin, Orig.
in Diverse. Hom. 5.
(if that Homily be his and not some other ancient Writers) that he exhorts
the Communicant to imitate the humility of the Centurion, who said, Lord I am
not worthy that thou should come under my roof. And that the Christians
usually expressed adoration at the receiving this Sacrament, is manifest from
S. Augustines, Aug. in Ps. 98. Ep. 120. c. 27. Amb. de Sp. Sanc. l. 3. c. 12.
Nemo manducat nisi prius adoraverit, and from other like expressions both of
his and S. Ambroses.

4. Now whereas the twentieth Canon of Nice, according to a more ancient
Custom, enjoined all Prayers upon the Lords days, and from Easter to
Whitsunday, to be performed in a standing gesture; which 8. Augustine says was
the general practice upon those days at the Eucharistical, Aug. Ep. 119. c. 15.
or Communion Prayers, it is not to be doubted but that their gesture of
reverence, used upon those days at this Sacrament, was a standing gesture;
especially since Tertullian earnestly declares against the use of a sitting
posture in adoration, Tertul. de Orat. c. 12.
as being irreverent; and also acquainteth us that it was not allowed in those
times, DeCor. Milit. c. 3.
de geniculis; adorare, to perform any adoration kneeling upon the Lords days.
Wherefore when Dionysius of Alexandria speaks of a Communicant in his Church,
Eus. Hist: Eccl. l. 7. c. 8.
(...), we may properly render it standing at the Lords Table, and the testimony
of Justin Martyr above produced, gives a very probable intimation of the same
gesture. But when as the ancient Churches had two stationary days in a Week
(that is the sourth, and sixth days; with which the seventh day was also joined
at Caesaria, as is manifest from S. Basil) upon which the holy Communion was
administered; it is probable, Basil. Ep. ad Caesariam.
that as upon those days they prayed kneeling, so they did in the same gesture
receive this Sacrament, in attendance upon which they thought an humble gesture
of adoration to be very suitable; this Sacrament being accounted by them (...)
the dreadful mysteries.

5. Albasp. Obs. l. 1. Obs. 15.
Indeed Albaspinus undertaketh to assert, without any proof, that the chief
reason why anciently they stood in their Prayers upon the Lords days and the
Pentecost, was because upon those days they received the holy Communion, and it
was requisite they should use none other than a gesture of Joy upon that day,
in which they communicated in that Sacrament. But besides the improbability of
supposing daily Communions (where we have no testimony thereof) from Easter to
Whitsunday, this observation is very plainly contradicted by Albaspinus himself
in his very next observation, Obs. 16.
where he declares that the Eucharist was constantly celebrated upon the
stationary days, and yet upon those days he yields that the ancient
Christians did pray kneeling: Conc. Trul. c. 90.
and this his conjecture is also contrary to what is asserted by the sixth
general Council, by Zonaras and Balsamon, upon the twentieth Council of Nice,
and by S. Hierom, Austen, Hieron. Prooem. in lib. 1. Com. in Ephesians.
Basil, and other Fathers, who unanimously assert that their joyfulness to the
wonder of the Gentiles, for the Resurrection of Christ; and their professing
themselves to be risen with him, and to expect resurrection by him, was the
cause of their standing gesture at those times in their Religious Prayers. But
that the most humble gesture was not thought inconsistent with the Eucharist
may appear. Gr. Nazianz. Orat. in Gorgon:
Besides the testimonies above produced from what Gregory Nazianzen relates of
his Sister Gorgonia who privately fell down prostrate before the Altar with the
Sacrament in her hand.

6. Wherefore kneeling at the holy Sacrament, or receiving it in a gesture of
Prayer and Religious Worship unto God, was no way disallowed as unlawful by the
Primitive Church; but our practice herein, is but a building upon their
Foundations who themselves used a gesture of Adoration, or the same gesture
with that of Prayer.

7. Obj. 4. Kneeling is a gesture which has been grossly abused by the Papists,
in worshipping the Host, according to their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, and
to that end it was enjoined by Honorius the third. Ans. 1. NO sinful use of any
gesture, though it be in the most manifest idolatry, does render that gesture
unlawful in Religious service to God, as was showed in the former Chapter.
Though the Israelites sat down to eat and drink, when they had offered
Sacrifices to the golden Calf. Ex. 32.6. it was still allowable in the days of
Samuel to sit down to feast upon the Sacrifices of God. 1 Samuel 9.13, 22. And
though the discumbing or reclining gesture, was anciently used in Idolatrous
Feasts ( Amos 2.8. Ezekiel 23.41.) and so continued in some places very common
till the times of Christ, (being designed by (...) to sit, or rather discumb in
the Idols Temple. 1. Cor. 8.10. Conc. Ancyr. Can. 51
) and for some hundred years after as appears from the Council of Ancyra, yet
Christ himself made use of this gesture at the Jewish Passover, according to
the Custom and Canons of the Jewish Church.

8. Ans. 2. Though it be true that many Papists (but not all) do receive and
adore the Host kneeling; yet the Decree of Honorius so often insisted upon, is
herein mistaken and misapplyed. That Decree commands that the people cum
elevatur hostia salutaris se reverenter inclinet, Decret. Greg. Lib. 3. Tit.
41. c. 10.
idem faciens cum eam deferat Presbyter ad infirmum, which words speak not the
gesture of communicating, or at the time of receiving the Sacrament; but only
concerns their behavior as spectators, when the Host immediately after the
Consecration is elevated, or when it is carried abroad to the sick. And though
the old Gloss supposes that kneeling was thereby at such times enjoined, which
the practice of many in that Communion cannot admit; Espencaeus a more learned
man than the Author of the Gloss, Espencaeus De Adorat. Euch. l. 2. c. 16.
accounts that Decree rather to prohibit kneeling, and to direct (as the
words se reverenter inclinet, may import) a standing gesture with expression of
reverence. And Espencaeus tells us in the same place, that in 1555. the
kneeling gesture had not obtained in the Church of Lions, and that when some
endeavored to obtrude it upon that Metropolis, a stop was put to their
proceeding by the Royal Authority: and in the same place in that Book,
purposely written for the adoration of the Sacrament, he declares, that it is
not much material in what gesture it is performed, whether sitting, standing,
lying, or kneeling.

9. Ans. 3. They who will lay aside all gestures grossly abused, must upon the
same account reject all those, which are in this Sacrament ordinarily received
in the Protestant Churches, both standing, and sitting, as well as kneeling.
That standing was a gesture used in the Romish adoration of the Host, by many
of the ordinary sort of Papists is evident from Espencaeus now cited. Sacr.
Cerem. lib. 1. Sect. 2. Cap. 1. f. 22.
And if he who is elected Pope be not Bishop or Priest; at his Priestly
Ordination he receives the Sacrament standing: for then as their Book of
Ceremonies informs us, Ordinator communicate electo stanti in ipso cornu, de
corpore and sanguine Christi; Ibid. c. 2. f. 28.
and the same gesture is used by him at his Episcopal Ordination, Communionem
sumet sub utraque specie stans, etc. and as this is the gesture of the Pope in
that great solemnity of the Popes being invested with his Papal dignity, V.
Durand. Rat. l. 4. c. 54. n. 45.
so upon the great Mass upon Christmas day, if the Pope himself celebrate the
Mass, the Deacon who attends upon him receives it at the Popes hand in a
standing gesture, Diaconus slans, inclinato capite ex ejus manibus de Corpore
Christi communicate, Ibid. Lib. 2. Sect. 1. Cap. 14.
-- calamo slans sanguinis partem sugit; and in the same gesture the consicient
Priest usually receives.

10. Sacerdotal. Par. 1. Tract. 4. c. 35.
But because sitting is most contended for amongst us, I shall observe that
this has been many ways also grossly abused. First it was the ordinary gesture
of worship in the Romish Pagan Idolatry. The ancient laws of their Pagan
worship required, ut adoraturi sedeant, which as Plutarch affirms, Plut. in
Numa.
was appointed by Numa Pompilius; and Tertullian informs us that at their
Gentile solemnities even in his time, they worshipped their images sitting,
Tertul. de Orat. c. 12.
adoratis sigillaribus suis residendo.

11. And in the Romish Church, it is by some asserted, and appears very
probable, that the Pope himself at some solemnities receives the Eucharist
sitting. When the Emperor receives his Coronation, their Master of Ceremonies
tells us, that at the time of Mass, the Pope with the Emperor following him
in the place of a Subdeacon goes to the Altar, whence Pontifex ad sedem
eminentem communicaturus revertitur, Sacr. Cerem. l. 1. Sect. 5. Cap. 3.
the Pope (who at that time does himself celebrate) goes to his seat of
eminency therein to receive the Communion. And a Book called the Quench-Coal,
written many years since as an Answer to Dr. Heylins Coal from the Altar,
produces this testimony from William Thomas in his History of Italy, who
declared himself an eye witness thereof, in the year 1547. that the Altar in
the Cathedral Church of Rome, Quench Coal p. 12.
even in the time of Mass when the Pope received the Sacrament, was standing in
the midst of the Quire, and the Pope sitting in a Chair of State about it. And
Didoclavius tells us, (which is the only instance he produces out of any
History for sitting at the Sacrament, (and he may be mistaken in that) that the
Benedictine Monks receive the Sacrament sitting upon the Thursday before
Easter: Altar. Damasc. c. 10.
and yet I suppose (if his observation be true) he will not imagine that they
receive it with less adoration of the Host, than other Papists do.

12. And sitting at the Sacrament has yet been much more abused by the Arians
in Poland (as their Synods called the Socinians) who as denying the Divinity of
Christ, In Synodis Cracoviens. Petricoviens. Wlodislav. and Toruniens. in Corp.
Confessionum.
and not giving due reverence to him, were the first Authors known to those
Churches of this sitting gesture: upon which account the Churches both of the
Bobaemian, Augustan and Helvetick Confessions, residing in Poland and
Lithuania, disclaimed the use of that gesture (though they esteemed it lawful
in it self) as being upon this occasion scandalous. Wherefore to assert that
every gesture grossly abused by others ought to be utterly relinquished, is not
only contrary to truth, and to the practice of the Church of England; but is
herein opposite to the use of all the reformed Churches, and it would make void
Christ's institution of the Sacrament, by admitting no gesture to be lawful to
communicate therein.

13. Yet that we may discern the various working of men's minds, in their
arguments against this kneeling gesture, and how copiously every thing
affords matter to them who will take up with any thing; we may observe, Div.
Right of Chapter Gov. Chapter 2. q. 1. p. 195.
that as kneeling is sometimes disliked as having been Idolatrously abused, so
sitting is sometimes pleaded for, as being the gesture practiced and allowed by
Christ, because it was the gesture (say they) in the Idols Temple. Thus Mr.
Rutherford in these strange expressions, undertaketh to prove that Christ did
sit at the Lords Supper, because sitting at the Idols Table, 1 Cor. 8.10.
declares that in Religious Feasts sitting was ordinary, and a sign indicant of
honoring the spiritual Lord of the Banquet, and a religious Communion with the
Lord of the Feast was hence signified.

14. Another thing urged against kneeling at the Sacrament, Obj. 5. Rutherf.
Divine Right of Chapter Govern. Chapter 1. Qu. 5. Sect. 1, 3.
which of the others is most strange and uncharitable, is this, that kneeling
at the Sacrament is Idolatry, and is parallel with worshipping god by an Image,
and even with the Pagan Idolatry it self, upon this ground, Altar. Damasc. c.
10 p. 801.
because to kneel before any Creature as a memorative object of God, though
there be no intention of giving divine adoration to that Creature, is Idolatry,
in the opinion of some men.

15. Ans. 1. This rash position tends to make the Jews worshipping God before
the Ark or mercy Seat, and before the Temple at Jerusalem, or the Tabernacle in
the Wilderness, to have been equally Idolatrous with the serving Jeroboams
Calves, or worshipping Baal; which was so far from that great sin, that it was
then a necessary duty of Religion. And the cause of this gross mistake, is the
want of considering the vast difference, of worshipping a false God; or making
use of a memorative object to represent the likeness of the divine being, which
is contrary to his nature, and forbidden by his Precepts; and of using such a
memorative object in worship, as is to be a memorial of the Covenant and grace
of God and Christ, and his Communion with us, being to that end appointed and
instituted as a remembrance of him. If these things be not accounted vastly
different, it must be concluded not very considerable, whether we do things
appointed of God or forbidden of him; and things agreeable to the nature of God
or apposite thereto. And besides this to worship God alone, making use of such
memorative objects as an help thereto, which do properly call to our minds Gods
mighty works, and glorious Attributes, is far from being either Idolatrous, or
blameable. If a pious man taking a view of the mighty works of Gods Creation,
or any part thereof, should upon this sight be put in mind of the power and
wisdom of their Creator, and thence should glorify admire and worship, not the
Creature but God alone; such actions are not evil, but devout and religious.

16. 2. This assertion is of so dangerous consequence, as to disown this holy
Sacrament, from being an Ordinance of Christian worship, and to hinder the
principal duties therein to be performed. For it is directly contrary to the
duties of this Sacrament, to condemn the worshipping of Christ as sinful, at
the view of this memorial of Christ's Death in this Sacrament; when Christians
here ought to magnify his grace, mercy, and love, to glorify him for the
wonderful Salvation and Atonement effected by his Death, to implore his grace
and spirit, with all the blessings and benefits of the New Testament, to
acknowledge him, and submit to him, as our only Sovereign Lord, with other such
like, which are proper actions of our worshipping and inwardly adoring him. And
it is unreasonable as well as uncharitable, where these inward acts of Religion
are necessary and a duty, to condemn the outward expression thereof, as either
Idolatrous, or any was sinful, being directed to him who is Lord both of our
Souls and Bodies.

17. And though some men's fierceness carries them very far, yet if we consult
the judgment of the Protestant Churches, who all admit an uniform gesture in
their several churches; not only the Lutheran Churches make use of kneeling at
the Communion, as an expression and excitement of devotion, but the Bohaemian
Church which also used kneeling, declared that this gesture being piously
received, Ratio Discipl. Cap. 3. Sect. 4.
devotionem ipsam and in conspectu Dei humilitatem, adcoque gaudium cum tremore
auget; increases devoutness of mind, humility in the sight of God, and awful
rejoicing. Those of the Helvetick Confession in Poland, who themselves used
standing, did approve of kneeling in the Polish Synods above-mentioued, nor
has it ever been condemned by any Protestant Church abroad: but is
particularly approved and well allowed of also by diverse of the most eminent
Ministers of the Reformed Churches, as has been manifested by Mr. Durel Zanchy
declares, Zanch. in Sec. praec. c. 17.
that there is no doubt but that they act holily, and according to the will of
God, who come to handle and partake of the holy Sacrament, with external
reverence also. And Hospinian declares, that the Sacraments ought to be
handled with great Religion and reverence, Hospin Hist. Sacram. l. 5. c. 8.
according to the Custom of every Church, with a comely habit, modest
behavior, soberly and devoutly, with the head uncovered, and with bended knees.

CHAP. IV.
Of other particular Rites appointed in the Church of England.
SECT. I.
Of the Surpless.
1. A Decent habit in the service of God is generally allowed to be expedient,
and Bucer observed, that whether men will or no, they must acknowledge that the
distinct Garments and Ornaments of Magistrates, does procure a singular respect
to their Magistracy. And a decent habit used by Ministers in the worship of
God, does express a reverent esteem of the service of God, and promoteth a due
respect to them and their Ministration, with men of unprejudiced minds. Upon
which account a particular comely attire for the Levites under the Law, Chapter 1.
Sect. 2.
(as has been above-shewed) and for Christian Ministers both in the Primitive,
and reformed Churches, was ordered and appointed by Ecclesiastical Authority:
and to this end with us as with many other Churches anicent and modern reformed
the use of the Surpless is received, the decency of which is to be considered.

2. As the service of God in Religious ministrations is excellent and
honorable, Baron. A. 44. Casaub. Exercit. 16. n. 73. Seldom. de Synod. l. 1.
c. 3.
so the general sense of a great part of the World, both Jews and Gentiles,
have accounted white garments to be honorable and comely, and they are also
approved as such by the wisdom of God himself, in the description of the most
excellent persons and things. The glorious attire of the Lambs wise, and some
of the Apocalyptick Angels, is expressed by their being arrayed in white linen.
Rev. 19.8. Chap. 15.6. the glorious state of the whole Church of God, and its
Members, and of the Elders before the Throne, is signified by their being
clothed in white raiment. Rev. 7.9. Chap. 3, 4, 19. chap. 4.4. and the
appearance of Angels, the Transfiguration of Christ, and the vision of the
glory of God, are represented in white garments, Mark 16.5. Act. 1.10. Mark
9.3. Dan. 7.9. and the Holy Ghost would certainly not make use of things
indecent and unseemly, as representations of such great and glorious
excellencies. And therefore they who will condemn or deride a vesture of white
linen, as being in it self uncomely, must first undertake to give evidence,
Zanch. in 2. Pracept. c. 16.
that they have better judgments concerning what is decent in the Church, than
the rest of the World have, P. Martyr. Ep. ad Hoop.
or than he has who gave the being both to the World and to the Church. And it
has been acknowledged by Protestant Writers of good note, that the use of
white linen has hereby this special advantage, that from the natural
simplicity of the color, the special consideration of white linen above
expressed, and the use of these expressions in Scripture, it may aptly direct
us to the meditation and consideration of purity.

3. Yet because it must be acknowledged, that things in themselves otherwise
unblamable, may become unlawful when they are made use of upon evil principles,
or in any evil way, or to bad ends and purposes; and whereas the use of the
Surpless is charged by some with Judaizing, and by others with too much
compliance with the degenerate state of the Christian Church under Popery, I
shall take these things into consideration.

4. Though such things as have a natural comeliness or convenience, do not
become unlawful to Christians at all times, because they were made use of or
enjoined in the Law of Moses, as has been manifested; yet I further observe,
Chapter l. Sect. 1.
that the Surpless was no Aaronical garment, as has been ordinarily supposed
and granted. Among the high Priests garments, his Ephod which was made of blue,
Purple, Scarlet and sine twined linen, and his Robe which was all of blue, can
have no affinity with the Surpless, neither of them being white linen, and both
of them of a different shape, and his linen Breeches, Bonnet, Mitre, and Girdle
bear not the least resemblance thereto: it remains therefore that none other
of their garments can be like to our Surpless, unless either the Coat of the
high Priest, or the Coats of the inferior Priests, (which are sometimes called
Ephods) should agree thereto. The high Priests Coat was ordinarily an
under-garment, worn next to his skin, upon which he put on his Robe, Ephod, and
other attire, as may be collected from Moses his consecration of Aaron, Lev.
8.7, 8. and is plainly expressed by Josephus, who was himself a Priest, Josep.
Ant. l. 3. c. 8.
and at Jerusalem whilst this attire was yet worn.

5. But it must be owned, that upon the day of atonement, which was the tenth
day of the seventh mouth, the high Priest went into the Holy of Holies in a
linen Coat, without his other ordinary Priestly garments, Philo. de Somn. Targ.
Jonath. in Lev. 16.4. Salian. An. 2545. n. 54.
as is affirmed by Philo Judaeus (who also says that this was a white Coat,
though others as well as our English Translators in Exodus 28.39. suppose it was
embroidered) by one of the Chaldee Paraphrasts, and by diverse others both
Jewish Writers and Modern Christians. Cun. de Rep. Heb. l. 2. c. 1.
And though Cunaeus represents the contrary opinion which he opposes, as the
common opinion of those Christian Writers, which went before him: yet it must
be acknowledged as manifestly true, from Lev. 16.4, 23, 24, 32. that the high
Priest entered the Holy of Holies without his glorious attire only in a linen
Coat, with linen Breeches, Mitre, and Girdle: which might well signify that
humble purity was more fit to appear before God, than the greatest splendor
and glory; and also that when the true atonement should be made by the Messiah,
the glory of the Aaronical Priesthood should be done away. And to this purpose
an obscure place, Joseph. de Belt. Jud. l. 8. c. 1^.
probably corrupted in the ordinary Copies of Josephus, may with a little
transposition be corrected, to become both plain, and agreeable with other
Jewish Writers, if we read them, after his description of the high Priests
glorious garments, (...), that the high Priest did put on a plainer garment
than his glorious apparel, when he went into the Holy of Holies, which garment
he did not wear at any other time.

6. Yet if this linen Coat of the high Priest, and those of the other Priests
were white, as is probable, they were very different from the Surpless in three
respects. First, in their fashion; for those Coats of the Aaronical Priests
were strait in the arms, and so close to the body, that they admitted of no
gathers or folds, Josep. Ant. l. 3. c. 8. Hieron. ad Fabiol. Alcuinus de Div.
Offic. c. de fingulis vestibus.
as Josephus informs us, whence S. Hierom and Alcuinus compared them to the
Soldiers garments, which were so strictly fitted to their bodies, that they
were not hindered in shooting, but strengthened thereby. And this difference was
observed by Amalarius Fortunatus, that under the old Law, Amal. de Eccles.
Offic. l. 2. c. 18.
the white garment used in the service of God was a strait one, but under the
Gospel a loose one: and common reason will further evidence, that such a loose
garment as our Surpless is, was no way convenient for the employment of the
Levitical Priest in killing and offering Sacrifices, sprinkling and wringing
out blood, and such like actions. Secondly, those Aaronical Coats were girded
about them with a girdle, as both the Scriptures, Lev. 8.13. Chap. 16.4. and
Josephus in the place above mentioned do express, and the linen girdle for the
inferior Priests, was according to Josephus his testimony, wrought with blue,
purple, and scarlet, as was also that of the high Priest for his most holy
garments, as may be observed from Exodus 39.29. Thirdly, those Priestly garments
under the Law were no upper ornamental garments, but those Coats were the only
vesture upon the upper part of their naked bodies, as were also their linen
Breeches upon their lower parts, and no common garments might be worn with
them. Hence they were appointed to cover their nakedness, Exodus 28, 42. and
Philo says, Phil. de Monarch. l. 2.
that in their ministrations they were (...), without any other apparel besides
their Priestly Coats; and the same may be inferred from Lev. 6.11. Ezekiel. 44.17,
18, 19. In all these things which are considerable differences, in the esteem
of those who impartially observe them, these Aaronical Vestments and the
Surpless do disagree: which may therefore evidence, that this garment was not
received under Christianity as a thing Aaronical, but only as a decent Vestment
in Religious Service.

7. And if we consider that while the Priesthood of Aaron was yet standing,
though blue Purple and fine Linen were used in the high Priests Ephood, and in
the Vail of the Temple; yet Mordecai did lawfully wear a garment of these
colors of another fashion from the Ephod, and to a different end, Esth. 8.15.
and that though God appointed holy linen garments for the Priests, the Levites
lawfully used other linen garments not enjoined by the Law, in their praising
God, which were probably loose garments, and were called Robes, Middoth. c. 5.
Sect. 3. Seld. de Synedr. l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 7. ex Solom. ben Wirga.
1 Chronicles. 15.27. this (besides what is related of other white garments used by
the Priests in other joyful Solemnities) is sufficient to show, that Gods
Commandments concerning the Priestly garments under the Law, did not take away
the liberty of using other linen garments for comeliness, either in, or out of
Religious service.

8. Concerning the Antiquity of the Christian use of this white linen garment
its ordinary use at the end of the fourth Century is manifest, from the
testimonies commonly produced from S. Hierom, Hier. adv. Pelag. l. 1. c. 9.
who speaks of the Bishop, Presbyter, Deacon, and the whole Ecclesiastical
Order, being in a white garment, at the time of sacred administrations; Chrysostom.
Hom. 83. in Mat.
from S. Chrysostom, warning the Clergy to mind their duty, and not to think it
enough for them when the Sacraments are administered, to walk in a white shining
garment; and from the Council of Carthage, Conc. Carth. 4. Can. 41.
whereby the Deacon was required at the time of the oblation and lesson, to
wear the white garment. Now these places evidencing that this vesture was then
used, in very distant parts of the Christian World, it may be thence in all
likelihood concluded, that it had a much more early original. Walaf. Strab. de
Reb. Eccles. c. 24.
Walasridus Strabo relates, that in the beginning of Christianity, communi
indumento vestiti missas agebant, divine offices were performed in their
ordinary apparel, and the first, says he, who ordained the contrary was
Stephen Bishop of Rome, which was about 250 years after Christ. And if this
relation was admitted as true, these garments would be thence concluded to have
been used in the Church above 1400 years since; and in matters of outward
ornament, it is not desirable that the first times which were under
persecution, should be made the rule for the more flourishing times of
Christian Religion: for they then had no such fixed revenues for the support of
the Ministry, or honorable structures for Church Assemblies, as we now enjoy.
Steph. Epist. Decr. ad Hilarium.
But indeed the Decretal Epistle of Stephen, upon which Walasridus relieth, is
a manifest forgery, and in the very reading it, it smells rank of the
Superstition of much later times. But that the use of a linen attire was at
that time an ensign of the Ecclesiastical Officers, seems the main design of
that observation of Pontius the Deacon, Pontius Diac. in Vit. Cypr.
concerning S. Cyprian; who a little before his Martyrdom being allowed to sit
down in a retiring place, about the Judgment-hall; Sedile (says he) erat
fortuito linteo tectum, ut sub ictu passionis Episcopatus honor frueretur; The
seat was casually covered with linen, so that upon the stroke of his passion he
enjoyed the Episcopal honor. And if we further consider what probable evidence
has been above given, that white garments were used both in the Jewish
Synagogues, and their other solemn Services, this makes it appear probable,
that they were of very ancient use under Christianity, upon the account of
Decency.

9. And since the degeneracy of the Romish Church, though they still use the
Surpless, it is none of their proper Massing garments, being never worn by the
Priest who consecrateth, Durand. Ration. l. 3. c. 1. etc. Durant. de Rit. l. 2.
c. 9.
(or their conficient Priest) at the Mass, as is manifest from Durandus,
Durantus, and the Roman Missal in its praeparatio ad Missam. But his Massing
attire is made up of these six Vestments, according to their ordinary
description, the Amictus, alba, cingulum, stola, manipulus, and casula, all
which are far different from the Surpless: Benedict. diverse. sec. usum sarum.
and these six garments only are accounted the holy garments used by their
Priests, and all of them have their particular Consecrations, as the Surpless
even in the Romish Church has not; and therefore this garment has been far
less abused among them, than either Churches, Communion clothes, and other
things, which by reason of their manifest convenience or decency, are
ordinarily admitted to be of lawful use.

10. And if any persons will decry the use of such Habits, which have been
abused as unlawful and unclean, let them consider whither this Spirit will lead
them: for they must hereby oppose S. Paul's doctrine of all things being pure,
and instead thereof must introduce a far greater distinction of things clean
and unclean under Christianity, than ever was admitted under the Jewish
Pedagogie: since almost the same abuses may be objected against any other kind
of Vesture, as against the use of white Linen. Alt. Damasc. c. 10. p. 895.
Some opposers of our conformity have averred, that the white garments used by
the Gentile Sacrificers were white woollen, and the Romish Book of Ceremonies
says, Sacr. Cerem. l. 1. Sect. 1. cap. 5. Dur. Ration. l. 3. c. 18.
that among the peculiar garments of the Pope, the gown of white woollen is
one. And as the Mass attire in the Romish Church is upon many days required to
be white; so upon diverse other yearly days, this attire must be red, upon
others green, and upon others violet-coloured. And for more particular
instance, Sacerdotal. Par. 1. Tract. 4. cap. 42.
the use of black garments (which are in themselves nevertheless lawful) may be
argued against with as much plausibleness from the Topic of abuse, as can be
urged against the white. For that the ancient Pagan Priests used a black habit,
Buxt. Lex. Rab. (...)
and were thence called Chemarim (which Junius usually renders atratos, or
those who wear black) is declared by Buxtorf; and has been observed from R. D.
Kimchi on Zeph. 1.4. and is generally acknowledged. But I further observe, that
among the Papists their anniversary Solemnities for the last Pope, Sacerdotal
ibidom.
and for all other deceased Popes and Cardinals, their commemoration of all
Souls, and all their particular Masses for the dead (which are none of the
least of their enormities) are required to be performed in a black attire only.
Sacr. Cerem. l. 2. Sect. 2. cap. 26, 31, 34, 35.
Yet where all such corruptions are disclaimed, either such things as are in
themselves otherwise allowable and expedient, may be lawfully used,
notwithstanding the abuse of others, or else men must have disputed themselves
out of Gods Creation, since both Heaven and Earth, and all sorts of Creatures
therein, have been idolatrously abused, as is abundantly manifest from Vossius
his Books, De Idolatriae origin and progressu.

11. Wherefore this habit being of ancient use in the Christian Church, which
esteemed it decent, and being no Jewish attire; and being so far from an
attendant upon the Romish Transubstantiation, and their Sacrifice of the Mass
(as some have falsely suggested) that if it did not reach to the Apostles times
(who in the Arabic language are often called Alhavarin, V.D. Hammonds Parap.
Rev. 4.4. Seld. de Syned. l. 3. c. 11. Sect. 3.
which some render albicantes, others viri albis induti vestibus) it was
certainly used long before these corruptions took place, and while the
primitive purity of doctrine was retained; and it is a garment which is not
appointed, nor allowed to be used to consecrate the Mass therein; and has also
escaped those superstitious Consecrations, which have been used among them
toward Communion-cloaths of linen, and Patins and Chalices or Cups, all which
are retained by Protestants: there is then no reason why its use among us
should be condemned. Among the Protestant Churches, some in Germany with those
in Denmark and Norwey retain this with other vestments; diverse other Writers
and men of Note declare the use of this vestment to be innocent and allowable;
others, Calv. Ep. 117. and Ep. 120.
and among them Calvin dislike the heat of contention against the use hereof.
And though some, as the Synod of Weissenburg in Transylvania, Concord. Confil.
Syn. Alb Juliacens 1634.
disapprove the use of the linen garment, as being not a thing of an
indifferent nature; yet they proceeded upon insufficient grounds, relying
altogether upon these mistakes, that this garment was Aaronical, and brought
into the Christian church in the late and corrupt times thereof; which mistakes
are sufficiently discovered, and therefore what is built upon them can be of no
force, and therefore needs no further answer.

SECT. II.
Of the sign of the Cross in the Office for Baptism.
1. Among other Ceremonies, Mr. Baxt. Disp. of Cerem. c. 2. v. 52.
the sign of the Cross (which if rightly understood, would appear to be of very
good and profitable use) has been most opposed; and though some more modestly
doubt of its lawfulness, suspecting this rather than any other Rite of our
Church to be unlawful, but not daring to condemn them who use it; others have
more rashly but very falsely charged it, Admonition.
as containing a wicked and superstitious institution of a new Sacrament. The
lawfulness and usefulness hereof will be best vindicated by a right
understanding of its use: and because it is received amongst us as a laudable
Rite of the Primitive Church which we retain (as the thirtieth Canon declares)
I shall first give some account of the practice of the Primitive Church in the
use of this sign, which I think was anciently observed for a threefold end and
purpose.

2. 1. As a professing sign, whereby they testified openly their honoring
Christ crucified, either before them who denied the Christian name, or among
themselves; or as our Canon expresses it, they hereby made an outward show and
profession even to the astonishment of the Jews, that they were not ashamed to
acknowledge him for their Lord and Savior, who dyed upon the Cross. S. Austin
says, usque adeo de cruce non erubesco, In Psalm 141.
etc. I am so far from being ashamed of the Cross, that I do not put the Cross
of Christ in some hidden place, but carry it on my forehead; and in another
place he speaks of the Christian, De verb. Ap. Sermon. 8.
that lest he should be ashamed of the Cross of Christ, he places it upon his
forehead, which is the seat of shamefastness. Cyril exhorts, Let us not be
ashamed to confess him who was crucified, let the (...) (the sign of the Cross)
be confidently made upon the forehead with the finger. Catech. 13. Amalar. de
Eccl. Offic. l. 3. c. 18.
And Amalarius says, we believe that we shall be saved by him who was
crucified, of whose name the Jews are ashamed, -- and therefore we make the
sign in our forehead, which is the seat of shame. And to this purpose the use
of this sign by some of the Soldiers under Julian is accounted in Theodoret to
be an expression (...) of the Christian profession. Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c.
16.
And indeed whenever the ancient Christians used this sign publicly
(especially when any one signed himself therewith) it always included a
profession of Christ: yet since through the blessing of God we live not among
the Gentiles or Jews, who oppose the name of Christ, and have other sufficient
visible signs of professing the faith of Christ, in public Assemblies of the
Church; the use of this Rite to this end is no way needful to be continued
amongst us; but because it is liable to the same danger with what I mention in
the following particular, the disuse hereof is useful and commendable in the
present state of the Church.

3. Secondly, This sign was most frequently used as an expression of hope and
and trust in Christ crucified, and of confidence in him, expectation of
blessing from him, and supplication unto God by him. To this purpose both
Latin and Greek Writers have paralleled this, with Moses lifting up his hands
when Israel was engaged with Amalek, which was a manifestation of devout
application to God and holy considence in him. De Cor. Mil. c. 3. Ad Vxor. l.
2. c. 5. Chrysostom. ad pop. Ant. Hom. 21.
And this use of this sign was anciently very common in the actions of life,
even in retirement and privacy, as is expressed by Tertulian. Thus S.
Chrysostom directed the Christian when he went abroad, that he might be in
safety under the divine protection, to disclaim the Devil, and express his
adhering to Christ, with using the sign of the Cross. When Julian, after his
Apostasy, was affrighted and terrified while he sought to consult with the
Devil, as a remedy against his fears, he signed himself with the sign of the
Cross, Naz. Orat. 3.
which Nazianzen expresses (...), which words show his use of that sign, to be
a declaration of flying for aid, and expecting help from Christ whom he
persecuted. Upon this account this sign was sometimes anciently used in the
working Miracles (as is expressed by Nazianzen, Epiphanius, and other Fathers)
as a visible testimony of confidence in Christ, which Casaubone well
expresses, Casaub. Exerc. 13. in Baron. n. 33.
Opem a Christo petiit, facto signo crucis, quod Primitivae Ecclesiae fuit
symbolum ejus fiduciae quam in Christo, and cruce ipsius and passione ponebant.
And whereas this sign was long since used in every sacramental administration,
and some expressions of the Ancients have mentioned spiritual aid and grace, to
be conveyed per signum crucis by the use of this sign, they hereby only meant
that these benefits flowed from Christ's Passion, and were obtained by a
Religious application unto him, as Cassander asserteth, Cassand. in Hymn.
Eccles. p. 220.
Haud dubie nil aliud significare volebant, quam omnem tutelam and salutem in
morte Christi esse constitutam, and sacramenta omnia vim atque efficaciam suam,
non aliunde quam a morte Christi haurire. In like manner the Christian
Emperors from Constantine and downwards, made use of the Banner of the Cross,
as an expression of their trust in Christ crucified, and the same is related by
Bid, Bed. Eccl. Histl. l. 3. c. 2.
concerning Oswaldus in England in his engagement against the Britains.

4. Yet because this sign which has been grossly abused to superstition, by
placing an operative virtue and essicacy in the mere outward use thereof, would
in this ordinary practice be still very liable to the same abuse by many
persons, or to be so misunderstood by others; because they cannot upon every
such action declare their intent and end in that usage, as is done in our
Liturgy, when it makes use of the Cross in Baptism: therefore the disuse of
this outward sign as an expression of Christian confidence, in order to the
avoiding of that which is properly scandal (the producing corruption in
Religion, and the sin of man which is therein included) is altogether as
reasonable and fit, as was the ancient forbearance of the Love-kiss and the
Agapae upon the same account.

5. Thirdly, The sign of the Cross as also generally made upon the foreheads of
them who were received unto the Church. Hence in the instruction of the
Catechumeni, Aug. de Catech. Rudib. c. 20.
they were every one of them told at their due time, Passionis and crucis signo
in front hodie signandus es, omnesque Christiani signantur; that he must then
be signed in the forehead with the sign of the Cross, according to the manner
of all Christians. And that this sign was constantly attendant upon the
admission of members in the regular administrations of the Church is declared
by S. Augustine upon John, Tr. in Johan. 118.
and the same usage is reckoned by S. Basil among the (...), Bas. de Spir.
Sanct. c. 27.
or the fixed Laws and Constitutions of the Church; (...) and when S. Cyprian
says, Cyp. de Unit. Eccles.
in front signantur qui Dominum promerentur, he thereby means that they who
are though worthy to be admitted to Christianity, are so signed in their
foreheads.

6. The intent of this sign in this use thereof, was that the Church did hereby
solemnly testify those persons having relation to the Christian society, to
stand obliged to mainain the Christian profession and life; and so far as
concerned her authority, did hereby dedicate or engage them thereto, and charge
and require them to be mindful thereof; and this was a token to admonish them
that they must not be ashamed to confess the Christian Faith, and to fight
under Christ's Banner, and to serve and honor him. Upon this account the sign
of the Cross was ordinarily called Signum, or Signaculum Dei by the Latin
Writers; and by the Greek (...), the seal or mark whereby these persons were
declared to be set apart to God, so far as the Church had any right over, Cyp.
Ep. 56.
or interest in them of her communion. Thus those words of S. Cyprian, Muniatur
frons ut signum Dei incolume servetur, do exhort to Christian constancy and
resolution, that they might thereby keep inviolable what was intended by this
sign on their forehead, which engaged them thereto. Aug. in Psalm. 85.
And when S. Austin checketh the Donatists, who confined the Kingdom of Christ
to the narrow limits of some parts of Africa, saying, Do thou call thy self a
Christian, that thou may envy the glory of Christ, cujus signum in front te
portare asseris, whose sign thou clarest thy self to bear in thy forehead, he
thereby shows, that this sign was accounted to include an engagement or
admonition, to promote and advance the honor of Christ. And that it might be a
more plain Memorial of the Christian faith and duty; when it was used to the
Catechumens, Confess. l. 1. c. 11. De pec. Mer. and Remis. l. 2. c. 26. Aug. de
Symb. l. 2. c 1.
some distant time before their Baptism, (of which S. Austin makes frequent
mention) the abrenunciation and profession of faith were then joined therewith,
as appears from S. Aug. de symbolo ad Catechum. (the like unto which
appears in our office of private Baptism) and when it was used at the time of
the administration of Baptism, it immediately followed upon the persons
professing to undertake the Christian life, Dionys. de Hier. Eccl. c. 2.
as is expressed by the Author, De Hierarchia Ecclesiastica. And some dark
intimation of this Primitive use of this sign, may be discerned remaining in
the corruptions of the Papacy, but the more clear expression thereof is
exhibited in our reformation.

7. This sign used in our Church upon any person in the office of Baptism, is
declared to be in token that hereafter he shall not be ashamed, to confess the
faith of Christ Crucified, and manfully to fight under his Banner, against sin,
the World, and the Devil, etc. Which words speak this sign to be a token by way
of remembrance of his duty to the person baptized, and a testimony of
engagement upon him, and expectation concerning him from the Church. Which
sense of these words is made more manifest by the Canon, Can. 30.
which declares that it is apparent in the Communion Book that the infant
baptized is by virtue of Baptism, before it be signed with the sign of the
Cross, received into the Congregation of Christ's stock, as a perfect member
thereof, and not by any power ascribed unto the sign of the Cross, -- and it
after adds, that this Church accounts this sign a lawful outward Ceremony
and honorable badg, whereby the infant is dedicated to the service of him that
died upon the Cross. Now dedicating a person being an engaging or setting him
apart unto God, and it being evident from the Canon, that this dedicating is
wholly distinct from the baptismal dedication to be a Member of Christ's Church,
we must hereby understand the Church to engage this Member upon her account to
the service of Christ, in like manner as when any Father shall give himself to
the Lord, as the Macedonians did, 2 Cor. 8.5.
and with diligent care shall warn and charge his Children, to yield and devote
themselves to God, this is properly called his dedicating himself and his to
the service of God. And this sense is yet more evident from the office of
Baptism, where the Minister baptizing (acting in the name of God) says in the
singular number, N. I baptize, etc. but says in the plural number, We receive
this Child, and do sign him, etc. acting herein in the name of the Rulers, and
other Members of the Catholic Church in Communion with us, the whole body
desiring and seeking the good of every member. So that hereby there is as great
an obligation laid upon this person baptized, as the members of Christ's body,
and the power of his Church can lay upon him, by their relation to him,
interest in him and authority over him.

8. Defense of three Cerem. Par. Chapter 2. Sec. 7.
With much agreeableness to this sense, Bishop Morton declared, that the Child
is dedicated to God by consecration in Baptism, which is a Sacrament of Grace:
but the dedication which is fignified by the sign of the Cross, is not by any
proper consecration to God, or tender of grace received from God, by such a
sign made: but is a declarative token of duty, which afterward the person
baptized ought to perform, concerning his constant and visible profession of
the Christian Faith. Bishop Fern says, Consider. of Concernment. Gh. 7. n. 7.
Eccles. Polit. l. 5. Sec. 65.
it signifies the duty of the baptized and is to mind him of it; and Mr.
Hooker terms it, an admonition to glory in the service of Christ, and a
memorial of duty, and a bar or prevention to keep from Apostasy.

9. Now besides the Sacraments themselves, it is very useful and needful, to
admit other means of memorial and solemn charge, to engage men to the faithful
service of God, who are too prone to be negligent therein. Though all Abraham's
Family were circumcised, God had a special favor for Abraham, because he would
command his Children and Household after him, Genesis 18.18, 19.
and they would keep the way of the Lord. And though in Joshua's time the
Israelites were circumcised, Josh. 24.22.27.
and kept the Passover, and had their Sacrifices, and public general
Assemblies before the Tabernacle; yet Joshua did further solemnly engage them
to God, and set up a stone as a witness thereof. And when S. Paul mentioned the
good profession which Timothy made before many witnesses, 1 Timothy 6.12, 13.
he thought fit to add a solemn charge unto Timothy in the sight of God and
Jesus Christ; which requires him to answer that profession. Wherefore since
such a charge is in it self very useful; if as members we have that due value
we ought to have for the body of Christ's Church, that engagement, charge or
expectation, which has a concurrent force and influence, both from the Rulers
and from multitudes of other members of that body, must be thought the most
solemn and weighty of all other.

10. That in so considerable a Case some significant rite is very expedient, to
add to the solemnity thereof, is sufficiently proved by the common wisdom of
Mankind, when they commit to others any great charge; and by the prudence of
the ancient Church in this very particular. And this rite of the sign of the
Cross, is upon many accounts very proper for this purpose; because it is apt to
suggest to our minds the remembrance of the name of Christ, (which was
anciently signified by chi, the first letter of (...), the old form of which
letter was this () as appears from an ancient Inscription pro^^ced by
Scaliger) and of the Passion of our blessed Savior upon the Cross, Scalig.
Animad. in Euseh. p. 110, 120.
and of the nature of Christianity in taking up his Cross; and also because it
was a sign to this end honorably used by the Primitive Christians. And our
Church has taken abundant care to prevent all superstitiousness in the use
hereof, both by appointing it after the person is baptized, and received, as
both the Office of Baptism and the Canon expresses, and by the Declaration of
its true intent and end, which is therewith expressed.

11. I know that some persons have asserted as from Irenaeus, Iren. adv. Haer.
l. 1. c. 1.
that the Original use of the sign of the Cross, was received in the Church
from the Valentinians, who used it as the fan of Christ to purge away sin: but
these things are much misrepresented, there being nothing at all in Irenaeus to
this purpose. Only concerning the Valentinians (who indeed were no Christians,
but by a strange medley from names used in Christianity, and Gentilisme, and
from their own fancies they framed a Theogonia of Aeones, which they called
their Pleroma) Irenaeus, with whom Tertullian agrees, Tertul. adv Valentin. c.
9.
says that the Keeper of this Pleroma was Horus, who among other names was
also called Stauros or Crux, Lytrotes or Redemptor, and of him they interpreted
those words of S. Matthew; his fan is in his hand. So that all this referred
not to the sign of the Cross, but to an imaginary person, who was an Idol of
Valentinus his brain.

12. But though the true original of the Christian use of this sign be above
expressed, Justin. Apol. 2. and adv. Tryphon. Tertul. de Bapt. c 8. Adv. Jud.
c. 10. Barnab. Ep. p. 136.
what is produced by the ancient Writers, of this sign being prefigured in the
Old Testament, by the roasting the Paschal Lamb, the Serpent upon the Pole, the
form of the hands of Jacob in blessing the Sons of Joseph, and of Moses hands
being lifted up, which Barnabas expresses, (...), is far more considerable
than the mistaken matter of this objection. And whereas the mark upon the
forehead, Ezekiel. 9.4. was accounted by Theodotion (and by Aquila, as Origin
relates) by the Vulgar Latin, and the ancient latin Version used by Tertullian
to be the mark of the Letter Thau, which is the word there used in the Hebrew:
both S. Hierom who himself understood the Samaritan Character, which was
anciently used by the Jews, and Origin from the relation of a converted Jew,
declare that the old form of (...) Thau, was in the figure of a (...) And
though Scaliger in his learned ^^^^dversions upon Eusebius averreth, Animad. v.
p. 117.
that this was their mistake concerning the Samaritan Character; yet the truth
of what they asserted, may appear from the old Alphabet collected out of their
ancient Medals by Bishop Walton, which is different from the Vulgar Characters.
And I may add that the Aaronical Priesthood under the Law which prefigured
Christ, Kerith. f. 5. in Buxt. Lex. Rab. in (...).
received their Unction in the form of a Cross, or the Greek Chi, as both the
Talmud and all the Jewish Rabbis do declare, those Rabbis who seem to dissent
being reconciled to this assertion, by the reasonable interpretation of Simeon
de Muis. S. de Muis Var. Sacr. in Abarb. in Ex. 30. Sozom. l. 7. c. 15. Baron.
an. 389. n. 99. Just. Mart. Apol. 2. and Sylburg. ibidem.
And the form or sign of a Cross was an Hieroglyphick of the life to come among
the Egyptians, and a character of wisdom among the Platonists. And all these
things speaking an honorable use of this sign before the time of Christ,
though they were not chief reasons of the Christians usage, might well be
providentially ordered for the advantage of Christianity, it being particularly
related by Sozomen, that the Conversion of diverse Pagans was occasioned thereby.

13. Chapter 2. Se. 1.


14. And whereas some disapprove this sign because it has been abused by the
Church of Rome, I have given a sufficient answer to this in the fourth Section
of the same Chapter. And he who would censure an useful and piously ordered
sign of admonition and memorial, because a superstitious operative use of the
same transient sign is not allowable, must condemn things greatly different, as
if they were the same. As if because Gideons Ephod was abused, when it was made
an Idol, the use of an Ephod by Samuel, and David, for the decent service of
God must be also insufferable; and because the image of Caesar set up to be
worshipped is abominable, therefore his image stamped upon the Coin must not be
tolerated. And there is as much reason to condemn wholesome and profitable
words, from some persons making an ill use thereof, as to condemn useful
actions and gestures for the same cause.

15. They who censure this Rite, because it is used so soon after Baptism it
self, as an attendant thereupon, supposing that no significative rite may be
lawfully received so nearly attending upon any Sacrament; they also build upon
a very false and groundless supposition: as if the Love-kiss and the Agapae
were not so used in the Apostolical times, with reference to the Lords Supper;
and the trinal mersion in Baptism both in the Primitive and most reformed
Churches. Yea I would appeal to every indifferent man's Conscience, whether if a
Father being solicitously careful of the eternal welfare of his Son, and having
nurtured him in the fear of God, and lived to see him receive the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper; should give his Son some token so soon as be comes from that
Sacrament, requiring him to keep the same, as a memorial of his Fathers charge
upon him, to mind the service of God, and the Christian life and Unity, to
which he is further obliged by the receiving that Sacrament; I say, I would
appeal to such a man, whether he durst condemn this action as sinful, merely
because this charge and token has some reference to the Sacrament. And this
rite of our Church has many advantages above this instance, both in the higher
authority of the Church, the greater simplicity of the rite it self, and the
relation it bears to the pattern and example of Primitive Christianity.

16. Among the Protestants, the Lutheran Churches retain not only this, but
some other Rites in the office of Baptism, which are not received in the Church
of England. And though many other Reformed Churches do not use this sign, yet
they condemn it not; nor do they herein censure either the Church of England,
or those of the Augustane Confession. It has been observed partly by Mr.
Hooker, and partly by Mr. Durel, Goulart. in Ep. 56. Cypr. c. 7.
that Goulartius declared this Ceremony to be indifferent in its nature, but
said it was not necessary now for all Christians to observe it; by those words
rather modestly defending the practice of Geneva (as Mr. Hooker expresses it,
in a way of excuse) than expressing any dislike of them who without
superstition do retain it. Exercit. in Bar. 13. n. 33.
Isaac Casaubone when he wrote his exercitations, expresses an approbation of
this Rite in the Church of England. Buc. Cens. c. 11.
And Bucer in his Censura, declares it to be an ancient and simplex ritus,
apure or innocent Rite, and that he judges the use thereof to be neither
indecent nor unprofitable.

17. I know there are some, who think their own apprehensions so much above all
others, that they are no otherwise moved by testimonies which are produced
against them, than to express their censures, Altar. Damasc. c. 10. p. 830.
and sometimes their contempt o^ the most worthy Writers; and on this manner
does Didoclavius deal with the testimony of Bucer which I now produced; says
he, it is frigida and diluta censura, nec satis expendisse videtur it was his
dull and weak judgment about this matter, and he did not seem to have
considered what he wrote. But let not such think, that their authority is of
any value to be put in the balance against the Primitive Church, and so many
reformed Churches and Writers, and therefore as there being no just cause from
the consideration of this rite it self, and the use thereof to condemn it, the
censure of such persons is unjust and uncharitable; and the dislike of others
who are more modest in their opposition is also groundless.

SECT. III.
Of laying on hands in Confirmation.
THis Imposition of hands is the more opposed, Didocl. Altar. Damasc. c. 5. p.
359. Except. of Presbyt. p. 29.
because of those Declarative words in the Prayer used at Confirmation, Upon
whom after the example of the holy Apostles, we have now laid our hands, to
certify them by this sign, of thy favor and gracious goodness to them. The
Non Conformists here will neither allow, that the Apostles practice should be
accounted any example for laying on hands in Confirmation, nor that this sign
may be used to certify Gods grace and favor, which seems (say they) to
speak it a Sacrament.

2. Wherefore we are first to consider, what Warrant this imposition of hands
in Confirmation may claim from the practice of the Apostles. We read, Act.
8.15, 17, 18. that after Philip had baptized at Samaria, by the Apostles prayer
accompanied with imposition of hands, they received the Holy Ghost: and the
same is related concerning the Disciples at Ephesus, Act. 19.6. Here we have an
Apostolical practice evident, that they imposed hands and prayed, and thereupon
the Holy Ghost was received. It is indeed acknowledged, that in those instances
there was a visible and miraculous testimony of the presence of the Holy
Spirit, by speaking with Tongues, etc. but the chief blessing of Gods Spirit
consists in the inward Graces of the Spirit, which were not peculiar to that
time; and that the obtaining the strengthening grace of the Spirit, was in an
especial manner designed by the Apostles imposition of hands, is declared by
Irenaeus; Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 4. c. 75. Aug. Tract. 6. in Ep. 1. Johan.
and it was justly esteemed by S. Austin, that the Holy Ghost is here received,
where no miraculous gifts are bestowed, but the gracious dispositions of love,
peace, and unity are entertained. And prayer, especially the most solemn Prayer
of the Bishop, or chief Officer of the Church, joined with imposition of hands
(which was a testimony of peculiar benediction used by dying Jacob and others
under the Old Testament, and by Christ and his Apostles under the New) is a
means to obtain this blessing, to such who are disposed and qualified for the
receiving thereof: but that those who indulge and give way to their corruptions
and passions, (as the Corinthians did by their divisions) could not receive the
increase of the grace and strength of the Holy Spirit, by the Apostolical
imposition of hands, is also asserted in the place abovementioned by Irenaeus.
And if any persons will contend, that the imposition of hands now received in
the Church, cannot be a practice according to the example of the Apostles,
because in those times the Holy Ghost was often miraculously received, which
cannot now be expected; he may as well assert that the imposition of hands for
Ordination, is not continued in the Church from the example of the Apostles,
because then the Holy Ghost was sometimes extraordinarily given thereby; or
that our praying and preaching is not a doing that, for which we have the
Apostles for an example, because we cannot by them expect such wonderful gifts
as sometimes were conferred under the Apostles doctrine and by their prayer.

3. And by the searching into Antiquity we may discern the general use of this
Imposition of hands in the Church as from the Apostles. When the Apostle, Heb.
6.2. speaks of the Foundation of the Doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on
of hands, the ordinary exposition of the Greek and Latin Fathers, refer those
words unto Confirmation, and in the same sense are they understood by Calvin,
Beza, Illyricus, and many other Protestants. Eusebius ralateth a story, Eccl.
Hist. l. 3. c. (...).
wherein Confirmation was used under the name of (...), while S. John was yet
alive: and Cornelius noted it as a defect in Novatus the Schismatic, that he
never obtained Confirmation from the Bishop for receiving the Holy Ghost, which
he calls (...), Eus. Hist. l. 6. c. (...).
as his words are related in Eusebius. Tertullian in his short account of the
Rites of the Church, Tertul. de Resur. Came. c. 8. De Baptism. c. 8.
after he had mentioned Baptism, expresses Confirmation in these words, Caro
manus impositione adumbratur, ut anima Spiritu illuminetur: and in his Book De
Baptisma, says that after Baptism is used imposition of hands, calling for and
inviting the holy Spirit by that benediction. Cypr. Ep. 73.
S. Cyprians testimony is yet more full, who says that for those whom Philip
baptized, that which lacked was performed by Peter and John, by whose prayer
and imposition of hands, the Holy Ghost was invocated and poured forth upon
them: which also (says he) is now practiced among us, that those who are
baptized in the Church, are presented to the chief Officers of the Church, that
by our prayer and imposition of hands, they may obtain the Holy Ghost, and may
by Confirmation attain to the highest Order of Christians (or signaculo
dominico consummentur.) S. Ambrose speaks of Confirmation, Amb. de Sacr. l.
3. c. 2. Hieron. adv. Lucif. Aug. Cont. l. 3. c. 16. l. 5. c. 23. and in Psalm.
130.
that the holy Spirit is thereby obtained by prayer, S. Hierom approves it for
Apostolical; and S. Austin in diverse places defends the practice hereof, with
relation to the Apostolical imposition of hands, and for the receiving the Holy
Ghost, even when the miraculous gifts of the Spirit were no more communicated,
and this imposition of hands was enjoined by the ancient Council of Elvira,
Conc. Elib. c. 38.
unto them who being baptized in case of necessity, did afterward recover
their health. And therefore this practice of the Primitive Church, as from the
Apostles, is abundantly sufficient not only to justify, but to commend herein
the order of the Church of England, which agrees thereto.

4. The use of Confirmation in our Church, besides the leaving out things
superstitious, has two great advantages in its external administration. The
first advantage, is in the time when it is performed, which is when the person
is come to some years of discretion, and being instructed in the main
Principles of the Christian Doctrine, does by his own actual consent and
promise renew his baptismal vow, and ratify and confirm it in his own person.
For the increase and strength of grace, which is then implored, and the being
received to a higher rank of Christian profession, does reasonably suppose a
capacity of knowledge and understanding. Indeed in the early times of
Christianity, while Baptism was ordinarily administered to persons adult, the
Profession of their Faith, together with their taking upon them the practice of
the Christian life, went before their Baptism; and thence not only
Confirmation, but the Lords Supper was soon after administered to them: and yet
it is not amiss observed by Kemnitius, Exam. Conc. Trid. Part. 2. de Confir.
that before hands were imposed by S. Paul upon the Disciples at Ephesus, there
was some kind of exploratio fidei, or an examining of their Faith into which
they were baptized. And acknowledged it must be, that even in Infants,
confirmation was anciently in some Churches used soon after Baptism; but then
the Lords Supper was also received by such Infants, which was a blemish in some
Churches as ancient as the time of S. Cyprian, Cyp. de Laps. Aug. de Eccles.
Dogm. c (...) Alcu. de Divin (...) fic. Tet (...) Sab^^ (...)
is often mentioned by S Augustine, and four hundred years after S. Augustins
time, the administering the Lords Supper to Infants was directed by Alcuinus,

5. The Western Church in the later Centuries, has ordinarily required in most
of its Offices several days distance between the administration of Baptism and
Confirmation, Ration. l. 6. c. 84.
as Durandus declares; who also in the same place is of opinion, that the
ordinary custom of the more ancient Church required a perfect age, or (as he
expresses it) the age of twelve or fifteen years, De Consec. did. 5. c. ut
Jejuni.
in them who received confirmation; which opinion he groundeth upon the Canon,
ut jejuni ad confirmationem veniant perfectae aetatis. And that persons who
receive confirmation should have arrived at some capacity of understanding, was
judged convenient by Cassander, Consult. Cas. Art. 9. and de Hymn. Eccles.
who also declares the consent of diverse others of the Romish Communion. And
herein the Church of Rome, since the Protestant Reformation, yea since the
establishment of the English Liturgy, has receded from her former Rule of
confirming Infants; and in the first Synod of Millain, Conc. Mediol. 1. de
Confirm. Catech. Romans de Confirm.
which followed that of Trent, and in the Roman Catechism, it is required that
those who are to be confirmed, should be at the least seven years old, if not
twelve, and should be instructed with reference to their confirmation; De
Ritib. lib. 1. c. 20. Sect. 14.
and this alteration is approved by Durantus, with summa ratione receptum est.
And herein the after-wit of the Romish Church has entertained, what was with
some derision rejected, in the sixth Session of the Council of Trent, as we are
informed in the Hist. Conc. Trident. lib. 2 p. 194.

6. And somewhat analagous to Confirmation at the years of discretion, may be
observed from the Jewish Church; where when the child came to be thirteen years
old, Buxt. Syn. Jud. c. 3.
the Father in a (...) or a sacred Assembly of a complete number for solemn
occasions, presents the child before them, who having been taught both
prayers and precepts of duty, Aben Ezr. in Genesis 17.14.
he then undertaketh to be (...) one who takes upon himself the obedience to
the commands of the Law, and prayer is then made for him, that he may grow up
in good works.

7. A second advantage of our confirmation is, that here is a reducing the
ancient primitive Rite of imposition of hands, which for many hundred years
has been extruded from the Romish confirmation, by other superstitious
Ceremonies. Durand. ubi supra.
And though Durandus be so frivolous, as to imagine that imposition of hands is
contained in the blow upon the cheek (which was used in many Romish Churches
after confirmation, but was not directed at all in the Office secundum usum
Sarum) and Bellarmine be so vain as to assert it to be contained in Chrysming
the forehead, Bellarm de Confirm. l. 2 c. 2.
(which is the principal Romish Rite of confirmation) wise men might see, that
there is no more agreement in these things, than that the hand is made use of
about them all. Wherefore this Rite of imposition of hands, was no Rite either
abused or used under the corruptions of the Church of Rome, but was an innocent
and useful primitive Rite, restored in the Reformation of the Church of
England. Belarm. ibid. c. 2, 13.
And even the Bishop holding up his hands to pray over them which receive
confirmation, which the Cardinal would have to include imposition of hands, is
neither required at all in the Office of Confirmation secundum usum Sarum, nor
is it mentioned among the present Rites of confirmation by Durantus, Dur. de
Ritib. lib. 1. c. 20.
and therefore it may as reasonably be said, that Imposition of hands is
included in all their prayers, as that it is contained in their confirmation.

8. Ratio Discip. c. 3. Sect. 3.
Among the Reformed Churches, the Bohemian had confirmation with Imposition of
hands, which they did account an Apostolical Rite, and they (much after the
manner of the Church of England) used therewith invocation of the divine grace,
and a renewing their baptismal Covenant: wherewith they also joined Absolution.
And this Comenius both commends as the primitive practice, Comen. Annot. in
Rat. Discip.
and says that this way of Confirmation is still piously used in some
Churches. In the Lutheran Churches, even they who retained not this use of
Confirmation, Conf. Sax. de Conf.
(as in Saxony) did yet esteem it when administered with imposition of hands and
prayer, unto persons who being come to years of understanding, did make actual
profession of their engaging to Christianity; to be agreeable to the purest
Antiquity, Exam. Conc. Trid. Par. 2. de Confirm.
and the Apostles practice, and to have exceeding great profitableness both for
the edification of the Youth, and of the whole Church, as we may learn from
Kemnitius, who was one of their chief Writers. Calv. Inst. l. 4. c. 19. n. 4,
13.
And Calvin himself expresses a like approbation of the same, declaring withal
his desire that such Confirmation with Imposition of hands might be restored.

9. But it remains to be inquired, how the Church can certify the persons
confirmed, by the sign of Imposition of hands, of Gods favor and gracious
goodness toward them. For the answering of which, waving other considerations,
I shall observe two things. First, that as this imposition of hands is a
testimony of admitting persons, to a higher rank of Christian Professors, who
ratify their baptismal Covenant by their own action, (intimating also an
approbation of this profession) it includes the power of the Keys, whereby the
Officers of the Church are enabled by Gods authority, to declare particularly
his favor and gracious goodness to them who embrace the conditions of
Christianity, and to direct them thereunto; and to this purpose was Imposition
of hands on the Penitents, at diverse times, used in the ancient Church. And to
testify Gods gracious acceptance (either by our words or actions) of men's
undertaking the exercise of Christianity, is a thing greatly different, from
the tendering the divine grace of Gods Covenant as exhibited by any sign, as a
means to convey the same, which is the proper nature of a Sacrament.

10. Secondly, This Imposition of hands is a sign of a Benediction in Gods name
from the Officer of Gods Church. The Levites, and especially the Priests under
the Law, were required to bless the people in the name of God, Deuteronomy. 10.8. 1 Chronicles. 23.13. which blessing was performed in a way of benedictory prayer or
supplication, Numb. 6.23. and this blessing in Gods name, was a testimony of
Gods giving his blessing to them, (supposing them not to render themselves
incapable thereof) Number. 6.27. The external testimony of their general blessing
all the people, Targ. Jonath. in Number. 6.23.
was most probably by lifting up their hands toward them, as is declared by
one of the Chaldee Paraphrasts, and is observed by Baronius; Baron. Annal.
Eccl. An. 34. n. 220.
and we have an instance of this Rite, attending the Priestly benediction, Lev.
9.22. and our Savior made use of the same, Luke 24.50. But in their solemn
particular benedictions, in the Old Testament they used Imposition of hands, of
which we have an example, Genesis 48.14.16. in Jacobs blessing the Sons of Joseph;
this Rite was also used in their Ordination of their Elders; and the constant
use hereof in the particular benedictions by persons of great eminency among
the Jews, is reasonably esteemed the cause why the Jews brought little Children
to Christ, that he might put his hands on them, and pray, Mat. 19.13. Great. in
Mat. 19.13.
And from the frequent practice of this Rite Junius and Tremellius have
ventured to admit a Paraphrase into their Translation, concerning the Priestly
benediction, wherein they express the use of Imposition of hands, in Number. 6.27.
(which can only be allowed concerning particular benedictions.) The end and
design of imposition of hands in benediction, (...). voc. (...). J^n. in Number.
6. c. 7.
is declared by Ravanellus to be in testimony of the help, favor, and grace of
God to be given to him who receives imposition of hands, and Junius says, by
this sign they were to testify to the people Gods grace, which are Phrases
much like those in this Prayer at Confirmation in our Liturgy. Yet this Rite
was only a sign of Gods favor in this use, with respect to the Benediction or
Prayer for that person, supposing and hoping him to be duly qualified, for the
receiving the benefit therein desired, and therefore is of no Sacramental
nature.

11. Now ^lessing (including nothing Ceremonial, and peculiar to the Law, and
the Ministry of the Old Testament) is very suitable to the Gospel, which is in
an especial manner a Dispensation of Blessing And this benediction or praying
(...) for Gods blessing, was the (...) designed in this Apostolical (...) of
hands with prayer, and from their time this use has been continued in the
Christian Church, as has been showed; and it would be a strange, unreasonable,
and uncharitable thing, if those who come to renew their baptismal Covenant,
might not receive the Churches blessing in Gods name, with prayer for their
Christian growth and perseverance. And the dignity of Office in the Church,
chiefly giving authority to bless, (according to that rule of the Apostle, Heb.
7.7. without all contradiction the less is blessed of the greater) this solemn
benediction at Confirmation, has thereupon been justly reserved to the Bishop
or chief Officer of the Church, by whom alone it was performed in the time of
S. Cyprian and S. Hierom.

12. Confirmation in our use thereof, is called by Bishop Whitgift, Bishop
Whitg. Defense p. 785. Eccl. Pol. l. 5. Sect. 66.
The Bishops benediction by laying on of hands; by Mr. Hooker, This special
benediction the Rite or Ceremony of Confirmation; and when Confirmation was
restored in Scotland, in the fourth Article of the Assembly of Perth, it was
declared concerning children who had been catechized, that the Bishop should
bless them, with prayer for the increase of their knowledge, and the
continuance of Gods heavenly grace with every one of them. And the ancient
Confirmation was accounted a Benediction by Tertullian, Tertul. de Bapt. c. 8.
Conc. Eliber. c. 77.
and a Benediction of the Bishop, by the Council of Elvira. And since the
Gospel Dispensation is a Ministration of Blessing, and the great blessing of
the Gospel is to receive the promise of the Spirit, Gal. 3.14. This benedictory
prayer upon a solemn occasion, for the grace and strength of that Spirit, was
suitably accompanied in the practice of the Apostles and the Christian Church,
with the ancient and proper token of benediction, the Imposition of hands.

13. Presbyt. Except. p. 29.
But it has been urged, that the Articles of our Church declare imposition of
hands in Confirmation, to be a corrupt imitation of the Apostles practice; and
that Confirmation has no visible sign appointed by God. Artic. 25. and
therefore Imposition of hands cannot therein certify children, of Gods favor
and gracious goodness toward them: and thus contradictions are injuriously
imposed upon the Church. The words of the Article to which they refer are
these, Article 25.
Those five commonly called Sacraments, that is to say, Confirmation, Penance,
Orders, Matrimony, and Extreme Unction, are not to be counted for Sacraments of
the Gospel, being such as have grown, partly of the corrupt following of the
Apostles, partly are states of life allowed in the Scriptures: but yet have not
like nature of Sacraments, with Baptism and the Lords Supper, for that they
have not any visible sign or Ceremony ordained of God. The sense of the former
part of which words is, That the Church of Rome accounting Confirmation,
Penance, Orders, and Extreme Unction for proper Sacraments of the Gospel, their
error herein proceeds from their corrupting those things which were
practiced by the Apostles; but their esteeming Marriage to be a Sacrament, is a
mis-representing a state of life allowed in the Scripture to be a
Gospel-Sacrament.

14. The latter clause of those words of the Article, do manifestly alike deny
Confirmation and Ordination to have any visible sign or ceremony ordained of
God, or that God has not appointed in them any such properly Sacramental sign
as Baptism and the Lords Supper has. For in both these, the Imposition of
hands is immediately a representation of a benediction, and of being thereby
received into a higher degree among Christians, by the ministerial power of the
Church; and though further grace from God is needful in this higher degree, and
humble and devout persons may receive grace from God suitable to whatsoever
state he calls them; yet grace is in these cases to be expected in the use of
Prayer, and from the Promises of Gods assistance to, and presence with his
people, and his Ministry; but not immediately from God, by the use of
Imposition of hands, as an outward sign, whereby that grace is directly
exhibited and conveyed: and moreover, proper Sacraments are seals of Gods whole
Covenant, and means whereby he conveyeth both pardoning and satisfying grace.
And I further add, that the acknowledging the sign of Imposition of hands in
Confirmation, not to have any divine institution or immediate command, hinders
not its being of Apostolical practice, and that in the use thereof we may both
follow the example of the Apostles, and certify Gods favor and gracious
goodness to persons confirmed, according as is above expressed.

SECT. IV.
Of the Ring in Marriage. And the Conclusion.
1. The Ring was by the old Nonconformists called a Sacramental Sign, and a new
Sacrament, and others since have expressed some fear, lest the use of these
words with the delivery of the Ring, In Name of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost should favor them who account Marriage a Sacrament. But if this was
an intimation of a Sacrament, a last Will and Testament, beginning In the Name
of God, etc. and being signed and sealed, must be accounted a Sacrament. And
even among the Romanists who esteem Marriage for a Sacrament, the Ring is not
fixed upon for the sign or matter thereof, but some fix upon the persons
contracting, others upon all those words and actions whereby consent is
signified, others (as Estius speaks) doubt which of these to close with,
Bellarm. de Matrim Sacr. c. 6.
and Bellarmine admits them both.

2. Now though Marriage be in some sense a Religious Constitution, as having
its original institution from God; yet both the nature of this society and the
end of it, speak it a civil state of Gods appointment, even as the state of
Government and Subjection is: and therefore as other civil contracts are
established by words of consent, ordinarily attended with real signs or tokens;
as with us some Livery and Seisin is used in the passing over an Estate, and by
the general consent of the World, an Earnest attends ordinary Bargains; so by
a large consent of Nations, has a Ring been thought fit to establish the
Matrimonial contract, as a pledge or earnest thereof. Whence it was an ordinary
custom among the Jews to use (...) the Ring of Espousing; the manner of its use
among the modern Jews is expressed by Buxtorfe in his Synagogua Judaica, Syn.
Jud. c. 28.
and the ancient practice thereof is mentioned in the Talmud in Kiddushin.
Buxt. Lex. Radbin in (...).
Among the ancient and laudable customs of the Roman Empire, Tertul. Apol. c. 6.
Tertullian reckons this for one, that women then wore gold only on that one
finger, quem sponsus oppignorasset annulo pronubo, where the Bridegroom had put
the pledge of the Matrimonial Ring: Baron. An. 57. n. 51.
and Pamelius upon that place of Tertullian (and Baronius also) observes the
like use of the Ring to be expressed by Pliny; to which purpose also are the
words of Juvenal, who describing Marriage, says -- Et digitis pignus fortasse
dedisti. Juven. Sat. 6.
and Theosebius in Photius calls the Ring (...), the conjoyner of conjugal
society. But though the use of this Rite in Marriage was very ancient, Tertul.
de Idolatr. c. 16.
even among the Pagan Nations, Tertullian assures us it was no part of their
Paganism; says he, Neque annulus, neque conjunctio maritalis de alicujus idoli
honor descendit: but this pledge, and other common earnests, were prudently
used long before the time of Christ, and are still continued under Christianity.

3. And that the principal use of this Rite is under the Christian state
continued, to be an earnest of this Matrimonial Contract, is not only manifest
from those ancient ritual words, mentioned by Durantus Durandus and many
others, Annulo suo subarravit me sibi Dominus, but from S. Augustine, Aug. Tr.
2. in 1. Ep. Johan.
who calls it arram sponsi, the pledge or earnest of the Husband; and the
same intent hereof is expressed in several testimonies cited in Gratians
Decretum, c. 30. q. 5. c. nostrates. Foeminae. V. Gloss in c. 27. q. 2. si
quis. And in our Liturgy, the giving and receiving a Ring is declared to be a
pledge of the Vow and Covenant, made between the persons who enter upon this
state of Marriage. And whereas these words, In the Name of the Father, of the
Son, and of the Holy Ghost, have some relation to the pledge of Wedlock by the
Ring (in our Office of Marriage) as it is a testimony of consent to the
Covenant of Marriage; the sense and design thereof is to express thus much,
That this Contract of Marriage in the Church, is undertaken with respect to the
Rules of the Christian Doctrine, and the Institution of God concerning
Marriage, and by Authority therefrom, and in Subjection thereunto; and that by
reason of this institution, the expressed consent of the persons contracting
must stand firm and inviolable; and therefore it is fitly and solemnly declared
to be, In the Name of the Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, in that
being now joined together by God, no man can put them asunder.

4. But besides this principal end of the Ring, the delivery thereof did also
include a giving authority to the Wife, to command and take care of the goods
of the house, and the provisions which the ancient Romans usually sealed; and
hence the Ring given in Marriage was a Seal-ring. Paed. l. 3. c. 11.
Thus Clemens Alexandrinus calls it a Ring of Gold, given to the Woman but
not for ornament, (...), but to set a seal upon what requires safe custody:
and in the same Chapter he says, that the care of the house is fitly committed
to the Wife, and those who have no wives may use the Seal-ring themselves. So
he expresses this ancient usage of giving a Seal-ring: which may also not
improbably be designed in the comprehensiveness of Tertullians language,
Tertull. ad Vxor. l. 2. c 9.
by his Phrase of Matrimonium obsignatum. Concerning the custom of the Romans
sealing their household provisions, Pliny tells us, Plin. Not. Hist. l. 33. c.
1.
Cibi and potus annulo vindicantur a rapina; Their meats and drinks were by the
use of the Ring secured from robbery: and that the most ancient use of Rings
was wholly designed for sealing, is declared by Macrobius, Macr. Satum. l. 7.
c. 13.
Veteres non ornatus sed signandi causa annulum circumferebant. And that the
giving a Ring was of old a testimony both of special favor, and of committing
authority, appears by the instances of the Rings given by Pharaoh to Joseph,
and by Ahasuerus to Mordecai; both which are confidently and probably asserted
by Boethius Epo to have been Seal-rings; says he, Boet. Epo. Quest. Heroin. l.
2. qu. 5. n. 21.
Quod de annulo dicitur, utrobique de signatorio sumendum est proculdubio, ad
extollendam tam Josephi quam Mardochaei authoritatem, ut quibus rex uterque
concrederet omnia. And though the custom of sealing things belonging to the
house, and the use of a Seal-ring in Marriage is not with us continued; yet
with reference to this ancient usage, the delivery of the Ring may still fitly
import, the Husbands committing the things and affairs of his house, to the
care and authority of his Wife.

5. This Rite also did probably express not only an honorable estate, (as
Marriage is) but also a state of freedom and liberty (the Ring in Marriage
being used by them only in the former times of the Roman Empire, who were
Freemen and not Slaves and Vassals whence it is declared by Macrobius in the
place above cited, that no persons under servitude might by the Laws of the
Empire wear a Ring; Cod. l. 6. T^t. 8. Se. 2. Digest. lib. 40. Tit. 10. Sect 5.
and Lib. 38 Tit. 2. Se. 3. n. 1.
Jus annulorum famuli non habebant. And the civil Law it self does in diverse
places declare, (treating De jure aureorum annulorum) that if any person who
was no Freeman, obtained the right of wearing a Ring, he thereupon all his
life time enjoyed the Privileges of the Ingenui or Freemen, though he might
not dispose of what he had at his death. And Gotofredus gives an instance from
Dio, Gotofr. ibidem.
concerning Musa a Physician, to whom Augustus gave a Ring, that he might enjoy
this freedom. Agreeably hereto, the Ring in Marriage may among us in some kind
intimate a state of civil freedom from vassallage and villainage in the persons
contracting, and may more particularly express, that by the Matrimonial
Contract, there is made over to the Wife a right of Copartnership in the
Immunities, and that degree of honorable estate, which the Husband possesses.
But though these things last mentioned may well be admitted and allowed, the
main intent of the use of the Ring, is to be a pledge or earnest of the
Marriage covenant, as is expressed in these words; With this Ring I thee wed.
Buc. Censur. c. 20. Disp. of Cerem. c. 2. Sect. 43.
And this use of it was approved by Bucer as a thing very convenient, and Mr.
Baxter has declared, that he saw no reason to scruple its lawfulness.

6. And hence a good account may be given of these words, used with the Ring,
With my body I thee worship. Which not only includes the Husbands honoring
his Wife, but also declares that he takes his Wife with her issue by him,
into participation of that degree of civil Worship, Dignity, or Freedom which
himself has: and as this suiteth well the nature of their Union in being one
flesh; L. Cokes Reports 5. Part. Cawdreys Case.
so it agrees with the usage of the common Law of England, wherein (otherwise
than in the Civil Law) both the freedom and honor of the whole Family,
depends on the Husband. And more especially these words design to express,
the man's receiving this woman to be his Wife, in the honorable estate of
Matrimony, so as she should enjoy that degree of civil worship and other
Matrimonial Privileges (as authority of guiding the House, and commanding the
Family, and a right of her issue being Heirs) whereby the honorable condition
of a Wise or Materfamilias, was distinguished from a Concubine taken in the
best sense, for one under a Matrimonial Contract (and therefore sometimes
called a Wife) but without the right to these Privileges. Of such Concubines
in the times of the Old Testament, we have a frequent account in the holy
Scriptures; Great. Decret. Did. 34. c. 3, 4, 5.
the Canon Law gives intimation of such under Christianity, and Gellius among
the old Romans makes a difference between some women, who were received into a
state of Marriage, but not in the most honorable degree thereof, and to these
he allows the name of Matrons; and other Wives who were their
Matres-familias, Noct. Attict. l. 18. c. 6.
as having a disposal of the Family, and a relation to the right of inheriting.
And this Phrase may also be allowed to signify that the Husband has not power
over his own body but the Wife, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. 7.4. And
therefore the sense of these words appears to be very considerable.

7. And as to the word (Worship) it is here evidently taken for an expression
of civil honor, respect, and eminency, which was a more usual acceptance of
that Phrase in the last Age, than now it is, as may appear from these words of
Mr. Tyndal: Tyndall against Sir Tho. More.
Concerning worshipping or honoring, which two terms (says he) are both one;
the words which the Scripture does use, in the worshipping or honoring of God
are these, to love God, cleave to him, etc. all which words (says he) we use
also in the worshipping of man, howbeit diversely, and the difference thereof
does all the Scripture teach. Nor is the word Worship in its common use so
perticuliarly now referred to divine Worship; but that besides the ordinary
title of Worship in a civil sense given to men, we also read in the last
Translation of our Bibles, such Phrases as these, 1 Chronicles. 29.20. they
worshipped God and the King; i. e. gave due honor, reverence, and obeisance
both to God and the King. Luke 14.10. then shall thou have worship in the
presence of them that sit at meat with thee. Rev. 3.9. I will make them come
and worship before thy feet: and in the ancienter Versions there occurreth a
much more frequent use of such Phrases. And therefore these words, With my body
I thee worship are not unallowable in the Phrase, and are very significant,
comprehensive, and of great moment, in their sense, design and intent.

8. And now having impartially and diligently considered those appointments in
our Church, which for an hundred years past have been by diverse persons so
severely censured and opposed, (though by others worthily defended and justly
valued) the result is this.

9. First, That if these things were rightly and truly understood and
apprehended, they would be well approved; and the vehement out-crys against
them, and the open separation from this Church upon this account, would appear
unreasonable and sinfully uncharitable. And this right understanding is a
matter of no great difficulty to intelligent persons, (by whom others might be
directed) who shall impartially make inquiry, having their spirits possessed
with humility, meekness, calmness, and charity, unto which Christianity
obliges all men.

10. Secondly, That though misunderstanding and mistakes, or prejudices and a
strong affection to one party of men, and over-suspicious thoughts of, and
designed oppositions against others, may and do engage many to disclaim these
things established, even to the present dangerous breach of the Churches peace
and unity, and the extreme hazard of its future welfare: yet nothing has been,
nor indeed can be produced, against the way of worshipping God, established in
our Church^, which either ought upon Principles of Conscience, or according
(...) the Rules of Christian and Moral prudence, to hinder pious men from
hearty joining therein, or yielding unfeigned assent and consent thereto.

11. Thirdly, That those persons who will resolvedly oppose with violence,
these establishments in the Church of England, and renounce its Communion upon
any accounts referring to the Liturgy, and way of Worship appointed therein,
may observe that almost all the same things which they blame in our Church, and
for which they injuriously depart from it, have been received and appointed
(with many other things, which their Principles do equally or more severely
condemn) in the Primitive Church, and especially in the third, fourth, and
fifth Centuries, (of the Rites and way of Worship, in which Ages we have more
ample records than of the the times foregoing) and had they then lived, they
must upon the same accounts, according to their present Principles and
practices, have disclaimed the Communion of all the famous known Churches of
the Christian World in those Ages, which have been, and deserve to be greatly
renowned. And this, besides the former considerations which refer to the things
themselves, is of so great moment, that he who would have rejected the
Communion of those Churches, must have thereby disowned Membership with the
Body of Christ, and could never have reconciled such practices with
endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit in the bond of Peace.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 160. lin. 4. and 10. for pretection read prelection, p. 166. l. 11. for
Histonery r. Histories, p. 177. l. 4. dele that, p. 197. l. 3. for ipsiusve
verabile r. ipsius venerabili, p. 222. l. 32. r. (...), p. 229. l. 20. r. I
shall, p. 302. l. 30. for become r. be come, p. 311. l. 2. dele if, p. 354 l.
20. r. sufficient rule for faith, p. 355. l. 18. for rules r. Rulers. page 460.
l. 27. for sometimes r. sometimes, p. 481. l. 7. r. may appear, besides, p.
497. l. 28. for springling r. sprinkling, Other less mistakes must be left to
the ingenuity and pardon of the Reader.


