A Famous BATTLE Fought by the Earl of Bedford against the Marquis of
Hartford and the Lord Pawlet, and the rest of the Cava^^^^^ who was ready to
take shipping for WALES.

Declaring the manner of the Earl of Bedfords obtaining the Victory, there
being slain almost 100. Cavaleeres, and not above 29. of our side.

Whereunto is annexed The great Guard that Prince CHARLES has about Ludlow
Castle.

Also notifying the 3. Shires that has taken an enforced Protestation to
assist His Majesty against both Houses of Parliament.

Brought to London by the last Post.

LONDON: Printed for I. Williams: October. 1.

R.W. LLOYD
modern bookplate

Good News from Westchester, and the places near adjoining.
THE Marquess of Hartford since his going from Sherborn Castle in
Sommersetshire, has had but very bad success, Fortune has frowned on him
very much, for at his arrival near Miniard a Sea Town not far distant from
Wales, they troubled all the Counties in their march, insomuch that on
Wednesday night last, all the shop windows were at Myniard shut up, every man
Armed, and the Town guarded, expecting daily the arivall of the Earl of
Bedford and the rest of the Parliaforces, and according to their expectation
the Earl, and with some 500. Horse, and some foot, upon the 25. of this
month, And at his coming near the Town, the Marquess sent out Colonel
Lunsford with 4. or 5. troops of horse, to give him a charge but they had been
better to have kept with in their bounds, for at their coming the Earl sent
many thundering Messengers to welcome them which soon caused them to retreat,
and to fly for succor and releife to the rest of their forces; The Earl being
within half a mile of the town, he sent out strict Warrants to all the Manors
that were thereabouts, to with draw all their Ships and Barks from that place,
for the better hindering of the Marquess from his going into wales by Sea, and
at his arivall there; The Major of Bristoll having information and intelligence
of it, they immediately sent out diverse Ships to secure that Fort Town and to
hinder the Marquess and the rest of his confedrates from going into Wales, All
the Castles thereabouts was strongly guarded and Fortified for the KING and
Parliament, insomuch that the Marquess would not posesse himself of any of
them, the Earl having thus secured those parts, he drew his Forces near the
Town, and upon the 29. of this month let fly diverse pieces of Ordnance at the
Marquess and his confederates, insomuch that they were forced to send a parley
and have produced bloody effects. Notwithstanding all which, and diverse other
insufferable injuries, so confident were we of his Majesty's former
professions, never to refuse any Petition presented by his people to him in any
humble way, that we desisted not to wait our best time to present so after some
hours, and at the same concluded to have a general meeting with their Forces
within two hours, which was accordingly done, and at their coming into the
fields, they resolved to try their power and strength against each other, where
Captain Belfore, a most Noble and deserving Soldier, drew up 200. Horse and
gave fire against the Enemy, insomuch that diverse of them were soon struck
from off their horses, and after the space of three hours fight, the Marquess
and his Forces made a retreat, and betook themselves to the Town; and it is
reported, that some of their chiefest Commanders are fled, the Earl is
resolved not to return without honor; by the next Post you shall hear more,
till then farewell.

The Kings Majesty upon the 28. of this Month marched with his Army from
Chester toward Shrewesbury, where it is thought he will have a meeting with
the Earl of Essex, and there to treat with him concerning the Affairs of this
Kingdom, but the Cavaleers are very unwilling that His Majesty should come to
any agreement; For upon the 29 of this Month his Excellency the Earl of
Essex, having gott^^ possession of the City of of Worcester, the Town having
informed him that there was much Gunpowder laid in some Sellar near to the
Town Hall and as it was confessed by some that were taken prisoners, it was to
blow up his Excellency, and to destroy as many of his Forces as they could.

This Plot was discovered by a worthy Gentleman, one Master John Jackson, an
Inhabitant of the said City of Worcester, Septem. 29.

It is credibly reported, that by His Majesty's special Command Prince Charles
is guarded with 200. horse and 400 foot in the Castle of Ludlow, the Trained
Band also does daily lie there pretending to guard his highness Person in
these troublesome times.

It is also reported for certain, That three Shires thereabouts, namely,
Shropshire, Denbi-shire, Flintshire, have taken a forced Protestation to assist
his Majesty against both houses of Parliament, but it is thought their
Resolution in that will not hold long, for when the Parliaments Forces shall be
present to assist them, for they want help and encour^gers, such as the Lord
Fairefaxe and Sir John Hotham in Yorkshire.

FJNJS.

