A Famous Victory OBTAINED By Sir WILLIAM WALLER, against the Lord HERBERT
and the Welsh Cavaliers in the Forest of Deane in the County of Gloucester,
where six hundred of the Welchmen were slain, and a thousand taken prisoners
by the Parliaments Forces, the said Lord Herbert General of South Wales being
slain.

ALSO A true Relation of the whole Proceedings of the said Sir William Waller
in that County, showing in what manner he faced Cicester, and what stratagem he
and Colonel Massey (who is Governor of Gloucester) used when they obtained
this victory against the Welsh, with the number of men which have been lost by
Sir William Waller, and what strength he has.

LONDON, March 31. Printed for Robert Wood. 1643.

A Famous Victory obtained by Sir WILLIAM WALLER against the Lord HERBERT and
the Welsh Cavaliers in the Forest of DEANE.
UPon occasion of the great victory which Sir William Waller obtained this
week against the L. Herbert (the Earl of Worcesters eldest son, a great
Papist) and his Welsh Cavaliers in the County of Gloucester, I shall not so
much vary from the matter, as I should injure the worth of that noble
Gentleman, if I should speak a word or two in the first place of the circuit
which he has gone, and how wonderfully God has blessed him with good success
since his last setting forth, it being sufficiently known to the world, what
singular service he did before for the King and Parliament in the West Country.

Although at his advancing from Gilford in the County of Surrey, he was not
accommodated with such considerable Forces as was desired, yet such has been
the good success of this worthy Knight, together with the affection of the
Country People to the cause, that when he came to Salisbury, he was about 4000.
strong, and from thence marching to Bristoll he was 5000. strong, which being a
considerable force to f^l^ upon some good Design, he advanced with his forces
from thence to Malmesbury, where he was engaged in a hot service, he sat down
before the place the 22. of this March, a little after Noon, and at his first
coming, the Kings forces showed themselves under the side of a wood, near the
Town, but upon the first proffer of a charge, they retired toward Cicester,
whereupon he fell to work of the Town, and in the skirts of the outward Town,
where were Gardens walled in, from whence the Enemy played upon the Parliaments
Forces, but within half an hour they were beaten from thence, and Sir William
Wallers forces entered the lovver town, and kept possession thereof, driving
the enemy into the upper town, which they had fortified; and falling upon the
West part, in which they had cast up a brest-vvorke, and planted a piece of
Ordnance: whereupon Sir William Waller advanced two Drakes, and under that
favor his Musketeers possessed themselves of some houses near the port, from
whence they galled the enemy very sore, and so continuing an hot fight for a
while, at last he was forced to give over for want of ammunition, the maine
part whereof was unluckily stayed behind by a mischance of the carriage, and
could not come up till the next morning,

But that the enemy might not perceive this defect of ammunition, toward
morning he caused all the drums to beat, and trumpets to sound, dravving both
horse and foot out into the street, as in preparation to an assault, which
gave the enemy such apprehension, that immediately they sent out a Drum, and
craved a parley, yielded upon quarter, and gave him entrance about seven a
clock in the morning: they were about 300. foot and a troup of horse, but the
horse which shevved themselves near the town at his first coming, shifted
away, without making any attempt against the Parliaments Forces. At this town
Sir W. Waller took prisoners Col. Herbert Lunsford, Col. Cook, Lieutenant
Colonel Dabridgecourt, Sergeant Major Finch, six Captains, six Lievtenants,
six Ensigns, one Cornet and four Quartermasters, besides the ordinary
soldiers, part whereof were sent to Gloucester, and the rest to Bristoll.

Having settled this town in quiet, and left a considerable force to defend the
same, he advanced with his forces toward Cicester, where were 700. foot, and
300. horse and Dragoons of the Kings Forces, and whether he entered into the
Town or no, I will not stand now to expostulate; for it is rather thought that
he made no attempt against it, aiming at a greater victory, which he would not
neglect for taking a town of so small importance: for it is reported for a
truth that he only faced the town; but whilst he looked on that town, he
rowed toward the Forest of Deane, where was the L. Herbert beforementioned
with about 2000. Welchmen which came over the river of Severne at Rosse bridge,
since they received that great defeat when they assaulted Gloucester.

And to make this intended victory (which was afterward obtained) the more
complete, Sir W. Waller gave notice of this design to Col. Massey, who is
governor of Gloucester, with directions for him at such a time to issue forth
with a considerable party from thence on the other side of the river, being the
time which he intended to fall upon the Welsh forces: which business on both
sides being pursued with effect (according to the most certain relation fell
out to be thus. Sir W. Waller suddenly returning from about Cicester, and with
a speedy march coming to Deane, fell upon the Welchmen, who at the first seemed
to make strange of running away, and therefore for a while fought very manfully
till about six hundred of them were slain, and near a thousand taken prisoners,
so that very few could escape to the mountains to bring tidings of her
countries valor. They also lost all their arms and ammunition, with good store
of horse: many Commanders were slain, and the rest were for the most part taken
prisoners, and it is reported that the L. Herbert himself is slain. The
prisoners are disposed of as those which were taken at Malmesbury: for some
were sent to Gloucester, and the rest to Bristoll.

And it is further informed, that notwithstanding those great overthrows
beforementioned were not obtained without hazard and difficulty, yet the said
Sir William Waller has not lost in all above 60. of his men since he first
went forth, which is a thing very observable.

The sum of this Relation is received with much credit, though the particulars
thereof as yet are not certainly known: for the party that brought this
relation came away post as soon as the victory was obtained, before the
particular knowledge thereof could appear to those that were in the Action,
but within few days when Letters come out of those parts, there will be a more
full and exact Relation of this business.

FINIS.

