OF THE INFALLIBILITY OF THE CHVRCH OF ROME. A Discourse written by the Lord
Viscount FALKLAND. Now first published from a Copy of his own hand.

OXFORD, Printed by H Hall Printer to the UNIVERSITY: M.DC.XLV.

printer's device of Henry Hall, an arch with two pillars (not in McKerrow)

OF THE Infallibility of the Church of ROME.
TO him that doubts whether the Church of Rome have any errors, they answer, 1.
that She has none, for She never can have any. This being so much harder to
believe then the first, had need be proved by some certain arguments, if they
expect that the belief of this one should draw on whatsoever else they please
to propose: Yet this is offered to be proved by no better ways then those by
which we offer to prove she has erred: Which are, arguments from Scripture,
Reason, and Ancient Writers; all which, they say themselves, are fallible; for
nothing is not so but the Church; which if it be the only infallible
determination, and that can never be believed upon it is own authority, we can
never infallibly know that the Church is infallible: for these other ways of
proof (they say) may deceive both them and us; and so neither side is bound to
believe them.

If they say, 2.
that an argument out of Scripture is sufficient ground of Divine faith, why
are they so offended with the Protestants for beleiving every part of their
Religion upon that ground, upon which they build all theirs at once? and if
following the same Rule with equal desire of finding the truth by it, (having
neither of those qualities, which Isidorus Pelusiota says, are the causes of
all Heresies; (...), Pride and Prejudication) why should God be more offended
with the one then the other, though they chance to err?

They say, 3.
the Church is therefore made infallible by God, that all men may have some
certain Guide; yet though it be infallible, unless it both plainly appear to
be so, (for it is not certain to whom it does not appear certain) and
unless it be manifest which is the Church, God has not attained his end; and
it were to set a Ladder to Heaven and seem to have a great care of my going
up, whereas unless there be care taken that I may know this Ladder is here to
that purpose, it were as good for me it had never been set.

If they say we may know it, 4.
for that General and constant Tradition instructs us in it, I answer, that
ignorant people cannot know this, and so it can be no Rule for them; and if
learned people mistake in this, there can be no condemnation for them. For
suppose to know whether the Church of Rome may err, (as a way which will
conclude against her, but not for her; for if She has erred, certainly She
may; but though she has not erred hitherto, it follows not that She cannot
err,) I seek whether She have erred; and conceiving She has contradicted her
self, conclude necessarily She has erred; I suppose it not damnable though I
err in my judgment: because I try the Church by one of those touch-stones her
self appoints me; which is, Conformity with the Ancient. For to say I am to
believe the present Church that it differs not from the former, though it seem
to me to do so, is to send me to a witness, and bid me not believe it.

Now to say the Church is provided for a Guide of faith, 5.
but must be known by such marks as the ignorant cannot seek it by, and the
learned may chance not to find it by, though seeking it with all diligence and
without all prejudice, can no way satisfy me.

If they say, 6.
God will reveal the truth to whosoever seeks it these ways sincerely; this
saying both sides will (without means of being confuted) make use of;
therefore it would be as good that neither did.

When they have proved the Church to be infallible, 7.
yet to my understanding they have proceeded nothing farther, unless we can be
sure which is it; for it signifies only that God will allwaies have a Church
which shall not err; but not that such or such a Successiion shall be all
ways in the right; not that the Bishop of such a place, and the Clergy that
adheres to him shall all ways continue in the true faith. So that if they say
the Greek Church is not the Church, because by it is own confession it is not
infallible; I answer, that it may be now the Church, and may hereafter err,
and so not be now infallible; and yet the Church never err; because before
their fall from truth, others may arise to maintain it, who then will be the
Church; and so the Church may still be infallible; though not in respect of any
set persons whom we may know at all times for our Guide.

Then if they prove the Church of Rome to be the true Church, 8.
and not the Greek, because their opinions are consonant either to Scripture
or Antiquity, they run into a circle, proving their tenets to be true, first;
because the Church holds them and then theirs to be the true Church, because it
holds the truth: which last, though it appear to me the only way, yet it
takes away it is being a Guide which we may follow without examination, without
which all they say besides is nothing. 9.


Nay suppose they had evinced, that some Succession were infallible, and so had
proved to a Learned man that the Roman Church must be this, because none else
pretends to it; yet this can be no sufficient ground to the ignorant, who
cannot have any infallible foundation for their belief that the Church of
Greece pretends not to the same; and even to the Learned it is but an
accidental argument, because if any other company had likewise claimed to be
infallible, it had overthrown all so proved.

Nay it is but an arbitrary argument, 10.
and depends upon the pleasure of the adversary; for if any society of
Christians would pretend to it, the Church of Rome could make use of it no
longer.

The chiefest reason why they disallow of the Scripture for Judge, is, because
when differences arise about the interpretation, there is no way to end them;
11.
and that it will not stand with the goodness of God, to damn men for not
following his will, if he had assigned no infallible way how to find it. I
confess this to be wonderful true (...), and let them excuse themselves that
think otherwise. Yet this will be no argument against him, who beleives that
to all who follow their reason in the interpretation of the Scriptures, and
search for Tradition, God will either give his grace for assistance to find
the truth, or his pardon if they miss it: and then this supposed necessity of
an infallible Guide with this supposed damnation for want of it, fall together
to the ground.

If they command us to believe infallibly the contrary to this, 12.
they are to prove it false by some infallible way (for the conclusion must be
of the same nature, and not conclude more then the premises set down,) now
such a way, Scripture and Reason, or infused faith cannot be (for they use to
object the fallibility of them to those that build their Religion upon them)
nor the Authority of the Church, for that is part of the question, and must be
it self first proved, and that by none of the former ways, for the former
reasons.

The Popes infallibility can be no infallible ground of faith, 13.
being it self no necessary part of the faith (and we can be no surer of any
thing proved then we are of that which proves it,) and if he be fallible, no
part is the more infallible for his sideing with them. So if the Church be
divided, I have no way to know which is the true Church, but by searching which
agrees with Scripture and Antiquity, and so judgeing accordingly. (But this is
not to submit my self to her opinions as my guide, which they tell us is
necessary.) Which course if they approve not of as a fit one for a Learned man,
they are in a worse case for the ignorant, who can take no course at all, nor
is the better at all for this Guide, the Church; whilst two parts dispute
which is it, and that by arguments he understands not.

If I granted the Pope, 14.
or a Council by him called to be infallible, yet I conceive their Decrees can
be no sufficient ground (by their own axioms) of Divine faith. For first (say
the most) No Council is valid not approved by the Pope (for thus they
overthrow that held at Ariminum) and a Pope chosen by Symony is ipso facto no
Pope. I can then have no certainer ground for the infallibility of those
Decrees, and consequently for my belief of them, then I have that the choice
of him was neither directly nor indirectly Symoniacall; which to be certain
of, is absolutely impossible. 15.


Secondly, suppose him Pope, and to have confirmed the Decrees; yet that these
are the Decrees of a Council, or that he has confirmed them, I can have but
an uncontradicted attestation of many men, (for if another Council should
declare these to have been the Acts of a former Council, I should need
again some certain way of knowing how this declaration is a Councels) which
is no ground (say they) of faith, I am sure not so good and general a one as
that Tradition by which we prove that the Scripture is Scripture, which yet
they will not allow any to be certain of but from them.

Thirdly, for the sense of their Decrees, 16.
I can have no better expounder to follow then Reason; which if, though I
mistake, I shall not be damned for following, why shall I for mistaking the
sense of Scripture? Or why am I a less fit interpreter of one, then of the
other were both seem equally clear? And where they seem so (I mean equally
clear) and yet contradictory, shall I not as soon believe Scripture, which
is. without doubt, of at least as great authority?

But I doubt whether Counsels be fit deciders of Questions; 17.
for such they cannot be, if they beget more, and men have cause to be in
greater doubts afterward (none of the former being diminished) then they were
at first.

Now I conceive there arise so many out of this way, 18.
that the Learned cannot end all nor the Ignorant know all. As besides the
forenamed considerations. Who is to call them, the Pope, or Kings: Who are to
have voices in them; Bishops only, or Priests also: Whether the Pope or
Council be Superior; and the last need the approbation of the first, debated
among themselves: Whether any Countries not being called, or not being there
(as the Abissines, so great a part of Christianity, and not resolvedly
condemend by them for Heretics, were absent at the Council of Trent) make it
not- general: Whether if it be one not every where received (as when the
Bishops sent from some places have exceeded their Commission, as in the
Council of Florence) it be yet of necessity to be subscribed to: Whether there
were any surreption used or force, and Whether those disanull the Acts: Whether
the most voyees are to be held the Act of the Council, or those of all are
required, (As Canus says, All the Council cannot err, the most may; which
never yet agreed) or Whether two parts will serve (as in the Tridentine
Synod,) a considerable doubt, because, Nicephorus Callistus relateing the
resolution of a Council at Rome against that of Ariminum makes them give three
reasons. (...). Tom: 2, page 172.
One That the Bishop of Rome, was not present. The second That most did not
agree to it. Thirdly That others thither gathered were displeased at their
resolutions: which proves, that in their opinions, if either most not present
agree not to it, or all present be not pleased with it. a Council has no
power to bind. All these doubts, I say, persuade me that whatsoever brings
with it so many new questions, can be no fit ender of the old.

In those things in which, 19.
before a General Council have defined, it is lawful to hold either way, and
damnable to do so after; I desire to know how it agrees with the Charity of
the Church, to define any thing, and so bestow upon the Devil one path more
for us to walk in to him?

If the infallibility of a General Council be a point of faith I desire to
know why it is so? 20.
Scripture and Tradition seem to me not to say so: But if they did, so I
suppose you will grant they do of this doctrine, [That the souls of the
blessed shall see God before the day of judgment, and not be kept in secret
Receptacles] For else the doctrine of prayer to Saints cannot stand: and yet
for denying this does Bellarmine excuse Pope John 22 (of which belief they
know he was not alone) because the Church (he means, I doubt not, a General
Council) had not then condemned it. I desire to know why should not he be
condemned as well without one as many Heretics that are held so by their
Church, yet condemned by no General Council? which if he makes to be the rule
of Heresy, it had been happy to have lived before the Council of Nice, when
no opinion had been damnable but some against the Apostles Council at
Jerusalem, because there had yet been no General Council.

At least, why shall not I be excused by the same reason, 21.
though I believe not a Council to be infallible, since I never heard that any
Council has decreed that they are so? Neither, if it have, can we be bound by
that Decree, unless made certain some other way that it self is so.

If you say, we must believe it because of Tradition; 22.
I answer sometimes you will have the not beleiving any thing, though not
declared by a Council, to have power enough to damn (that is when it makes
against us) at other times the Church has not decreed unless a Council have,
and their error is pardonable, and they good Catholics.

Next, 23.
(as I have asked before) how shall an ignorant man know it? for he, in likely
hood, can speak but with a few, from whom he cannot know that all of the
Church of Rome's part do now, and in past ages have believed it to be Tradition
so certainly as to make it a ground of faith, (unless he have some revelation
that those deceive him not.) Neither indeed can those that should inform him
of the opinions of former times be certainly informed themselves; for truly if
(as they would persuade us) the relation of Papias could cosen so far all
the Prime Doctors of the Christian Church into the belief of the doctrine of
the Millenaries, so as that no one of those two first ages opposed it, (which
appears plain enough, because those that after rose up against this opinion,
never quoted any for themselves before Dionysius Alexandrinus, who lived at
least two hundred and fifty years after Christ.) Nay if those first men did
not only believe it as probable, Dial. cum Tryph p. 307. lib. 5. cap. 33.
but Justin Martyr lays, he holds it, and so do all that are in all parts
Orthodox Christians (...). Irenaeus sets it down directly for a Tradition, and
relates the very words that Christ used when he taught this; (which is plainer
then any other Tradition is proved, or said to be (out of Antiquity) by them.)
If (I say) these could be so deceived, why might not other of the Ancients as
well be by others deceived in other points? And then, what certainty shall the
Learned have, when after much labor they think they can make it appear that
the Ancients thought any thing Tradition, that indeed it was so? And that
either the folly, or the knavery of some Papias deceived them not? I confess
it makes me think of some that Tully speaks of, who (arcem amittunt, dum
propugnacula defendunt) loose the fort, whilst they defend the outworkes; for
whilst they answer this way the arguments of Tradition for the opinion of the
Chiliasts, they make unusefull to them the force of Tradition to prove any
thing else by. For which cause it was rather wisely then honestly done of them,
who before Feuardentius set him forth, left out that part of Irenaeus which we
allege (though we need it not much, for many of the fathers take notice of
this belief of his;) Yet he justifies himself for doing it by a worse blow to
them then this it self, which is, saying, that if they leave out all errors
in the books they publish (that is, I suppose, all opinions contrary to the
Church of Rome) bona pars Scriptorum Patrum Orthodoxorum evanesceret, a good
part of the writings of the Orthodox Fathers must vanish away.

But the Tradition that can be found out of Ancients (since their witnessing
may deceive us) has much less strength when they argue only thus: 24.
Sure so many would not say this is true, and join in opinions, if there were
no tradition for them. I would have you remember they can deliver their opinion
possibly, but either before the controversy arise in the Church (upon some
chance) or after. If before, it is confessed that they write not cantiously
enough; and so they answer all they seem to say for Arrius and Pelagius his
faith before themselves, and so consequently their controversy (though it may
be not their opinion) arose. If after, then they answer often (if any thing be
by them at that time spoken against them) that the heat of disputation brought
it from them, and their resolution to oppose Heretics enough; I desire it may
be lawful for us to answer so too, either one of these former ways; or that
it is (as often they say too) some Hyperbole, when you press us in any thing
with the opinions of Fathers. At least, I am sure if they may deceive us with
saying a thing is a Tradition, that is not, we may be sooner deceived if we
will say and conclude it for a Tradition, when they speak it only as a Truth,
and (for ought appears) their particular Opinion.

For besides, if when Salvian, 25.
comparing the Arrians with evil Livers, (and that after they were condemned
by a Council) extenuates, (by reason of their beleiving themselves in the
right) with much instance the fault of the Arrians, and says, How they shall
be punished for it in the day of Judgment, none can know but the Judge. If (I
say) they confess it to be his opinion, they must also confess the doctrine
of their Church to be different from that of Salvians times; because he was
allowed a Member of that for all this saying; whereas he of the Church of Rome
that should say so of us would be accounted Sesqui-haereticus, a Heretic and
a half: Or else they must say (which they can only say and not prove) that he
was so earnest against ill men, that for the aggravation of their crime he
lessened that of the Heretics; and said, what at another time he would not
have said; which if they do, will it not overthrow wholly the authority of the
Fathers? Since we can never infallibly know what they thought at all times,
from what they were moved to say by some collateral consideration.

Next to this certain and undoubted damning of all out of the Church of Rome;
26.
which averseth me from it; next comes their putting all to death, or at least
pains, that do so, where they have power: which is an effect, though not a
necessary one, of the first opinion; and that averseth me yet more; For I do
not believe all to be damned whom they damn, but I conceive all to be killed
whom they kill. I am sure if you look upon Constantine's Epistle, written to
persuade concord upon the first disagreement between Alexander and Arrius, you
will find that he thought (and if the Bishops of his time had at first thought
otherwise, he would have been sure better informed) that neither side deserved
either death or damnation. (and yet sure this question was as great as ever
rose since:) For having spoken of the opinions as things so indifferent, that
the Reader might almost think they had been fallen out at Spurn-point or
Ketlepins, he adds, Niceph. Tom. 1. p. 555.
(...). For that which is necessary is one thing, that all agree and keep the
same faith about divine providence. I am sure in the same Author, Moses, a man
praised by him, refusing to be made Bishop by Lucius because he was an Arrian,
and he answering, Tom. 2. p. 206.
That he did ill to refuse it before he knew what his faith was, Answered,
(...). The banishing of Bishops shows ENOVGH your faith. So that it is plain
he thought punishing for opinions to be a mark which might serve him to know
false opinions by.

I believe throughout Antiquity you will find no putting any to death, 27.
unless it be such as begin to kill first, (as the Circumcellians or such
like;) I am sure Christian Religions chief glory being that it increased by
being persecuted, and having that advantage of the Mahumetan (which came in by
force) me thinks, De Regno.
(especially since Synesius has told us, and reason told men so before
Synesius, that (...), Every thing is destroyed by the contrary to what settled
and composed it) It should be to take ill care of Christianity, to seek to
hold it up by Turkish means: at least it must breed doubts, that if the
Religion had always remained the same, it would not be defended by ways so
contrary to those by which it was propagated.

I desire recrimination may not be used: 28.
for though it be true that Calvin has done it, and the Church of England a
little, (which is a little too much) for Negare manifesta non audeo, and
excusare immodica non possum, yet She, confessing She may err, is not so
chargeable with any fault as those which pretend they cannot, (and so will be
sure never to mend it) and besides, I will be bound to defend no more then I
have undertaken, which is, to give reasons Why the Church of Rome is fallible.

I confess this opinion of damning so many, 29.
and this custom of burning so many, this breeding up those who know nothing
else in any point of Religion yet to be in readiness to cry To the fire with
him, and To Hell with him, (as Polybius says in a certain furious faction of
an army of several nations, and consequently languages, (...), All of them
understood only this word, Throw at him) this I say in my opinion was it
cheifely which made so many so suddenly leave the Church of Rome, that indeed
to borrow the Authors phrase, (...) -- They needed not persuasion to do it but
only news that others had begun: For as this alone if believed makes all the
rest be so too; So one thing alone misliked, overthrowes also all the rest.

If it were granted that, 30.
because it agrees not with the Goodness of God to let men want an infallible
Guide, therefore there must be one; and that the Church of Rome were that one;
yet if that teach any thing, to my understanding, contrary to Gods Goodness, I
am not to receive her doctrine, for the same cause for which they would have me
receive it, (it being as good an argument, this Guide teaches things contrary
to Gods Goodness, therefore is not appointed by God; as to say, It is
agreeable to his Goodness there should be a Guide, therefore there is one) And
sure it is lawful to examine particular doctrines, whether they agree with
that principle which is their foundation; and to that (me thinks) to damn him
that neither with negligence nor prejudication searches what is Gods will,
though he miss of it, is as contrary as the first can be supposed.

I would know whether he that never heard of the Church of Ro^e shall yet be
damned for not beleiving her infallible. 31.
I have so good an opinion of them as to assure my self they will answer, he
shall not. I will then ask, Whether he that has searched what Religions there
are, and finds hers to be one, and her infallibility to be part of it, if his
reason will not assent to that, shall he be damned for being inquisitive after
truth? (for he has committed no other fault greater then the other) and
Whether such an ignorance (I mean after impartial search) be not of all the
other the most invincible?

Nay grant the Church to be infallible, 32.
yet me thinks, he that denies it and imployes his reason to seek if it be
true, should be in as good case as he that beleives it and searches not at all
the truth of the proposition he receives: for I cannot see why he should be
saved, because, by reason of his parents beleise, or the Religion of the
Country, or some such accident, the truth was offered to his understanding,
when had the contrary been offered he would have received that; and the other
damned that believes falsehood, upon as good ground as the other does truth;
unless the Church be like a Conjurers circle that will keep a man from the
Devil though he came into it by chance.

They grant that no man is an Heretic that believes not his Heresy
obstinately; 33.
and if he be no Heretic, he may sure be saved. It is not then certain
damnation for any man to deny the infallibility of the Roman Church: but for
him only that denies it obstinately, and then I am safe; for I am sure I do
not.

Neither can they say I shall be damned for Schism though not for Heresy, 34.
for he is as well no Schismatique, though in Schism, that is willing to join
in communion with the true Church, when it appears to be so to him; as he is
no Heretic though he hold Heretical opinions, that holds them not
obstinately, that is (as I suppose) with a desire to be informed if he be in
the wrong.

Why, 35.
if it be not necessary always to believe the truth, so one believe in
general what the Church would have believed, (for so they excuse great men
that have held contrary opinions to theirs now, before they were defined or
they knew them to be so) why (I say) shall not the same implicit assent to
whatsoever God would have assented to (though I mistake what it is) be
sufficient? When indeed to believe implicitly what God would have believed is
to believe implicitly likewise what the Church teaches, if this doctrine be
within the number of those which God commands to be believed.

I have therefore the less doubt of this opinion, 36.
that I shall have no harm for not believing the infallibility of the Church
of Rome because of my being so far from leaning to the contrary, and so
suffering my will to have power over my understanding, that if God would leave
it to me which Tenet should be true, I would rather choose that that should,
then the contrary. For they may well believe me, that I take no pleasure in
tumbling hard and unpleasant books and making my self giddy with disputeing
of obscure questions and dazzled (...). Caesariut.


If I could believe, there should always be (whom I might always know) a
society of men, 37.
whose opinions must be certainly true, and who would (...), Synesius.
labor to discuss and define all arising doubts, so as I might be excusably
at ease, and have no part left for me but that of obedience, which must needs
be a less difficult and so a more agreeable way then to endure endless
volumes of commentaries, the harsh Greek of Evagrius, and the as hard Latin
of Irenaeus, and be pained by distinguishing between different senses and
various lections, and he would deserve not the lowest place in Bedlam that
would prefer these studies before so many, so much more pleasant, that would
rather employ his understanding, then submit it; and if he could think God
imposed upon him only the resisting temptations, would, by way of addition,
require from himself the resolving of doubts. I say not that all these books
are to be read by those who understand not the languages, for them I conceive
their seeking into Scripture may suffice. But if I have, by Gods grace, skill
to look into them, I cannot better use it then in the search of his will,
where they say it is to be found, that I might assent to them if there I find
reason for it; or if I do not, they may have no excuse for not excusing me.

For whereas they say, 38.
it is pride makes us doubt of their infallibility; I answer that their too
much laziness and impatience of examining is the cause many of them do not
doubt.

Next, what pride is it, never to assent before I find reason for it, (since
they, when they follow that Church as infallible, 39.
pretend reason for it, and will not say they would, if they thought they found
none) and if they say, we do find reason but will not confess it, then pride
hinders not our assent, but our declaration of it; which if it do in any one,
he is without question, (...), condemned by himself, and it must be a very
partial advocate that would strive to acquit him.

One much prevailing argument which they make, 40.
is this, that whosoever leave them, fall into dissension between themselves,
whereas they in the mean while are always at unity. I answer, first, in this
whereof the question is now, they all consent. Secondly, when there is fire for
them that disagree, they need not brag of their uniformity who consent.
Thirdly they have many differences among them (as whether the Pope be
infallible, Whether God predeterminate every action, Whether Election and
Reprobation depend upon foresight,) Which seem to me as great as any between
their adversaries; and in the latter the Jesuits have Ancienter and more
general Tradition on their side, then the Church of Rome has in any other
question; and as much ground from reason for the defense of Gods goodness, as
they can think they have for the necessity of an infallible guide; yet these
arguments must not make the Dominicans Heretics, and must us.

If they say, 41.
The Church has not resolved it (which signifies only, that they are not
agreed about it, which is that we object) I answer, It ought to have done, if
conformity to the ancient Church be required, in which all that ever I could
hear of before Saint Austin (who is very various I confess in it) delivered
the contrary to the Dominicans, as not doubtful; and to say, it is lawful for
them to disagree whenever they do not agree, is ridiculous: for they cannot
do both at once about the same point.

And if they say, 42.
they mean, by the Churches not having concluded it, that a Council has not,
I answer that they condemn some without any, and why not these? Next, I say
that the opinion of the Diffused Church is of more force then the conclusion of
a Representative (which has its authority from the other) and therefore if all
extant for four hundred years teach any thing, that is more Heresy to deny
that then any Canon of a Council.

But may not howsoever any other company of People (that would maintain
themselves to be infallible) say as much, 43.
that all other sects differ from one another, and therefore should all agree
with them? Would those not (think they) ascribe all other men's dissentions and
learned men's falling into diverse Heresies to their not allowing their
infallibility to their not assenting to their Decrees? and not suffering them
(...), to sit as teachers of those things that come in question, and to have
all others in the place of Disciples obedient to them? which is that which
Nilus, a Greek Bishop, professes, that because the Greeks would not allow the
Romans, was the only cause of separation between them.

They use much to object, 44.
How could errors come into the Church without opposition, and mention both of
that opposition in history? I answer, they might come in not at once, but by
degrees; as in the growth of a child and the motion of a clock, we see neither
in the present, but know there was a present when we find it past. Next, so
many Authors being lost, who can make it certain to me that from none of
those, we should have had notice of this opposition, if they had come to us?
Next I say there are two sorts of errors, to hold a thing necessary that is
unlawful and false, or that in but profitable and probable: Of the second sort
that errors should come in, it appears not hard to me, and especially in
those ages where want of Printing made books, and consequently learning not so
common as now it is; where the few that did study busied themselves in
Schoole-Speculations only, when the Authority of a man of chief note had a
more general influence then now it has, and so (as Thucydides says the
Plague did in his time, (...), the disease that first settled in the head easily
passed through all the body,) considering how apt all men are to desire that
all men should think as they do, and consequently to lay a necessity upon the
receiving that opinion, if they conceived that a way to have it received: And
then if it were believed generally profitable, (as, for example, Confession,)
who would be apt to oppose their calling it necessary, for the same cause for
which they called it so? Besides, if this error were delivered by some Father
in the hot opposition of some Heretic, it may be none of his side would
oppose it, least they might take advantage by their dissension, and he that
disputed for the Orthodox side, might loose by it much of his authority.

The word [necessary] it self is often used for very convenient; 45.
and then from necessary in that sense to absolutely necessary is no difficult
change, though it be a great one. The Fathers use Heretics sometimes in a
large sense, and sometimes in a stricter; and so differ in the reckoning them
up; Some leaving out those that others put in (though they had seen the
precedent Catalogue) The doubtfulnesse of the sense of those words might bring
in error. Names, as an Altar, Sacrifice, Massa, may have been used first in
one sense, and the name retained though the thing signified received changes;
which may have been the art of the Church of Rome, as it was once of an
Emperor of Rome, Cui proprium fuit nuper reperta (I leave out Scelera) priscis
verbis obtegere, whose property it was to cover things newly found out with
ancient terms. And the same Author tells us, that the same State was as it
were cheated out of her liberty because there did remain, Eadem Magistratuum
vocabula, The same titles of Magistrates; and I believe that if the Protestants
beyond the Seas would have thought Bishops as good a word as Superintendents,
(and so in other such things) many, who understand nothing but names, would
have missed the Scandal they have now taken.

These ways (I think) things may have come, 46.
without much opposition, from being thought profitable to be done, and
probable to be believed, to be thought necessary to be both: and how things
little by little may have been received under old names, which would not have
been so at once under new ones: (the first of these being no such small fault
but that part of the Montanists heresy was thinking uncommanded fasting days
necessary to be observed, which without doubt might lawfully have been kept.)

But my maine answer is, 47.
that if for an opinion to be in the Church without known precedent
opposition, be a certain note of being received from the beginning, let them
answer, how came in the opinion of the Chiliasts not contradicted till two
hundred years after it came in.

To conclude, 48.
if they can prove that the Scripture may be a certainer teacher of truths to
them then to us, so they may conclude the infallibility of the Church out of
it, and we nothing; If they can prove the Churches infallibility to be a
sufficient Guide for him that doubts Which is the Church, and cannot examine
that (for want of learning) by her chief mark, which is conformity with the
Ancient; If they can prove that the consent of Fathers long together (if they
had it) is a stronger argument against us, then against the Dominicans; If they
can prove that though the first of them affirm that such a thing is Tradition,
and believed by all Christians (and this assertion till a great while after
uncontradicted) yet they are not bound to receive it, and, upon less grounds,
we are; If indeed any can prove by any infallible way the infallibility of the
Church of Rome, and the necessity under pain of damnation for all men to
believe it, (which were the more strange, because Justin Martyr, and Clemens
Alexandrinus among the Ancients, and Erasmus and Ludovicus Vives among the
modernes, believe some Pagans to be saved) I will subscribe to it, And

(...)
(...). Sophoc.

If any man shall vouchsafe to think either this, 49.
or the Author of it, of value enough to confute the one and inform the other,
I shall desire him to do it with proceeding to the business, and not standing
upon any small slip of mine, (of which sort this may be full) and with that
Civility which is fit to be used by men that are not so passionate as to have
the definition of reasonable creatures in vain; (remembering that truth in
likelihood, is where her Author God was, in the still voice, and not in the
loud wind; And that Epiphanius excuses himself if he have called any
Heretics in his anger, Deceivers, or Wretches, (...) and I request him also
to bring me to the Truth (if I be out of it) not only by his arguments but
also by his prayers: which ways if he use, and I still continue on the part I
am of, and yet do neither (...), nor (...), neither am wilfully blind, nor
deny impudently what I see, then I am confident that neither he will have
reason to be offended with me in this world, nor God in the next.

FALKLAND.

FINIS.

