The Famous TRAGEDY Of the Life and Death of MRIS. RUMP.

SHOWING How She was brought to Bed of a Monster With her terrible Pangs,
bitter Teeming, hard Labor, and lamentable Travel from Portsmouth to
Westminster, and the great misery she has endured by her ugly, deformed,
ill-shapen, base-begotten Brat or Imp of Reformation, And the great care and
wonderful pains taken by Mris London Midwife Mris Hasterigg, Nurse. Gossip
Vain Gos. Scot and her man Litesum Gossip Walton. Gossip Martin Gossip Nevil.
Gossip Lenthal Secluded Gossips. Apprentices.


Together with the Exceeding great fright she took at a Free Parliament. And
the Fatal end of that Grand Tyrant O. C. the Father of all Murders,
Rebellions, Treasons and Treacheries committed since the year 1648, As it was
presented on a burning Stage at Westminster the 29 th of May, 1660.

There was such horrid stinking smoke never known
Before; But now the Devil has his own.
LONDON, Printed for Theodorus Microcosmus, 1660.

PROLOGUE.
You Gallants that some idle hours have spent,
Here Is pastime that may give you all content.
It far excels Bell's story and the Dragon,
Or Pha'tons riding in the Fiery Wagon.
It Is no Colchester Bull nor yet Mad' Ox,
Nor Tyrant Nol, mounted in a Coach-box.
Let merry Bells then Music backwards Ring,
Whilst we the praise of Mris Rump do sing.
Let her Phanatick friends great Bonfires make
Of purest straw they from Pist Beds can take;
With Eccoes loud like screeking of a Cart,
And with shrill noise more sweeter then a F --
For now she is safe from danger brought a Bed,
Behold the Monster of her Maidenhead.
The Nurse is paid, By Oaths, false Protestation,
And by a new Coin called Sequestration.
It Is strange a Rump that is roasted, boiled and broyl'd.
Should after death bring forth a monstrous Child.
Got by some Pettyfogging Knight o'th post
Who in her Womb did leave his horrid Ghost,
To vex the honest people of this Nation
By her Base Brat, pretending Reformation,
Who's bred and born, and then within a day
Consumed to smoke, and clearly fled away.
But yet Spectators now with Patience view,
'This Scene, it is called a false W -- never true.
Enter Gossiip Vain, Scot and Nurse Haslerig. Gossip Vane. HAa, ha, ha, How
bravely have we steered the Coast now, Is there no more reprobates left, that
we may bring them under an Act of Sequestration, This parting of Estates is a
rare piece of employment, my thinks it is a gallant frollick.


Gos. Scot. Content gossip all is ours, though more would do well, what I have
makes me jocund.


Enter Lightsum. Jocund Mris, and well you might could you keep it. But what is
the cause of this merry Vain you are in, when Mris Rump lies so sick of a
Portsmouth Bastard, she! hardly bring it safe into the World?


Mrs. Gos. Scot. How! Sick, Sirrah are you sure of that?


Lightsum. As sure as you you will live to be hanged for murrher, Treason, and
Treachery.


Mrs. Scot. Gallop, Ride, Trot, Amble, Go, Run amain, withal agility,
dexterity, alacrity and celerity, call Mrs. London the Midwife, and tell her
that Mrs. Rump desires her to come away presently, for she is in strong labor
and endures miserable pangs and throws that comes upon her by playing the Whore
at Portsmouth; pray Heavens she has not taken some fright at the exclamations
of the people against the Arse, stump, Bum or Fag-end of a Parliament! I Will be
sworn it is enough to gally a Gentlewoman of her quallity and breeding to be
despised by every idle boy that makes verses, times and Songs of her, making no
better of her then a common Camp or Ammunition W -- turning up her Tail to
every lowsy ill-dependent, besides Martin the Town Bull. Well she is not the
first that has done amiss, these are but slips occasioned by the weakness of
her Sex. I Will in and make her a spiritual Cawdle, I doubt she will have an ill
bargain on it. Mrs. Rump, how do you? I say Mrs. Rump will you have a little
strong Water of Mrs Scots distillation, or a Cawdle of Sequestration to comfort
your putrified Bum?


Mrs. Rump. Oh sick, sick, I must Spew Nurse pray reach the Boul, Haw -- aw --
aw --


Nurse. Well Mrs. fetch it up: up with it: Heaven bless us! What Is this looks
so red Mrs?


Mrs. Rump. Oh it is blood, innocent blood, that has lay in congealed clods in
my Stomach a 11 years; Hark how loud it cries for vengeance! I never felt it
before I was overpowred by my Secluded Gossips, only once at Portsmouth, when
I was frighted by my Gossip Fleetwoodt party and the London Apprentices, Oh the
death of my King, his blood and the fear of his Sons coming, causes my pain to
increase, I understand too late he suffered by my Tyranny, an innocent and
untimely end.


Nurse. It Is well it is up, Mrs. cast again.


Mrs. Rump. Aw -- aw -- aw -- Oh my heart is almost burst!


Nurse, Lord, Mrs. what is that looks so yellow, Is it Choler?


Mrs. Rump. No Nurse it is Gold, accursed Gold, for love of which I sold my God,
murdered my King, gave away my Soul, and pulled down the gates, Posts,
Percullisses, nay through thy instigation had like to have fired the habitation
of Mrs. London my Midwife, and that for a small sum of one hundred thousand
pounds Aw --, aw --, aw --.


Gossip Scot. Quickly Nurse, bring the Basin Nurse.


Nurse, I come I come, What Is this looks like Parchment Rowld up in form like a
Bill of Indictment?


Rump. This is that black Bill drawn up by that strumpet my Mother. Bradshaw
through the instigation of the Devil, and my Father Cromwell, against my Royal
Sovereign, for which I endure these bitter pangs.


Gossip. Scot. Is Mris London come? If not, there is no help, we are all undone:
what course shall we take to preserve our dearly beloved sister Rump?


Gos. Walton. Call for more help. Hold fast behind gossiip Nevil, this throw I
fear will be her last.


Gos. Nevil. No I Will warrant you, I shall play the Oceano Dr. so well that my
Eutopian Physic will bring the Brat to perfection, It Is nothing comes now but a
Harp and Cross, it smells so strong of a Commonwealth it can never miscarry.


Gos. Martin. In good sooth I believe so too. Could she sweat upon it, as I use
to do at Baldwins Gardens, she would do well enough.


G. Scot. Or as I have done at VVickam with my Bone-lace-maker, or at Lambeth
with my Begger-wench, 'twould thrive in spite in of Fa^e.


Mris Rump. I Am almost spent Oh, oh, aw -- aw --


Nurse. What Is this looks like Paper?


Mris Rump. These are Votes and Ordinances of my own creating, contrary to Law
or Reason, made only to keep out my King contrary to my Oath of Allegiance, and
for sequestring my friends to stuff my own Coffers. Pray hold my back hard
Nurse, or my heart will shiver in pieces. Aw -- aw -- aw --


Nurse. What Is this that comes so strongly up? Foh, foh, foh, now it stinks all
the Kingdom over, but I cannot help it?


Mris Rump. Oh Nurse its too late to help now. This is that damnable
Declaration you causd to be lap'd up in an Oath of Abjuration, against my
Sovereign Lord the King, aspersing him and his whole Line with reproachful lys,
calling him Tyrant, who was the Most Just and Religious King in the World; Pray
Nurse fling some hot Embers on it, and make have for Mris Murder, Mris Rapine,
and my good neighbor Mris Perjury.


Nurse. I Am gone, here is the Midwife, Mris Londons come forsooth.


Mris London. Mris Rump how do you I pray?


Mrs. Rump. Oh Mrs. London, help me now or I die, never did Rump endure so much
sorrow, with bitter pangs, sobs and sighs. Oh, oh I am ready to die, you need
not have staid so long; there was no Gares, Portcullises or posts to hinder
you, Oh I Am ready to depart!


Mrs. London. Go, and the Devil go with you, I came but to laugh at thy misery,
thou have had too much of my help already, which has emboldned thee to play
the Strumpet. I Will not assist thee or thy brat any more Guild Hall is too empty
of Bodkins, Thimbles, Rings, and Boles to maintain thy whoredom, Exit.


As soon as she had made an end of speaking, in came rushing Mrs. Nevill, Mrs.
Scot, Mrs. Walton, Mrs. Martin. Mrs. Vane. etc. who presently fell about her
business: one held her hands, another her back, and a third her members, she
being in this grievous agony (having no hopes to escape with life, desired Mrs.
Haslerig to indite a bill to have her prayed for) and that it be speedily sent
by the Lord Mayor to the several Congregation within every their respective
Parishes for her safe Deliverance; which most accurately she penned in form of
a Declaration, in these words following.

The Declarations of Mrs. Rump, lying very weak, and in most grievous Pangs of
Childbearing; and cannot be Delivered.
Whatsoever dangers are threatened or feared, either by the great perplexity I
am at this present in (or by reason of my manifold sins that now in my weakness
lie heavy upon my Conscience,) yet I have assurance, that if I confess and
forsake them (as I have no such intention) I shall find mercy.

Therefore I confess and acknowledge (but not from the bottom of my heart) that
for the space of these 12 years I have been a most cruel murderer, not only of
Bodies, but of Souls; that I have perjured my self, First by my Oath of All
giance, and secondly by my Solemn Covenant, wherein (as in Hos. 1.9,) I have
spoken words, swearing falsely in making a Covenant; springs up against me)
like Hemlock in the furrows of the field: That I have most Traitorously
betrayed, and murdered my lawful King, the Anointed of the Lord, that I have
made Gods House and the Kings house a Den of Thieves: that I have loved
wickedness, and practiced it; that no fear has dehorted me from doing any
thing (but Justice) that I have robbed both God and the King, and have not
feared the one nor honored the other: that I have used all manner of jugglings,
Cousenage, contradictions and Equivocations, that my Religion has been
Railing, Blasphemy; Treason and Tautalogies,

And that I have not only covered but by the instigation of the Devil, and
against the Laws of our Sovereign Lord King Charles, forceably taken, stole
and carried away the goods and Chattells of many thousands of his Majesty's
Loyal and obedient Subjects; that I have made this Canaan of all happiness, a
Golgotha, and Field of Blood; and have yoaked my fellow Subjects to the Pride,
Tyranny and Oppression of my own Lust and Ambition; instead of Reforming I have
deformed, instead of repairing I have pulled down; Which has occasioned all
these miseries to fall upon me; My greatest grief of all being, that I know I
have committed all this, and much more, but cannot Repent for the same;
therefore the several Independents, Anabaptists, Seekers, Ranters Quakers, etc.
within the Cities of London and Westminster, and the late Lines of
Communications, are desired upon next Good Friday if I shall not be Delivered
before, to keep a day of feined Humiliation, and Prating; that the heavy
judgments that so inevitably threaten me, may be diverted; That so I may come
in again to Rule, Reign, and Tyrannize over you, Rump everlasting, Impositions,
Assessments and Taxations without end.

Your Friend and putrified Bum of iniquity, Mrs. Rump.

While this was writing Mrs. Rump grew worse and worse, and the good Wives made
account she had been drawing on: therefore Mrs. London stepped to her and spoke
as follows viz.

Mrs. London. Dear Daughter I perceive by thy pulses beating, and so much blood
springing out of thy Conscience into thy Face, that thou art almost already as
it were dead, and its a question whether the Child thou now art in labor with,
may come to perfection or no? or live to receive its Christendom, and though I
have upheld thee in all thy Actions, and safely brought thee from Portsmouth to
Westminster; and succored the Fox 12. years with Plate, Bodkins, Rings and
Bowls, yet thy sins and abominations have been so great I cannot deliver thee
so as to restore thee to thy former power, I advise thee therefore restore what
is taken by thy cruel Paws from thy God, thy King, thy Neighbor, and repent of
thy perjury.

Whilst thus she speak the Room was filled with smoke, over spread clear with
darkness, the Candles went out, and terrible thundrings were heard, intermixed
with wawling of Catts, howling of Dogs, and barking of Wolves, which strnck a
great terror in all her Gossips; In the mean time Mrs. Rump brought forth an
ugly deformed Monster without a head, goggle-ey'd, bloody hands, growing out on
both sides of its devouring panch, under the belly hung a great Bag, and the
Feet were like the feet of a Bear; those that will see this Brat may repair to
the Plantation of Fumigosus called Slavonia, whither she is gone to be Nursed by
Mris Sequestration; who no sooner is gone but in comes the Secluded Gossips.


Enter Secluded Gossips. What Is here to do? Is no room left for us? if not,
patience upon force must prove a medicine to purge this place from the usurping
power of a lawless Rump.


Gossip Lenthal. You are all welcome, pray sit down for I should be unwilling
to lose the place of Speaking, by which my Coffers have been stuffed with
draining the purses and heart-blood of other men's Estates.


Secl. Gossips. Nurse Lenthal, Read over some of the last Papers or manuscripts
of Mrs Rump.


Gossip Lenth. Here is an Act against the whole Line of King James by which its
neither murder nor Treason, to Kill Kings or murder the most Loyal Subjects.
And here is another rare Vote, which I look upon to be very good in Law, for the
increasing my Coffers (hoping to be a sharer therein) that is, For sequestring
Sir George Booth, and all those of the Royal party that assisted him.


Secl. Gossiips. Stay there a while, We disown your Treasons. Those Acts we
vote Null and Void. We Will clear the way, let the next go on where we have left,
right will take place, the stinking Rump be in a rotten condition, and though
it be supposed we fatte'd them, We Will make them Lean, and all for sorrow sing
Themselves to Hell, when England has a King.



Enter Free Parl. What hideous Monster's this, that appears thus died in Blood,
without shape, head or Body?


Mris Rump. It Is I that wait for Pardon. Is no Indemnity for me? though I have
dlpt my hands in the Scarlet die of Majesty, I hope your mercy will exceed my
cruelty.


Parl. I, as far as Law and Justice will extends; but I see little hope,
therefore as thou have sat long in pomp, so thou shall lie in State upon a
hurdle, and be drawn to thy Country house, where as much pains shall be taken
for thee as Judas took for himself.

She trembles.
Rump. Since so it is I Will to the City and die a martyr.


Enter Prentices. Lay hands on her.

They seiz on her.
All. We Will end this stink with speed.
They fling her in the fire and write this Epitaph.
Here lies she who was (in sum)
No Head or Body but all Bum,
Who did three Nations to confusion bring.
She sold her God, and murdered her King.

Enter Prentices with staves, and Clubs carrying the Effigies of that old
Tyrant O. Cromwell. A Prentice. Lo here is the form of that Grand Traitor Noll
Who gave a hundred pound a year to Pol
To vindicate his bloody Scarlet paws,
Under the Notion of a Good Old Cause.

All the rest. We knew it well, and did in sorrow sing
Whilst Judas like he murderd Charles our King.
But now we will make the world our deeds admire,
With that they flung the Puppet in the fire,
Which made the very dust and ashes fly,
From the earth as swift as lightning from the Sky.
And such a noisome Hog and darkness fell,
As if it had descended into Hell.
Where (with the Rumpish Brat) a curse it lies,
As though the Devil had torn out the eyes
The which was all the pay due for its hire
Whose scortching Nose three Kingdoms set on sire.

EPILOGUE.
Rejoice Great Britain now, for Kings there is none
Shall Govern thee, but Charles, and he alone
Will Peace and Plenty to this Nation bring,
Who is the Son of Charles thy marttyr'd KING.
The Rump of Traitors (that did sore so high
To spill the blood of sacred Majesty.
Are now defunct, Poor Whore she is brought a Bed
Of a long Tail, but neither brains or Head.
FAG, RUMP, BUM, STUMP.


