THE GREAT MYSTERIES OF GODLINESS AND UNGODLINESS.

The one opened from that eternal truth of the un-erring Scripture of the
ever-blessed JESUS.

The other discovered from the writings and speakings of a generation of
deceivers, called QVAKRRS.

Wherein their Sathanicall depths, and Diabolical delusions, not hitherto so
fully known, are laid open. And that which (as they often say) they have to
deliver to the world, which it is not yet able to receive, is most probably
manifested, a little before their time. To the rendering them and their way
abhorred to all true Christians.

Unfolding also, the delusive manner of their arguings, answerings, and
discoursings. In all which their chief endeavor is, to conceal themselves and
their opinions from being known and discovered.

Published for the reduching of such as are seduced: And the establishing such
as yet stand, from being seduced by them:

By RA: FARMER, a Servant of that Jesus Christ that was crucified at Jerusalem
above sixteen hundred years ago.

2 Pet. 21. 2. But there were false prophets also among the people even as
there shall be false teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bring upon themselves,
swift destruction. And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of
whom the way of truth shall be evil spoken of.

2 Timothy 3. 8, 9. Now as Janues and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the truth; men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the faith. But
they shall proceed further: For their folly shall be manifest unto all men, as
theirs also was

London, Printed by S. G. for William Ballara, Bookseller in Cornstreet, at
the Sign of the Bible in Bristoll: and Joshua Kirton in Paul's Churchyard. 1655.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, John Thurloe, Esquire, SECRET ARIE OF STATE.
Honorable and Honored,
ALthough I dare not presume to reach so high as his Highness; yet I can come
very near under your shadow; which to me, is very substantial. And I may speak
so loud, that if you please, he may hear. Awhile ago there came to this City
of Bristol, certain Morice-dancers from the North. By two and two, two and two,
with an intent here to exercise some spiritual cheats; or (as may well be
suspected) to carry on some levelling design. And our soldiers here, having
nothing else to do (unless work of their own making, that they might seem to
be necessary) struck in with them in their quaking. And my self, with some
other of my brethren in the Ministry here, being (by the Magistrates called to
conference with them) engaged to inquire into their opinions. I found it a
harder matter to discover then to confute them. They being the most egregious
prevaricators that ever men met with. Upon this account, my Geni is led me on
that way, to pull off their vizor, which is the principal intent of these
following papers: wherein is discovered their Mystery of ungodliness (as to
spiritual matters. And my thoughts having been a little before upon the Great
Mystery of Godliness. In a public discourse, I spoke something to both, which
gave some satisfaction, and was persuaded, might be useful, if made public.
Both which is here done, under the Title of the Mystery of Godliness, and of
ungodliness. And when I had done, I needed no long time to deliberate to whose
name to inscribe it. My heart readily told me, whom I honored. And I had a
desire, the world should know it. For, besides our old and familiar
acquaintance: The observation of your ingenuity (when I was last with you)
whereby I perceived that your Honors and high employments have not transported
you, has laid strong ingagments upon me. And I gladly took the very first
opportunity, to bear testimony to it. Sir, I was coming to you with a
supplicatory Epistle. But his Highness (by breath from his mouth) has driven
away these Northern locusts from us. And given a command for the remove of
their abetters and favorites. And now my supplicatory is (by this good hand of
providence) turned into a gratulatory Epistle; And I beseech you, let the
thanks be bestowed where you know it is due; for I am sure you know. And surely
Sir, his Highness has gained much upon the hearts of our Citizens, by this
act of grace and duty. We were made believe, these men had countenance from
him: which (upon my knowledge) made our Magistrates here so backward to be
quick with them, and to deal so severely (and justly) with them, as they have
been dealt with in other places. And therefore I rejoice that you breath so
good an air at Court. And oh that the same salutiferous air might blow, (and
continue to blow) through all the quarters of our English Elements. But Sir,
will you give me leave to speak my mind this once? (and we were wont to speak
freely one to another.) And i will speak for his Highness, it is not for his
honor nor saftety, that every petty Captain should dally with his Commands,
and ride away from their obedience to them. Some men know not how to bear an
even sail to that condition which these late troublous times have raised them.
They could live in war; but now know not how to live in peace, if it make not
for their profit. Hence many places and persons are rendered malignant, by
those, who in themselves are not better, no (and I am sure of it) nor so well
affected. And I beseech you, let not selfish insinuates find too much
countenance to the public grievance.

Sir, I write not this to loosen the reigns of Government, either in it self,
or its necessary supports (my soul abhorrs such thoughts.) But it pains me to
the very heart, that a people that may easily be managed, should be
over-ridden, by such, who seek not (what ever they pretend by their suggestions
of some friends) the public weal; so much as their own advantage. If people
be refractory or stubborn, it is fit they should know their Rider. But if they
go readily, why should they be spur-gald? I know not where ever I shall have
the like occasion, because I love and honor you, and would have you be truly
(everlastingly) honorable: I Will beg one thing of you. Improve you the high
advantage of ground you have gotten for God, his truth, and the common welfare.
(I need not mention his Highness, it is eminently included.) And to this end,
let order and established Government have a high place in your thoughts. And
that in Church as well as State. But why do I divide them? are they not
Hippocrates twins? do they not live and die together? how true did that saying
prove? No Bishop, no King. And will it not hold? No Minister, no Magistrate.
And every one a Minister, every one a Magistrate. I hate persecution. It Is a
judgment, and is not want of Government so too? When there was no King in
Israel, every man did what seemed good in his own eyes. And then they made
Priests (but yet they made them) of the basest of the people. Let Ministers be
basely accounted of, and the people (with a little help) will quickly learn to
despise Magistrates. Besides the judgment from the Lord, there is a natural
tendency in the one to the other. It will be Honorable Sir, and becoming
reforming times, that men learned, laborious and godly, (such as are so, and
can be content to approve themselves so; to those who are able and authorized
to judge) that they find more countenance, then those, who are not so
qualified. Men ignorant are impetuously zealous to cry down learning, that
their snuffs might seem to give some light, which if countenanced, (and that
such and find equal favor) will bring the next age to a dark Ministry. and
expose our children as a prey to the wolves of Rome. And as for these levelling
Quakers, I must need say; The revilings and reproachings of our gifted brethren
(who of late years, have made it much of their business, to render the
Ministers of this nation, Antichristian) have made way for them. And they (of
all men) have least cause to be offended with them (though they prevail most
with their Congregations.) For the call of the one is as good as the others,
though there be some difference in their doctrines.

Truly Sir, I had almost forgot what I was about; se. writing a Dedicatory
gratulatory Epistle? And to whom. One that is full of great and weighty
employments. Whither will not love carry a man? It made me overbold and tedious.
Pardon I beseech you my boldness, and accept of my love. I consecrate this
first fruit of my labors (in this kind) to your name, that it may live in you;
and that you might live in God, according to the Great Mystery of Godliness,
through the grace and power of that Jesus Christ which died at Jerusalem, whom
the Quakers vilify. To him I heartily commend you, and all your great and high
affairs: craving this farther favor, that I may still continue to be, and have
leave to subscribe my self, as I am

From my house in Bristoll, the first day of January, 1654/5. Sir, Your Honors
true, faithful, and most observant Servant in the Lord, RA: FFARMER.

A Monitory Epistle to the Reader.
Honest, but simple hearted Reader,
FOr thee principally is this work intended; It being a high act of Charity to
be Legs unto the lame, and Eyes unto the blind I cannot adventure to come in
print with an apology. And therefore let me plead my excuse. For the truth is,
I think it is a sault, that so much pay is spent, as now adays, to so little
purpose. For Scriblimus (we may say) indocti, etc. Every fool must be a fool
in print, or else he is no body. And some folks will be tinckering, though they
get others to stop the cracks both of sense and English. And if I should have
bin forward to do so too (as well as some of my neighbors) who could (as the
times are) quarrel with me? But I have ever been backward to this kind of
work, as being loath to be one of the Company, I have been sufficiently
provokt (as my Countrymen know) by a couple of Beagles of the tribe of
Rahshekah the railer: A lying Almanack-maker, and an Apostatized Minister, who
have appeared in print against me. But I was above them. And thought not them
worthy of so much pains of the blotting of a sheet of paper. I took (and do
take) my self as a traveller, that is limited to his time and business. And
such a one must not make a stop, at the barking of every dog. But consider,
It Is then ature of the beast. And therefore rides on and answers them, with his
horses heels. But now I confess, I could forbear no longer. Fool or Madman
(what the world pleases) for I care not, and I can be content to be, or be
esteemed any thing for Christ) I am engaged. He who never spoke in all his
life, when he saw one coming to kill his Father, the string of his tongue was
loosed, and he brake silence, to prevent danger. There are a generation of men
(if I may so call them) lately come quaking into our City, who in their mad and
frantic fits, offer violence to God and Christ and Gospel and all its
ordinances. And who here could be ^^lent, that as a watchman who should foresee
and forewarne of the danger? This was done, and is done by the rest of my
brethren here in their pulpit-labour with good success. And I (as well as
they) might there have rested. For I conceive not that we stand bound to be in
print upon every occasion. That which brought my backward spirit to this work
was: The Lord was pleased (by the help of some friends) to bring to my hands a
piece of the Anabaptists, which to me, made a clear discovery of the mystery
of these seducers: And gave me more light of their designs, then others of my
brethren (who have not seen that paper) had. In which persuasion I publicly
made some discovery. And being convin'd, that it might be more useful (if more
public) I beggd of God to fix my resolution to what might be most conducent to
his glory. Being persuaded never to have appeared to the world in this way, But
by his overruling hand, I have here presented to thee this discovery under the
title of the mystery of Ungodliness. And because thou should not only know
the evil, to avoid it, but the good also to follow it. I have therefore laid
before thee good and evil. The mystery of Godliness, and Ungodliness both
together. And its now thy duty (and yet it will be thy wisdom) to improve
advantages for thy estalishment. And to that end, Take a little advise: In
reading the mystery of Godliness, take but pains to turn to the quotations
of Scripture in the margin, and see how they prove the thing intended.
Especially do so in such truths as thou find thy self most affected with,
or seem most strange unto thee (if any should so seem, which methinks should
not.) Chiefly, Any truth thou most take notice of (under what consideration
so ever) tax and examine the proofs. This double benefit will arise. First,
The thing it self will be more clear. And Secondly, what thou receivest as a
truth, will be received on a divine authority. And so thy faith shall not
stand, or be built on man, who may deceive.) But on the un-erring word of God.
The not observing this rule in reading men's writtings, is the maine ground of
peoples instability: For this is sure, What ever is embraced upon mere humane
considerations: Upon the like considerations may be shaken off: He that
believes a thing, barely because such a man (of whom he has a good opinion,
and that he will not lie) told him so, when another shall come (of whom he has
an higher and better persuasion and shall tell him the contrary, to what he had
been persuaded; his persuasion is staggered if not altered. But now what is
entertained and believed, upon his word, then whom, none is more true, more
faithful, there is a sure foundation, a rock immovable: And then know further.
No truthe's thine own till thou art got up into the power of it. And that thou
square thy belief and life accordingly: The only way to be established against
error and heresy. As for the Mystery of Ungodliness, concerning it, I shall
give thee directions, when thon come unto it. It is meet the mystery of
Godliness should have the first place: that it might take the first possession
of thee; as a season against the poisons of heresy and ungodliness. And then
the more full the discovery, the more thou will abhor and avoid it. This is the
aim of my labor, which end if I shall attain, I shall* rejoice. In hope
whereof, I commend my labors to thee; And thee and them to him, who a lone is
able to make all profitable. Always remaining*

Thy faithful friend in the service of the Gospel of that Jesus Christ which
dyed at Jerusalem above sixteen hundred years ago. R A. FARMER.

ERRATA.
Reader,
I Am to beg thy favorable excuse in regard of some errors in the printing. My
desire was, that the Title at the head of every page, should have run thus, sc.
The great Mystery of Godliness to the first part, which extends to page 18.
And the Great Mystery of Ungodliness, from thence to the end. The Title. (The
great Mystery of Godliness and Ungodliness) being intended only for the
Title Page. There are some other faults in not observing full stops. And new
Sections, marginal notes, and quotations of Scriptures transposed and
disordered, in the first (The Mystery of Godliness, which though they alter
not the sense in the body of the Discourse; yet they hinder the advantage that
might be made, by those who would examine the quotations. This may possibly
occasion a new impression of that part by it self, which is but little. And
therefore in the mean time, need not much trouble thee. Some Errata which may
alter the sense, I have observed; which I entreat thee to correct with thy pen,
ere thou read.

In the Epistle Dedicatory. Page 1. line last but one, r. Genius. p. 2. l. 14.
r. a breath. p. 3. l. 9. r. But because. l. 10. dele you. I excuse my own
misnaming at the end my self. Epistle to the Reader: P. 1. l. 5. r. without an
Apology. l. 6. for pay r. paper. p. 2. l. 10. r. briefly. l. 11. r. try.

In the Book* Pa 1. l. 14. r. goodly. l. 19. for observe, r. subserve. ib. for
Ministry, r. Mystery. p. 2. l. 8. dele if, l. 9. for tie, r. tree. l. 27. r.
into. l. 33. after these words, perverseness of spirit, add, and proneness to
all manner of evil. p. 3. l. 14. r. continue. p. 4. margin note at the bottom;
for, of faith by nature, r. of both by nature p. 5. l. 17. dele the word, all.
l. 35. dele fig. 1. ib. margin, r. shut up as in a prison. p. 8. l. 9. r. when.
p. 9. l. 23. dele to, and read, that he might break. p. 1. Mar. dele new sect.
p. 12. l. 15. for are three, r. three are. p. 13. l. 11. for inheris, r. enter.
l. 27. for this, r. these. p. 14. l. 31. r. that though where. p. 15. l. 26.
dele is. p. 16. l. 37. and exercises. p. 18. l. 10. r. freely. l. 13. r.
differing. p. 2. l. 3 r. They are? l. 21. for waders, r. Readers. l. 36. r.
proposed. l. 37. r. as their usual. l. 39. for cry, r. say. p. 23. l. 6 for,
for r. to. l 9. dele thou l. 10. dele the interrogative points, and read
perceive them. l. 11. for such, r. thing. l. 6. after old, add foundations. p.
24. l. ^5. for powerful, r. wonderful. l. 36. for works, r. marks. l. 39. for
within, r. which in. p. 30. l. 31. r. these. p. 32. l. 7. for this, r. h s. l.
29. r. give you in here. p. 34. l. 6. r. proposes. p. 59. l. 9. for flesh, r.
flash. l. 22. dele yea. l. 26. r. naturally. p. 71. l. 11. for law, r. light.
p. 76. l. 13. r. hypocritically. l. 24. for reading, r. pleading. p. 88. l. 35.
for an unknown, r. one unclean.

The great Mystery of Godliness and Ungodliness.
1 Timothy 3. 16. Without controversy great is the Mystery of godliness: God was
manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory.


1 Creation.
THe eternal, invisible, only wise God, 1 Timothy 1. 17.
Father, Son, and holy spirit, Mat. 28. 19.
who only has immortality, dwelling in that light which no man can approach
unto, and which no man has seen, (or can see, 1 Timothy 6. 16.
) and live, Exo. 33. 20.
who being the Author and beginner of all things, Rev. 1. 8. 4. 11.
orders and disposes all things (as their end) for his own glory. Isa. 45. 7.
Prove. 16. 4.
This mighty God (intending to make his power and godhead and glory known)
Romans 20. Psalm. 19. 1. 2.
in the beginning of time, created the godly frame of Heaven and Earth Genesis 1.
as a place wherein to manifest much of that glory.

Angels.
And having made the Angels (creatures of an intellectual spiritual* Ps. 104. 4.
and so of an invisible nature; always to stand before him, Mat. 18. 10.
ready to obey and execute his Commands, Ps. 103. 20.
as ministering spirits, to observe and bring about this great Ministry
intended, Heb. 1. 14.
made also other creatures to dwell upon the earth, of a gross and bodily
substance, Genesis 1. 2. etc.
subject unto the eye of sense, and subservient also to this great design,
Nehem. 9. 6.
of his immortal glory. Rev. 4. 11.


Man.
And last of all (as the abridgement, and compendium of the whole Creation, and
the choycest piece os his workmanship, by whom he would be most glorified) he
makes man, Genesis 1. 26.
consisting of a soul (an immortal and spiritual nature) Genesis 2. 7.
to serve him as an Angel, in a spiritual manner, Joh. 4. 23.
and of a body (a gross and visible substance) to serve and honor him, above
and beyond other Creatures, (Angels and bruit Beasts) in a visible and outward
way of worship. Genesis 2. 7.


And to that end, endowed him with his own blessed Image, of righteousness,
holiness, and excellent knowledge, 1 Cor. 6. 20. Romans 12. 1.
and gave him also sovereignty and dominion over the rest of the visible
Creation: all things being made subservient to him. Original righteousness.
Genesis 1. 26. Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10.
By which means, he was eminently qualified for special communion with, and
enjoyment of his Creator. Genesis 1. 26. etc
The whole man being in a sweet frame of holy conformity unto his sovereigns
will; Genesis 17. 1. Amos 3. 3. Psalm. 73. 20. to the end. Eccles. 7. 29.
by obedience whereunto, he might have been everlastingly blessed and happy.
Deuteronomy. 11. 26. 27. Ex. 19. 5.

Thus have I seen on the day of a Kings solemn inauguration or Crowning; or on
his Royal progress to his great Convention, to establish Government, with his
people; All his Nobles and Officers richly furnished and adorned with all
gallantry, both in themselves and their attendants: each in their place and
order, in a stately equipage, riding on gloriously: And at last, out comes the
Prince in his Chariot of Majesty, out shining all; as he for whose honor that
pomp and grandeur was provided: Read the 8th Psalm throughout.




First Covenant.
Now the Lord having made man in this estate of honor, Psalm. 49. 12.
to make way for his own glory, in and by this great Mystery of Godliness, b
Eccles. 15. 14.
leaves him in the hand of his own counsel, under a strict Command of not
eating of the Tree of knowledge of good and evil, eut. 30. 15, 16. DGen. 2. 17.
with a kind of a Covenant and condition of everlasting life, upon obedience to
it; And if the contrary, upon the breach and disobedience of it. Ib.
Which tie (and the Command concerning it,) was as a sacramental sign and
manifestation of man's ready obedience, Therefore called the tree of knowledge.
to all other Commands of the Almighty, that should be given unto him.

Fall.
But now the Devil (being a Reprobate, and a fallen Angel, Jud. 6.
) envying Gods glory, and man's happiness, Wisd. 2. 24. Genesis 3. 13.
tempts man to the breach of this Commandment, suggesting that by eating, he
should be like God: Genesis 3. 5.
whereas (wretch as he was) he knew (by his own experience) that by disobeying,
man should be like himself, a Devil. And now man (being tickled with ambition
of being like to God in knowledge; Genesis 3. 6.
and being but a Creature, and so impossible to be good unchangeably Mal. 3. 6.
Ja. 1. 17.
(which is the sovereign prerogative of God only) by hearkening and yielding to
the temptation of the Devil, fell into the transgression: Genesis 3. 2. 17
And hereby involved himself Rom: 5. 12. 1 Cor. 15. 45. v. 21. 22.
and all his posterity Romans 5. 12. 14
(he being the head and root of all mankind, and a common person (to lose or
enjoy) Romans 9. 7. Col. 1. 24. Rom: 5: 10:
for all his posterity, who were in his loins; and by natural generation and
descent to proceed from him, (hereby I say) by this one transgression, he
involved himself, and all his posterity, unto a state of enmity and rebellion
against his Maker. Proneness to all manner of evil: Rom: 5: from 10: to 20:
Gen: 6: 5:
And thereby forfeited, both that blessed Image of righteousness, holiness, and
saving knowledge, in which he was at first created and contracted a perverseness
of spirit; But also lost that cheerful and comfortable light of Gods
countenance, which was to have bin his life and happiness.

And as a manifestation of his loss and guilt, man is driven out of Paradise
(that place of Gods special presence, and man's earthly felicity) as never to
enjoy the like on earth again; And an Angel with a flaming sword (the wrath of
the Almighty) to keep him for ever out, from eating (so much as sacramentally)
of the tree of life and immortality. Genesis 3* 24: Promise of Christ.


And had not Christ by an eternal decree and covenant with the Father, 1 Pet.
1. 20:
stepped in and undertaken for us: Heb. 8. 6.
the world had bin presently consumed; and man himself hurried into Hell and
destruction, to the eternal misery both of soul and body. Genesis 2. 17. World
continued. Romans 2. 5. etc. Vanity of the Creature.


But man is reprieved, and the execution of the sentence (as to the full) is
deferred, till the day of judgment. Romans 8. 20.
Yet shall he not go here, (and in the mean time) altogether unpunished; for
though the earth and other Creatures (that were made for man) continued, the
Creatures shall rebel, and withdraw subjection from him; Genesis 3. 17.
and the earth (being cursed for his sake, shall yield him food with sweat and
sorrow; Eccles. 2. tot.
and all things shall be full of labor, vanity, and vexation: so that he shall
have no satisfaction from them. Eccles. 1. 8.
And further, when he has toyled all his life, to little or no purpose (as to
true contentment) Psalm. 39. 6.
he must leave all these nothings; Prove. 23. 5. Eccles. 5. 14.
go unto the dust, Temporal Death.
(the grave) and lie down (if he go, as he came) in sorrow. Genesis 3. 19. Romans 5.
12.


So that upon the matter, man lives upon the earth as a condemned creature, Jo.
3. 3. 5. Man's state of nature.
and by patience, long suffering and forbearance; Romans 5. 16. 18 Ephesians. 2. 1 2.
permitted here to continue. And by his ^in under guilt, Romans 9. 22*
and curse, Romans 9. 22*
and death, Romans 3. 19. Ja. 2. 10.
(everlasting death and condemnation) Gal. 3. 10*
and having brought the same misery, not only upon himself, but also upon those
who never sinned actually, in the very same manner, and in the same thing, even
upon all flesh, children as well as others. Romans 5. 12:


So that now by means hereof, every Son and Daughter of Adam is conceived in
sin, and brought forth into the world in iniquity, Mat. 25. 41: 2 These. 1. 9:
deprived of that Image of righteousness, holiness, and saving knowledge of
God, in which Adam was at first created, Romans 5. 12. 18: Romans 6. 23. Original
sin.
of a depraved mind and spirit, always lusting after evil. Being (all Saints
as well as others, till regenerated) the children of wrath by nature, dead in
sins and trespasses; as to the enjoyment of Gods special love and favor, and
the cheerful light of his saving countenance, which only is true life and
happin^sse. Psalm. 57. 5* Job. 11. 12. Ephesians. 4. 24. Col. 3. 10. Gen: 5. 6. Ja. 4,
5. Ephesians. 2. 1. 2. 5. Col. 2. 13. Ephesians. 5. 14. Jo. 3. 3. Ps. 16. 1. 63. 3. Natures
light,


Notwithstanding which fall and loss, there remains in man (as his
intellectual nature, and reasonable faculties) by which he acts wisely and
prudently (as to worldly affairs, and humane concernments Luke 16. 8. 1 Cor. 1.
20.
so also) he retains certain vestigia footsteps, marks and impressions of that
moral and eternal Law of righteousness, at first engraven in his heart, by the
finger of the Almighty. Romans 1. 14, 15
So that although (as to everlasting felicity) man be dark Ephesians. 4. 17, 18 Jo.
1. 5. Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 5. 8. Col. 1. 13* 1 Jo. 2. 8: 1 Cor. 2. 14:
and dead by nature, Ephesians. 2. 1:
being under the power of Satan Act. 16. 18.
(the God of this world, 2 Cor. 4. 4. Jo. 12. 31.
whose Kingdom is a Kingdom of darkness, and who rules in men by ignorance,
yet there remains so much light, (with which every man is enlightened that
comes into the world, Ephesians. 4. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 14.
as does lead him to the knowledge of a God, and prompts him to the worship and
service of him; mediately and immediately; immediately to God himself, by some
acts of piety and devotion, tendered by all and every Nation, according to
those discoveries they have of him; and mediately to their fellow Creatures, by
certain acts of duty and charity, as they stand in several respects, Jo. 1. 4.
9.
related to him, and his light accusing or excusing, according to his walking.
Romans 1. 19, 20 Act. 14. 17, 17, 23.
Which light, some men and women (living in sensuality, and indulging to
fleshly pleasures, do as it were detain a prisoner, stifling it, and burying it
under lusts and unrighteous practices, Romans 13. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Pet. 2. 13,
14. Ephesians. 6. 1. 1 Pet. 2. 17, 18, 19.
thereby provoking the Lord to put out that Candle, which he had set up, and
left within them; Romans 2. 15. 27 1 Cor. 11. 14. Sensual life.
and to give them up to hardened hearts, and seared consciences, past feeling;
to commit all manner of wickedness with greediness, Romans 1. 18.
and so to make themselves seven fold more the children of wrath, then they
were before; Job. 18. 5, 6. 24. 17. Prove. 24. 20.
And so continuing finally and impenitently, to run headlong to everlasting
destruction: Romans 1. 24. 26. 28. Ephesians. 4. 19.
carrying in their very bosoms (even in their consciences, that which awakened
at the day of judgment) shall condemn them, needing no other Law or witness.

Others more civillized, by education, 2 Pet. 2. 20.
custom, Romans 2. 5. 2 These. 8, 9.
fear of punishment, Romans ^. 12. to the end of the ^6. v. Rev. 20. 12. Civil
life.
good example, Prove. 21. 6.
wholesome counsel; Jer. 30. 23.
And some by the power and efficacy of Religion, in a way of common
illumination and conviction, (which ordinarily goes along with it, where not
obstinately opposed and hindered) Prove. 22. 15. Deuteronomy. 13. 11. 17. 13. 19, 20,
^1, 12.
walk more evenly, sweetly, usefully then the former: with whom therefore, it
shall be more easy at the day of judgment, then for them.

Yet they and the former, are both in a state of estrangement toward God, and
liable to eternal condemnation; for though the lives of some are less ^inful
then others; yet the heart of all are equally iProv. 12. 15. 6. 23.
o Gal. 6, 7.
* Condition of faith by na(...)ure Ephesians. 2, 312. 4. 17, 18. Prove. 27. 19. Romans
3. 10, 11, 12. Ib. Gal. 3. 10. Ja. 2. 10.
depraved. Heb. 6. 4. Act. 7. 51.
And none is perfectly righteous; Luke 10. 1^. 14. Romans 2. 6 1 Pet. 1. 17. 2
Cor. 9.
without which no man (by the tenor of the first Covenant) can be justified and
saved. (...);
So that all are That as in a Prison, under lock and key, that he cannot get
out.
concluded under sin, Job. 10. 7. Psalm. 89. 48. Isa. 43. 13. Psalm. 49. 7, 8.
Christ held forth.
and none able to redeem or deliver his own soul, much less another* Jo. 5.
15. 16.
All having sinned and come short of the glory of God, (all of all Nations)
both Jew and Gentiles, being under the curse, and subject unto the bondage and
thraldom of Satan for ever.

But now behold and wonder at this great and glorious mystery. The great God
(not willing that all men should perish) Ephesians. 1. 5. 9.
according to the good pleasure of his will (which he had purposed in himself
from all eternity) unaskt, unsought unto (for who, or which of all men or
Angels, (with all their light or knowledge) could have once imagined such a
thing, which was not fully made known to any, either in heaven or earth, till
the time of full accomplishment) Romans 3. 24.
designed and appointed the eternal word, that enlighteneth all men that come
into the world, Ephesians. 3. 10.
with the common light of all nature) 1 Jo. beg:
to come himself into the world to enlighten his people, with the special light
of grace: And (passing by the Angels that fell, and reserving them in chains of
darkness, to the judgment of the great day) to take on him the seed of
Abraham, and to partake with us in our nature (flesh and blood) and to become
man, like unto us in all things Mat. 4 2. Luke 1. 78, 79. Mat. 4. 10. Luke 2.
32. Joh. 8. 12. 2 Cor. 4. 6. Col. 1. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 21. 24.
(sin only excepted).

That so participating of both natures (divine and humane) he might become a
middle man, a fit Mediator between God (by sin offended) and Man (by sin
offending) Mat. 4 2. Luke 1. 78, 79. Mat. 4. 10. Luke 2. 32. Joh. 8. 12. 2 Cor.
4. 6. Col. 1. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 9. Rev. 21. 24.
and also, that knowing our infirmities Heb. 2. 16.
(whereof he was to have experience by those trials and temptations, which he
should suffer in our nature whilst on earth) he might be the more compassionate
toward us; and to succor us, when we are tempted; 2 Pet. 2. 4. Heb. 2. 16.
14. Heb. 2. 17. Heb. 4. 15. Mediator.
and to perform the office of a merciful and faithful high Priest for us in
things pertaining to God and our salvation) in making reconciliation for the
sins of his people. 1 Timothy 2. 5. Heb. 9. 15. and 12. 24. Heb. 4. 15. Heb. 2.
18. Priest. Heb. 2. 17. Contemplation.


And here Oh depths of the love of God, how unsearchable, how unfathomable,
Romans 11. 33. 1 Cor. 2. 9. 1 John 4. 8.
as 1. That a Father, such a Father, the Father of love, yea love it self; (for
God is love,) That such a Father, should give such a Son, the Son of his love,
his loving and beloved, his own and only begotten Son, not having such another,
Jo. 1. 14. 3. 16 1 Jo. 4. 9. Mat. 3. 17. etc.
That he should give him to and for man; Man a worm, nay worse, a sinner, a
sinful man, an enemy, Jo. 3. 16. Romans 5. 6. 10.
a rebel to God, whom he might have justly destroyed, and yet have bin in
himself (as before) blessed and glorious for ever; Man by whose goodness God
is not made better; nor by whose badnesse he is never the worse Job. 22. 3.
Psalm. 16. 2.
O here is misericordia in excelsis, mercy in its heights, in its exaltation,
love without parallel, herein God commended his love to the purpose, Job. 35.
6, 7, 8
which made the multitude of the heavenly Host, sing gloria in excelsis, glory
to that God in the Heavens, that had such respect to men on Earth; who for
their sin deserved to be in hell; That when man (who by sin had departed from
God, the spring and fountain of his happiness and glory, and thereby justly
deserved to be punished with everlasting destruction, from the presence of the
Lord, and the glory of his power. Romans 5. 7, 8.
And being cast out to the loathing of his soul (had he but eyes to see his own
corruption and wretchedness) and no eye pitying him; Luke 2. 13, 14
much less able to help him, That then, even then, when man was ready to
perish, should be the time of love, and the Lord should pass by (or rather
stand still and pity, and cast his skirt of compassion over him, and say unto
him, again, and again, and again live; 2 These. 1. 8, 9
Oh ye Heavens stand amazed, and oh thou earth, (flesh and blood) rejoice and
tremble. Eze. 16. 2, 3, 4, 5.
Especially considering, that when there was none to help, the arm of the Lord
alone Ezekiel. 16. 6, 7, 8.
should bring deliverance unto man; by raising up a mighty salvation for him,
out of the house of his Servant David, Psalm. 2. 11. Heb. 12. 28.
even Christ the Lord, Isa. 63. 5.
the wonderful counselor, the mighty God, (mighty to save) Luke 1. 68. 69
the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace, Luke 2. 11.
who becoming man, came under the same Law, and obligation to obedience with
us. Isa. 63. 1.
And not only so; but also became our sponsor surety, and undertaker for us,
Isa. 9. 6.
to do, suffer and fulfill that for us, which we were no way able to do for our
selves Gal. 4. 4, 5.


For whereas we stood bound to fulfill and keep the whole Law for life, under a
penalty of the curse and death for non-observance: Man losing his strength
(which he should have had by his keeping close to God in obedience) Heb. 7. 22.
I say man losing his power to keep the Law; the Law lost its power to acquit
man. Romans 8. 3, 4. Man's state under the Law.
And of a Law and ministration of life; Genesis 2. 15, 16 Gal. 3. 10.
became a Law and Ministration of death, Romans 5. 6.
And the higher and more powerfully it wrought before (by man's obedience to it)
for comfort and salvation: so the higher and more powerfully it works now (by
its convincing light in the conscience) the more dreadful it is, (by reason of
man's disobedience to terror and wrath, and condemnation. Genesis 37. 1. Gal. 2.
16. 3. 11 Romans 10. 5. Gal. 3. 12. 2 Cor. 3. 7. 2 Cor. 3. 9.


Necessity of Christ.
Now when we were thus without strength, Romans 5. 6.
all of us being thus ungodly, Ib.
Christ, God-man Jo. 1. 14.
for his great love wherewith he loved us, undertook the mannagement of our
quarrel, and became the Captain of our salvation, to bring us to God and glory.
Heb. 2. 10.
For if there had been any Law, way or means, that could have restored man to
life and happiness, (could man by performing and keeping the Law, have
procured his own freedom, and stood just and upright before the bar of Gods
justice) then Christ had come and undertaken the work in vain: Gal. 3. 21. 22.
2. 21.
which once so much as to imagine, were the highest blasphemy against the
wisdom and goodness of God, that ever was conceived.

True it is, could man have (as I may say) justified the Law, by keeping it,
the Law would have justified him, in and by that obedience to it; Romans 10. 5.
Gal. 3. 12.
but now the Law is become weak and unable to justify any man, Romans 8. 3.
though powerful and strong enough, to condemn every man, 2 Cor. 3. 7.
having lost its strength to saving purposes, not through any defect or
inability of its own (for it is holy, just, and good;) Romans 7. 12. Christ
incarnate.
but through the weakness of the flesh (that is) ^ans corrupt nature, who is
not now able to fulfill it. And now behold the Lamb of God which takes away the
sins of the world. Jo. 1. 29. Ephesians 1. 4. 1 Pet. 1. 20. Rev. 13. 8.
For now God (for the accomplishment of that design of free grace and love,
which he had laid, before he laid the foundation of the world) Gal. 4. 4.
when the fullness of time (by him appointed was come) sent his Son, Jo. 1. 1,
2, 3.
him that is the eternal word, by whom he created all things: Heb. 1. 2, 3. Jo.
18.
that essential word, which really, fully, substantially knows, and makes
known, and fulfills his Fathers will; Romans 9. 5. Jo. 17. 2.
him that is God over all, blessed for ever, Phil. 2. 6.
equal with the Father in being, Majesty and glory, Prove. 8. from 22. to 32.
Jo. 17. 24.
him in whom his Father delighted from all eternity, Jo. 3. 16.
his own and his only begotten Son, Jo. 3. 16.
promised before to Adam, Genesis 3. 15.
preached to Abraham, and the Patriarks Genesis 12. 3. Gal. 3. 18. Genesis 18. 18.
26. 4.
typified in the legal sacrifices, Col. 2. 17. Heb. 10. 1.
and prophesied of by Moses, and all the Prophets, Act. 26. 22. and 28. 23.
pointed at by John, Jo. 1. 29.
he sends him, this Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, for sin to condemn
sin in flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in the
Saints, who walk not after the flesh, but after (and according to) the spirit*
Romans 8. 3. 4.
And whereas we were under ^in, Romans 3. 9. Gal. 3. 22.
God made him who knew no sin (in himself) to be sin for us by impu^ation, that
we might be made the righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5. 21.
in like manner. And whereas we (by reason of that sin) were under the curse,
he was made a curse for us, that he might Gal. 3. 13, 14
redeem us from that curse, that so we might inherit the blessing: and
therefore the Lord having laid hold on our surety, who is mighty to save and to
deliver (being man that he might suffer in the same nature and in the behalf
of those that had sinned; Heb. 2. 14.
And God that he might make full satisfaction to God, that was offended. Act.
10. 18.
The Lord I say, having thus laid hold upon our able surety, laid and charged
upon him all our iniquities, bruising and almost breaking his gracious heart,
with the hellish terrors of divine revenge and justice, where he made his
righteous soul an offering for sin. Isa. 53. throughout.
So sharp and hot were the flames thereof, that it made the maker of the whole
creation groan and cry out, my God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.
26.
A speech more dreadful, and fuller of astonishment, then if the whole frame of
heaven and earth (all men and angels, had been tumbling headlong into
everlasting torments; for in this God had not forsaken himself, but his
creature only; but in that, wrath was kindled beyond the finite apprehension
of the creature, here God (as it were) forsook and left himself, Christ being
God, one God with the father, blessed and beloved for ever, (And yet my God, my
God, why have thou forsaken me? And here behold and see (and in seeing weep)
was there ever sorrow, like unto this sorrow, which Christ suffered in the day
of his fathers wrath and fury? And again; behold and see (and in seeing
rejoice) that Christ suffered these sorrows as our surety. Surely he has borne
our griefs and carried our sorrows, he was wounded for our transgressions, he
was bruised for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and
with his stripes we are healed; All we like sheep have gone astray, and he has
laid upon him the iniquities of us all. Isa. 53. 4, 5, 6 Reconciliation:


And thus was God in and with Christ, in his everlasting decree, Covenant and
consent, roconciling the world unto himself 2 Cor. 5. 19.
by that one sacrifice and offering Heb. 1. 1. 10, 10.
, whereby through the eternal spirit Heb. 9. 14.
he offered up his life and shed his blood upon the Cross, a sacrifice for
sin, Heb. 10, 12:
to reconcile us unto God. Ephesians. 2. 16. Col. 1. 20. 24.
For without shedding of blood, there is no forgiveness of sin to be expected;
Heb. 9. 22.
Obedience to the Law (because short and imperfect) cannot effect it; and make
man right and perfect. But now by this one offering up of the body of christ
once for all, he has perfected for ever those that are sanctified, separated
and set apart for God, Heb. 10. 14.
So that Messiah, the Prince of our peace, and the Author of our eternal
salvation, being thus cut off by death, has confirmed the Covenant (made
between him and his Father) having finished the (satisfaction for)
transgression, and made an end of (the reign of) sin, by making reconciliation
for iniquity, and bringing in an everlasting righteousness. Dan. 9. 24. 27
To the end, that whosoever believed in him should not perish, but have
everlasting life. Jo. 3. 15.
So that now there is no condemnation, to them that are (by believing) in
Christ Jesus; Romans 8. 1, 2. New Covenant with Christ.
for the Law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus, has freed them from the
Law of sin and death; for this was the Covenant between Christ and the father,
that when he should have made his soul an offering for sin, the pleasure of the
Lord (by him thereby fulfilled) should take so good effect and so prosper under
his hand that he should prolong his days, and see a seed (a holy seed) he
should see and enjoy, that which his soul traveled for, and should be
satisfied, for all his sufferings. The reward whereof was this, sc. that by the
knowledge of (and faith in) him who in that work, was his Fathers righteous
Servant, he should justify and acquit many Isa. 53. 10, 11, 12.
(even as many as believe in him) from all their sins, Act. 13. 38. 39
by bearing the guilt and punishment of their iniquities in his body on the
tree of the Cross, 1 Pet. 2. 24. Sealed by his Resurrection.
whereof assurance is given, in that he raised him from the dead; Act. 2. 32.
3. 15. 10. 40. 13. 30, 33, 34.
for it was impossible that he should be holden or detained by the grave, Act.
2. 24. Jo. 17. 4. and 19. 30.
who finished the work that his Father had given him to do; Genesis 3. 15.
viz. by suffering the heel of his humanity to be bruised by Satan, that to
break the head and chief of all his designs, which was to keep man captive 2 Timothy 2. 26.
for ever in his Kingdom of darkness. 2 Timothy 2. 26.
So that by suffering death, Christ has destroyed him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil. And thereby delivered them, who through fear of
death were all their life time subject to Satan's tyranny and bondage. Ephesians. 5.
8. Act. 26. 18. Ephesians. 6. 12.
And now though the Devil accuse and lay sin to the charge of Gods Elect, yet
God himself does and must justify them. And whosoever condemns, it is not much
to be valued; for it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again; Col.
1. 13.
for he died for our sins, and rose again for our justification, having thus
wrought the work of everlasting righteousness, Heb. 2. 14, 15 Justification.
whereof the world may be clearly convinced to full satisfaction, in that he is
ascended unto his Father, and we see him no more; Romans 8. 33, 34.
for certainly, had he not satisfied and made full payment and reconciliation,
he must have come again, and died again; yea, and again, he must have been
often offered up, as the sacrifices under the Law were. Romans 4. 24, 25.
But his blood (being the blood of God) Dan 9. 24. Confirmed by his Ascension.
was of more worth, value and efficacy, then the blood of all the sacrifices in
the world. Jo. 16. 8. compared with v. 12. Heb. 10. 1. 2. Act. 20. 28. Heb. 9.
14.


Session in glory.
And now having broken the prison doors of death, and led Satan (who held us
in captivity) captive, Ephesians. 4. 8.
and openly triumphed over him on the Cross, Col. 2. 14, 15. c 1 Pet. 1. 21.
Mat. 22. 44. Act. 2. 30. 33. 36. Heb. 1. 13. Ephesians. 1. 20. Heb. 1. 3. and 10. 1^,
13.
he is now set down at the right hand of God in glory, there to rule until he
has subdued all his enemies; not only to himself (as then he had done) but
also to all his people, Romans 16. 20. Heb. 2. 14, 15. Intercession.
there completing his Priestly office, by appearing in the presence of God,
and making intercession for them. And by his Spirit, as their king Psalm. 2. 6.
Jo. 12. 15. 1 Cor. 15. ^4.
ruling in, and over them, until the time of restitution, and setting all
things right; Act. 3. 21. 2 These. 1. 8, 9, 10. Act. 17. 31. 2 Timothy 4. 1.
when he shall gloriously come, in great majesty, to judge all men, and to
render to every one according to their deservings. Romans 2. 5, 6. The Believers
Confidence.


a Heb. 9. 24. Romans 8. 34. Heb. 7. 24, 25. 1 Jo. ^. 1, 1.
In the mean while, a poor believer (though in and of himself, worthy of
nothing but wrath, and death, and hell Ezra. 9. 6, 7. Dan. 9. 7, 8. Genesis 32. 10
) may through that interest he has in Christ (by believing) come boldly to
God, Heb. 4. 16. 10. 21, 22. Ephesians. 3. 12.
and plead that righteousness, which is every way adequat and proportionate to
divine justice: 1 Jo. 2. 1, 2.
And God in justice (with all humble, yet faithful reverence be it spoken)
must acquit the man; though in himself ungodly, Romans 4. 5. 8. 33.
for payment being made, and satisfaction given by the surety, Heb. 7. 22.
it is but just that the debtor be acquitted and discharged; Romans 4. 24, 25
and shall not the judge of all the world do right; Genesis 18. ^5.
yea, God is just, and will declare his righteousness, by justifying him that
believes in Jesus. Romans 3. 25, 26. Ministers of reconciliation.


Now God the Father having thus reconciled the world unto himself by Christ;
for the farther carrying on of this work, commits the ministry and service of
this reconciliation to his Apostles and Ministers, 2 Cor. 5. 18, 19.
in their successive generations; M. 28. 19, 20.
who as Heralds and Ambassadors authorized and commissionated by him, 2* Cor.
5. 20.
should publish (and in his na e preach) the glad tidings of salvation, this
everlasting Gospel: And to let all men (even the Gentiles) see what hope there
is of their fellowship and participation of the blessings and benefits of this
mystery of godliness; Ephesians. 3. 8, 9. 1. 18.
which from the beginning of the world have bin hid in God, who created all
things by Jesus Christ, Ibid.
no nation, people or person being now excluded or shut out, (the partition
wall of Jewish ordinances being broken down Ephesians. 2. 14.
) and both Jew and Gentile, bond and free, male and female, Gal. 3. 28*
all may come and drink freely of that well of salvation, which Christ has
opened for all persons that will come unto him, Isa. 55. 1, 2. Lu.* 24. 6.
Zech. 13. 1.
) whereof for his part he is so free, (being no niggard of his blood and
merits) that he entreats all to come and partake of. And by his servants making
a full tender of himself, Mat. 11. 28, 29.
as Priest, Prophet and King, to all that will receive him. And to as many as
thus receive him, giving them right, power, and just claim, to become the sons
of God, Jo. 1. 12.
, and heirs of the kingdom Ia. 2. 5.
which he had purchased.

New Sect. -- Ability given to know and receive Christ.
But now man by his fall, being dead, and in the dark, yea, darkness it self,
and so (in his natural state and blindness) unable to receive and comprehend
this glorious and gracious mystery, of being righteous by another
righteousness; Romans 10. 4. 5. 17.
and of being saved by another sufferings Romans 5. 9, 10
(all men, Jews and Gentiles doting, and being fruitlesly set upon, seeking
life and happiness, by their own doings and performances. Romans 10. 3.
) Therefore together with the revelation of this mystery, by the ministry of
his servants, sent for that purpose Christ (over and above that common work of
the Spirit, by which he enlightens every man that comes into the world) gives
unto those, who are given him of the Father, Jo. 17. 6.
and who are to be called according to the eternal decree and purpose which he
purposed in himself, Romans 8. 28. Ephesians. 1. 9. 3. 1^.
and whereby he surely knows, those that are and shall be his 2 Timothy 2. 19.
) to them he gives a mind and understanding to know him, and to receive him,
and to be in him, and to be one with him; who is the true God, and eternal
life. 1 Jo. 5. 20. And tobe in him
And now a believer having Christ (who is eternal life) has eternal life in
and by Christ, 1 Jo. 5. 12.
whereas those who thus have him not, sc. by believing, have not eternal life;
because (what in them lies) they make God a liar (not entertaining and closing
with that testimony, and record that he gave of his son: 1 Jo. 5. 10.
which was; that in him he was well pleased; Mat. 3. 17. 2 Pet. 1. 17.
not only with him (for so he could not but be in justice, forhe had never
offended him) But in him, he was well pleased, being in mercy and loving
kindness Ephesians. 2. 7.
satisfied for the sins of all those, who come unto God by him; Heb. 7. 25.
who therefore are received as sons and daughters; by free grace Ephesians. 5. 8.
and adoption. Ephesians. 1. 5.


Sonship witnessed.
And now that those who thus believe in Christ, might have the witness in
themselves of their Sonship; because they are sons, God sends forth the Spirit
of his Son into their hearts, whereby they are imboldned to call upon God as
Sons, crying, Abba, Father, Gal. 4. 5, 6, 7.
being thereunto the more imboldned, because by the same Spirit they are sealed
and marked out unto the day of redemption: Ephesians. 1. 13.
c Ephesians. 1. 13, 14
And which is given to them as a pledge and earnest in hand, for an assurance
to them of their full inheritance, when their adoption and sonship shall be
completed, by the redemption of their bodies from the power of Corruption, 8
Romans 23.
as now their souls are, from the reign and power of sin, Romans 6. 14.
The same spirit also, in the mean time leading them into all saving truth;
Jo. 16. 13. 1 Jo. 2. 27.
comforting them in all their troubles; Jo. 16. 7. 2 Cor. 1. 4.
and helping them in all their infirmities. Romans 8. 26.
And thus has a Believer in himself, the testimony both of blood and of the
spirit witnessing to and with his spirit, that he is a son and child of God.
Romans 8. 15, 16 Justification witnessed.


But then, as there are three in Heaven, that bear record and give testimony to
this great mystery of godliness, sc. The Father the word and the holy Ghost; 1
Jo. 5. 7.
So there are and must be three witnesses on earth. i. The heart of a true
believer; before the work can be completed, which are three, the Spirit,
Blood, and Water, 1 Jo. 5. 4.
For d Jo. 19. 34.
Christ came not by blood alone, for justification, nor by water only, for
sanctification: but by water and blood; 1 Jo. 5, 6.
both which Sacramentally flowed forth from his precious body, when he hung
upon the Cross, a Sacrifice for our redemption: thereby showing forth the end
of his suffering, viz. both the justification and sanctification of his people.
And therefore he that has not the h 1 Jo. 5. 8. Who ever is a child of God,
by faith in Christ to justify him: Has the Spirit of Adoption to to sanctify
him, which seals to him, his interest in the complete and perfect work of
Redemption from all his spiritual enemies: sin as well as Satan.
witness and testim. within himself of all three has not the witness of
either, Jo. 3. 33, to the end.
he whose heart and conscience cannot witness to him, his faith and believing in
that blood of Christ shed, for his justification, cannot have the witness of
this blood (as water) for clean^ing and sanctification. For Christ sanctifies
none, but whom he justifies, Gal 4. 6. Sanctification witdessed.
and he whose heart cannot witness to him his faith operating on the blood of
Christ (as water) for sanctification, cannot have the testimony of blood, and
his interest in it, for justification; For Christ justifies none, but he also
sanctifies the n. Ephesians. 5. 24. 26. 27.
And he that has not the testimony and witness in himself, of his intrest in
blood and water, for justification and sanctification; cannot have the
testimony, and witness of the spirit, sealing, for these three agree in one,
Titus 11. 2. 11, 22, 13, 14.
and all bear witness to one and the same truth, sc. Christ's coming and dying
to redeem us from sin and all iniquity, Titus 11. 2. 11, 22, 13, 14.
both in the guilt and in the filth of it, both from the condemnation, and from
the domination of sin: For the grace of God which brings salvation and has
appeared to all men, teaches us, that denying ungodliness and world y lusts,
we sh^ud live soberly, righteously, and godlily in this present world, looking
for that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the great God and our Savior
Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar and choice people, zealous of
good works. And for as much as no unclean person, can enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven where the inheritance is. (For know ye not that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God; Be not deceived, neither a 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10.
Fornicators, nor Idolators, nor Adulterers, nor Effeminate, nor Thieves, nor
Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor Extortioners, shall inherit the
Kingdom of God and of Christ. For there shall in no wise inherit there any
thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works abomination or makes a lie.
Rev. 21. 27.
Therefore Christ (who has purchased his Church) does also purify it, and
cleanse it that he might present it unto himself a glorious Church, without
spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without
blemish, Ephesians. 5. 27.
For they are redeemed from their vain Conversation, which they learned from
their Fathers, 1 Pet. 1. 18.
and do not (after they have once learned Christ, and have heard him, and are
taught by him in truth, and as the truth is in him, Bph. 4. 20, 21
) they do not walk as other people, walking in the vanities of their darkened
minds, Ephesians. 4. 18.
(being through the ignorance that is in them, Ib.
strangers from the life of God, Ephesians. 4. 23.
But being renewed in the spirits of their mind* Ephesians. 2. 10.
and the Image of God being restored in them; by the power of their new
creation in and by Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 4. 22: Col. 3. 8.
they put off as to their former conversation, and manner of life, the old man,
which is corrupt, by deceitful lusts formerly mentioned; Ephesians. 5. 4*
But they now also put off all this, lying and defrauding, and stealing and
bitterness, and wrath and anger, and clamor, and evill-speaking, and foolish
talking, and unfitting jesting: And putting on the new man they now use such
language that do edify and built up others in holiness, and such as ministers
grace to the hearers. Ephesians. 4. 29.
Their conversation being now without Covetousness; Heb. 13. 5.
and such as becomes the Gospel. Phil. 1. 27:
And according to their hopes and expectation, 1 Jo. 3. 3.
as knowing that though God of free grace chose them (from the beginning) to
salvation, 2 Timothy ^. 10:
yet the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, must be by and
through the sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth, 2 These. 2.
13.
and saithfull obedience; Romans 16. 26. Gal. 5. 6.
And now acknowledging no other Sovereign but Christ, and acted by a spirit of
love, 1 Jo. 4. 19.
as sons they live to him, who died for them, 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15.
being contented to be, or to be accounted any thing, so Christ may be
glorified in them and by them, whether by life or by death, Phil. 1. ^0, 21.
And having no confidence in the fesh, or fleshy privileges, they worship God
in the spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6.
Counting all things loss and dung in comparison of the excellency of the
knowledge of Christ Jesus their Lord, that they might obtain him, and be sound
in him, not having their own righteousness which is of the law (or by the law
of working) but that righteousness which is by believing in Christ, the
righteousness which is of God by faith. Phil. 3. 8, 9.
And although they know that whiles they are in the flesh they shall not be in
all things perfect, Prove. 14. 16. Eccles. 7. 20. 1 Jo. 1. 8. 10. Psalm. 19. 12
Ia. 3. ^.
yet forgetting that which is behind (that to which they have already attained)
as not answerable to their longings, they press forwards more and more toward
perfection, Phil. 3. 13, 14
(grieving under their imperfections, and longing to be disburthened 2 Cor. 5.
1. 4.
) until they reach the mark they aim at, the price of their high calling
whereunto God has called them in and by Christ Jesus, Phil. 3. 14.
desiring in the mean time so to know him) by an operative and effectual
knowledge (and the power of his resurrection, and to have communion and
fellowship with him in his sufferings, that being conformed to him in his
death, Phil. 3. 10.
they might by all or any attain their part and portion in the blessed
resurrection. Ib. 11. A Christians engagement by Baptism.


And to this duty (of holy walking) a believer holds himself bound by his very
profession; for having by baptism put on Christ and Christian profession, Gal.
3. 27.
he thereby engages himself (as the Jew by circumcision to keep the whole law
Gal. 5. 3.
) so he by baptism to believe, observe and keep the whole Gospel, Gal. 3. 27.
Romans 6. 3, 4, 5, 6.
That very ordinance in its intent purport and signification; directing him,
and pointing out unto him, his duty: as one specially interested in the ends
and benefits of Christ's death, thereby sealed and signified Romans 6. per tot.
. So that he does and must conlude, (that where sin had abounded and reigned in
him before, even unto death; that there now grace and favor (through Christ's
righteousness) does reign much more to eternal life Romans 5. 10, 21
) yet he dares not (he may not) still continue in his sin, that grace might
still abound, Romans 6. 1.
Nay he concludes (as it is indeed) it is impossible. For how shall they that
are dead to sin, (and so have no more to do with it) live any longer therein:
Romans 6. 2.
for they know (if they know any thing) that as many as are baptized into Jesus
Christ, and thereby baptized into his death, burial and resurrection; are
baptized and thereby engaged, not only to the name, profession and calling of
Christ and Christianity, and to own him in these particular actings; But also
(if they expect to find real benefit, by the worth and merit of them) that
they find the real and efficacious fruit of all these powerfully by the
spirit working in them. Romans 6. per totum.
So that he concludes the death of Christ to be the death of sin. And the
resurrection of Christ, the resurrection of the life of his grace and holiness,
Reckoning himself now no longer debtor to live unto the flesh and its
corruption, but debtor to live unto the spirit and its holy motions. Romans 5 10,
11, 12, 13 Often use of Lords Supper.


And having always an eye to the great love of Christ, who by his death and
blood shedding, has thus redeemed him, He cannot but often think upon him,
and thankefully remember him, in and by that ordinance which he appointed in an
especial manner (a little before his death) for that very purpose, Luk 22. 19.
1 Cor. 11. 24, 25.
wherein he publicly owns him, and makes profession to the world of his faith
and hope, and rejoicing in him. 1 Cor. 11. 26.


And thus Reader, thou have a little of much more that might be written of this
great mystery of godliness, in which thou have a rude delineation of Gods
method in restoring fallen man The grounds and ends of this Mystery of
Godliness thus ordered in a way of Freegrace.
into his favor, through the whole progress, whereof (as is easily
perceiveable) there runs a continued line and cord of free grace and mercy,
thus contrived and ordered by him for a threefold reason.

The first reason, respects God himself, who has ordered it in this manner,
is; that he alone might have all the praise, the glory, Jer. 9. 23. 1 Cor. 1.
29, 30, 31, etc.
If salvation had been attainable by the law of working, man might have had
somewhat whereof to have boasted and gloried in himself. For although, that
working had come infinitely short in proportion to the reward proposed; And
although that reward therefore, was but upon a free promise. (And so only to be
claimed) Not through the worthiness of the work, or worker. And although that
work had been performed, but by strength received from him; by whom the reward
was promised, yet if man had performed the condition (on his part required) the
Lord would have accounted it, as happiness earned, and would have given in the
reward, as due in by (and for) working; And would have allowed him in his
glorying, Romans 4* 2*
But you see clearly, that that way of salvation is quite shut up; For by the
works of the law (and by obedience thereunto,) can no man be justified, Ps.
143. 2. Acts 13. 39. Romans 3. 20.
and therefore has the Lord concluded, and shut up all under sin, that by
saving those who are saved by free, rich, and undeserved, and unearned grace
and mercy, he might take away all matter and occasion from man of boasting, and
glorying in any work, or thing done, or performed, in or by himself, by any
strength or power, how ever received, which he might call his own, Romans 3. 27.
and that he that glories, might glory in the Lord, that he is a God that
exercises loving kindness in the earth, and that there is none like unto him,
that pardons iniquity, and passes by the transgression of the remant of his
heritage (his chosen heritage,) and who retains not his anger for ever,
because he delights in mercy, Jer. 9. 23. 1 Cor. 1. 19, 30,
and in mercy has freely given his own Son (as before) to do that for us,
which we were no ways able to do for our selves: Romans 3. 24, 25.
viz. to fulfill all righteousness in his own person for us, that we only
beliving in him (as to the justification of our persons, and acceptance with
God) might not perish, but have everlasting life. Romans 3. 16. 1 Jo. 5. 10.
Mark. 16. 16. A farther manifestation of free grace.


Nay, a little farther; to set forth the fullness, and freeness of this grace,
so free is it, that whereas, this righteousness of Christ is made ours, only
by our closing with, and receiving Christ, Jo. 1. 12.
as tendered to us by the Father, and to those ends and purposes (before
mentioned) that very grace or hand (as I may so call it) whereby we do receive
him, is freely given to us.

For whereas all men have not faith 2 These. 3. 2.
(without which it is impossible to please God, and to be accepted with him
Heb. 11. 6.
) and without which no man can receive and close with Christ Jesus for
righteousness, and life, and whom whosoever has not, has not life) the Lord
himself, gives faith it self to the heirs of salvation (the chosen and called
according to his purpose Romans 8. ^8.
) whereby they do believe. Ephesians. 2. 8. Phil. 1. 29.
And whereas they are naturally unwilling to deny themselves, and to come to
Jesus Christ, he makes them (who of themselves are not able so much as to have
a good thought 2 Cor. 3. 5.
willing and able, Ib. Phil. 1. 13. Heb. 12. beg. 2.
and whereas their faith, is weak, he strengthens it; 1 Pet. and 5. 10.
And when their faith is ready to fail, he secures it, Luke 22. 32.
nay, whereas there is an utter inability in man to this saving work; and so
much reluctance in corrupted nature against it; the Lord puts forth Exercises
more then common and ordinary power, to accomplish this work in the hearts of
his children, not only power, but great power, yea, exceeding great power; even
the same by which Jesus Christ was raised from the dead, which is no common and
general power. Ephesians. 1. 19. 20. 2 These. 1. 11.
So that there is such a change wrought in a believer that the work is called
(as it is) there being none of this in man before) a new creation. Ephesians. 2. 10.
2. Cor. 5. 17. Gal. 6. 15.
And the man a new man; ib. Ephesians. 2. 15 4. 24. Col. 3. 10:
And he has a new heart, Ezekiel. 36. 26.
and a new Spirit; Ezekiel. 11. 19.
whoever attains this has another spirit then he had before. And all this is
freely given them of God, 1 Cor. 11. 4.
and of mere grace; that God might have all the glory and man might cry Grace
grace; unto it; Romans 4. 16. 5. 20. Zech. 4. 7.
For grace is free, else grace were not grace; Romans 11. 6.
To God alone therefore be glory.

A second reason why the great mystery of godliness is thus contrived,
respects the Saints (true Christians it is for their security) certain attainment
to, and establishment in the glory and happiness proposed. God at first, when
he had made man good and s Luke 2. 14. Ephesians. 1. 6. 3. 21. Saints security. Qua
supra.
happy, left him to himself, and to his own freedom, not engaging in any sort,
to preserve him in that condition; And man showed himself a creature, though
good yet mutable; But now Jesus Christ, the second Adam, 1 Cor. 15. 45. 47, 49.
and the head of this new creation, has entered into a Covenant with God, and
made an agreement with the father established upon better terms, and better
promises; Qua supra.
for whereas the Condition of the first covenant and agreement between God and
us for happiness, was exact obedience to be performed in our own persons: Man
(you see) made righteous and holy (and without sin in him, to prompt him to
disobedience) yet did not keep himself so, but irrecoverably fell (for ought
that he could do to help himself) from that blessed Condition. And if he
could have helped himself (which was impossible) he that fell once might fall
away again, and so could never be secured of his happiness.

c Job 4. 18, 19.
But now (contrary to the custom among men) A tenure in Capite is better then
fee-simple. To have and to hold salvation by Christ our head, is better (more
secure and lasting) then when in our own keeping, God will not trust us, nor
Christ will not trust us with our selves, nor with our righteousness (by which we
shall stand upright and in favor with them) any longer, if our righteousness
were in our selves, (supposing we were redeemed from our former Captivity) yet
if when we were truly good, and had no experience of sin and corruption in us,
we did then fail; much more should we do so now. But it now being in Christ
(who is more then a bare Creature) and now become our surety and undertaker, he
will keep it for us. 1 Pet. 1. 3. 4. 5.
and us for it. And will not fail us. Heb. 13. 5. 2 Cor. 12. 9.
So that now the promise of righteousness, life and salvation is sure to all
the seed of Christ. Believers, I will not be long here neither, f Romans 4. 16.
lest my book should swell, (but reader) blessed God for Jesus Christ, and be
thankful.

Man's strong engagement to duty.
And now lastly (to come to a conclusion) and wherein I will be brief: This
great mystery is thus ordered; That the Lord might thereby more sweetly (and
in a way agreeable to his own nature) draw man unto himself; And more strongly
engage him, to him. Jer. 31. 3. Hos. 11. 4.
There Is nothing so sweetly freshly and strongly draws and ingages a rational
and ingenuous nature, as love and mercy. And by how much the greater the
Distance and disproportion was between the parties deferring; And by how much
the greater the misery and unworthiness of him was, to whom the mercy was
extended; by so much the greater, sweeter, stronger, powerful and prevailing
is that grace and mercy showed. Ezekiel. 6. beg.


Reader, enlarge these things in thy meditations, till thy heart be warmed, and
then admire, and adore, and love, and serve; 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15
And conclude, and say, withodt Contriversie great is the mystery of
Godliness. God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen of
angels precheth unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into
Glory.

From whence we expect him to come to judge both quick and dead, Act. 17. 13. 2 Timothy 4. 1.
Even so, come Lord Jesus come quickly. Rev. 22. 20.


MYSTERY. BABYLON THE GREAT, OR, The Great Mystery of Ungodliness DISCOVERED.

From the Writings and Speakings of a Company of Spiritual Juglers, called
QVAKERS.

WHEREIN Their Cheats are manifested to the World, for the reducing of those
they have seduced, and the establishment of such as by Gods mercy are not yet
taken in their Snares.

By Ra: Farmer, a Servant of that Jesus Christ that was crucified at Jerusalem,
above sixteen hundred years ago.

LONDON, Printed in the Year. MDCLV.

A Prefatory word of advice, to the seduced Followers of the seducing QVAKERS.
Friends,
DId you never see Hocus Pocus playing his prancks of Legerdemain, and
deceptions of the sight, persuading people they see that which is not? such
spiritual Juglers, (Juglers in spiritual things) are come among you, and if you
look not to your selves, you will be cheated by these, worse then by others;
there you lose a little money, here your souls; if I have endeavored to
discover them, that you may know and avoid them, I hope you will not be angry.
If you be, and be so long, you are more then angry, you are mad. And its common
to mad men to be offended with their Physician, yet he must not cease his work.
It was the great blessing God gave to mankind at first to have one language,
that all might understand one another; for words are the Interpr^ters of the
mind: and heretofore, for the proud attempts of the sons of men, God came down
and confounded their languages; so that though they meant the same things, and
things retained the same names and nature; yet by the obscurity of their newly
gotten expressions, they understood not one another meaning, and so (upon the
matter) were as bad as dumb one unto another: So that when the Brick-layer called
for mortar, the Labourer apprehended a trowel, and when he called for his rule,
he would bring him a hammer; this would make mad work you will say, and so it did,
it brought all to a Babel, confusion. And now, since by the blessings of the
Almighty, this confusion of tongues is pretty wellhealed, by the reconciling of
languages, and bringing words to some commonly received significations, and
intimations: what do those men do, but build Babylon again; who have brought up
a juggling trick of speaking one thing, and yet meaning another; this is the
practice of the Quakers, and that discovery of it, is the subject matter of
this following discourse: And this I drive at in it, to let thee know, that
many times (most times) when they speak of God, and Christ, and Scriptures,
etc. They do not mean that God, and Christ, and Scriptures, that thou do, and
other men, (wise men, godly men) do. They do not mean a God, and Christ, and
Scriptures without thee, but within thee only. It Is very plausible, and seems
to have much piety and godliness in it; and what will any man dare to speak
against God within us, and Christ within us, and Scripture within us, and
Ordinances within us? they are sure Seducers, false Prophets, idol-shepheards,
these will never convert souls. They in the letter, and they speak only the
letter; here is no life, no spirit; no, no, come hither, come and eat; here is a
new Tree of Knowledge; eat, you shall be as Gods; nay Gods, equal with him,
allsufficient in your selves: A Light, a God, a Christ, Scriptures, Ordinances,
all within you; and so within you, as these without you are not worth looking
after, they be carnal, fleshly* yourimagined God beyond the Stars, and your
carnal Christ, which you would make appear through your Heathenish Philosophy
is utterly denied; you shall see by whom and to whom these words are vomited.
Friends, I Will only say thus muck, for I undertake not the confutation o so much
as one of their opinions, nor I think need I. To discover them is sufficient to
render them abborred to all Christian ears; I Will only say thus much Though God,
and Christ, and Scriptures, and Ordinances be, and be never so glorious and
excellent, yet if they be not in thee, in their life and power and
efficatiously reforming and conforming virtue, they are to thee as if they were
not at all, or worse: but when ever they shall be in thee, let the measures and
degrees be never so high, they will (and must) also be without thee, and shall
never be indistinctly the same with thee. Waders, you have need revive your old
principles received from the word of truth; and look about you; deceivers are
come into the world, and would cast a mist before your eyes, that you may not
perceive their end. They often say, they have somewhat to deliver which the
world is not yet fit to receive; I suppose I have discovered their meaning, if
they dursi speak out; for thy most profitable reading whereof (besides a few
brief directions hereafter given thee, concerning their manner of answering to
the queries or questions proposed unto them) let me here a little admonish and
inform thee. In all inquires after truth, when a matter or question is proposed
or demanded; he that is to answer (if he be willing to have the truths
discovered) does either affirm and grant the question or deny it, or in the
third place (if there be need) distinguish and explain some words that may be
doubtful, or have a double meaning: And accordingly make his answer. There is
no fourth way. But to be wholly silent, or to shuffle and avoid the question, by
impertinent matter, that is not to the thing purposed. And such men that shall
take this and their usual way and course, are to be accounted as
prevaricators, impostors and deceivers. But is there no fourth way did I cry,
but silence and shuffling. There are a generation of men have found out that
way of equivocating and juggling even now mentioned, sc. To speak one thing and
mean not the same thing, which the words usually and in most men's sense and
construction signify. Now observe, in all their answers, these quakers neither
grant nor deny nor distinguish; But constantly betake themselves for one of
these two refuges of liers.

Either to avoid answering, by talking nothing to the purpose. Or if they do
affirm or deny, (which is very seldom) their words have another meaning then
is intended thou in the question. By the help of this observation thou may
trace and perceive? Then in all their wrightings and arguings, where any such
is controverted or debated by or with them: And much in all their speakings.
And if thou be now deceived by them, the fault is much nay, most, if not
altogether thine own, who will so easily be led blindfold by such palpable
deceivers, impostors, juglers. This first onset of theirs is but to unsettle
thee, from off thy old. If thou hold here a while, they will come and complete the
work hereafter. But I hope the Lord will stir up the zeal of our Magistrates
to stop the mouths of blasphemers though they have regard as is fit to tender
consciences however Reader do thy work. And i will indeavoure to do mine and the
Lord make us all able, wise vigilant, faithful and succesfull. So prays he,
who is,

The furtherer of thy faith and the helper of thy joy.

RA: FARMER.


And now Reader, having laid before thee, this great mystery of Godliness
from the un-erring truth of the eternal word, revealed in the scriptures. I
shall discover unto thee a great mystery of ungodliness, a mysteric of
iniquity, and of abomination; even that abomination which makes desolate,
and destroys all Christian Religion from the writings and speakings in a
generation of men called Quakers.

And here (in ^he first place) I shall communicate unto thee; that which I
confess was the first ground, of the discovere of this my sterie unto me, and
that you shall find in a beok intitl'ed.

A Confession of Faith, of the several Congregations, or Churches of Christ in
London, which are commonly (though unjustly) as they say, called Anabaptists.
Unto which is added, Hearts-bleedings for Professors abominations; Or, a
faithful general Epistle, from the same Churches: Presented to all who have
known the way of truth, forewarning them to flee security, and careless
walking under the profession of the same, discovering some of Satan's wiles,
whereby also wanton persons and their ungodly ways are disclaimed. The fifth
impression.

Which Book is signed in the name, and by the appointment of the aforesaid
several Churches meeting in London. By William Kiffen, John Spilsberry, and
twelve more of them.

And these men I look upon as competent for this discovery, for several
reasons; first, in respect of their residence and habitations, sc. London, a
place where (if any where) all Religions, Opinions, and Professions are to be
found; secondly, the parties themselves, sc. the Anabaptists, a sort of men in
many things (many of them) near of kin, I charge no man in particular; but
generally they have bin a sort of people much given to Enthusiasmes, and
immediate Calls, and Revelations, and apt to entertain fantastic dreams and
fancies. And concerning them, I fully concur with that precious Servant of
Christ (now in heaven) Mr. Cuthbert Sidenham, in an Epistle of his before his
excellent Book concerning Infant Baptism, and singing of Psalms; where speaking
of the Opinion of Anabaptists denying Infants Baptism, An opinion (says he)
which has been always ominous, and of a powerful strange influence,
accompanied with the most dangerous retinue of errors, since the first Embryo
of it was brought forth; whether by a judgment of God, or from its natural or
secret connection with other principles of darkness, I will not determine. Only
God has showed some black Characters on it, in every Nation where it has
prevailed; though we cannot but say, many Saints are innocently under the power
of it. Thus far he.

Now these men therefore, both in respect of the convenience of the place, but
especially in the likelihood of acquaintance and familiarity with this kind of
people, who mostly have been Members of their Congregations, and have departed
from them (which may be one of the black works before spoken of) these
Anabaptists, may have probably plowed with their heyfer, and so may best
unfold their riddle, and discover their ungodly Mystery, within their general
Epistle (before mentioned) after some little Preface, they do in these words.

To all the Churches os God, sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints,
with all that in every place profess the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both
theirs and ours.
Beloved Brethren,
HAving these many years through the grace and free-mercy of our God, been kept
in the profession of the Name of Christ, contained in the holy Scriptures of
the Prophets and Apostles, and findding the exceeding benefit and comfort of
walking with God, in some measure suitable to what he has made known unto us,
and well knowing that we are called to live in the last ages of the world,
wherein iniquity abounds, and the love of many waxes cold; as likewise
considering those peculiar times spoken of in 2 Timothy 3. 1. etc. are come upon
us, wherein men who sometimes have made a large profession of God and
godliness, are turned aside to commit all manner of uncleanness with greedines,
having turned the grace of our Lord Jesus into lasciviousness, calling darkness
light, and light darkness, by means of whom the way of truth is evil spoken
of, and many poor souls through temptations, ready to quit their professions,
and to be taken with their snares: We thought it our duty to declare our utter
dislike, abhorring and detestation of all such evil persons and ways, who
shall under pretense whatsoever plead for, or practice any way of ungodliness.

And having been through the goodness of our God, enabled to discern the secret
and subtle designs and snares of Satan, which he has laid to entrap poor
souls in, by carrying them from step to step, until they have bin wholly
captivated in his snares, and fitted by him to do him service.

We could do no less, then according to that measure of light we have
received from the Lord, to discover his wiles and stratagems, and to caution
all that profess the fear of the Lord, to watch over their own hearts and
ways, and to take heed lest they fall into the same condemnation.

For this we have found, that that way which God in his infinite wisdom
takes to bring souls unto himself by, viz. the presenting unto men his great
love, in giving Jesus Christ to suffer death, and his great salvation to all
that believe in his name; Satan that old serpent, through his instruments,
under the specious pretenses of beating men off from all false rests,
endeavors with all his strength to oppose and make void, persuading the sons
and daughters of men, that what is declared concerning the death of Christ at
Jerusalem, and his bearing our iniquities in his own body upon the Cross, is
but a mere History and shadow, the Scriptures are but a letter, and the
Ordinances of God but fleshly forms, thereby laboring to beget in the peoples
minds a contempt and slight esteem of Christ, his Word and Ordinances; and
that he might cheat them to purpose, tells them of a God within, and a Christ
within, and a Word within, and that God and Christ, and they are one, without
any true distinct knowledge of the true meaning of that which is expressed,
whereby poor souls with great and swelling words of vanity, triumph in a great
mystery of mere nothing but emptiness and confusion, speaking things whereof
they know not, and many poor souls knowing such expressions to be Scripture
phrases, do greedily embrace them, without a true, distinct, and clear
understanding the sense of what is spoken, having the persons of those who
speak such language in great admiration, as the chief, tender, charitable,
knowing, high and spiritual Christians: Whereas indeed although the words
spoken by them, are many of them true in themselves, (without which Satan could
not so effectually deceive) as that God, and Christ, and the Spirit dwell in
us, and that God, and Christ, and the Saints are one: Yet are we to understand
this union to be only in a way of relation, through participation of the same
Spirit, and this dwelling to be only in respect of grace, and powerful
operation and influence, working in the hearts of believers, according to the
tenor of the New Covenant, in making men holy and humble, purifying their
hearts, causing them to walk in all good conscience toward God and man; all
which by them is trampled under foot, and another kind of union, and
indwelling, driving at in their discourses, which although covertly expressed,
until by craft and subtilty, they have prepared the hearts of simple and
unstable souls, to receive whatsoever they shall suggest unto them, yet then is
openly discovered, being indeed the root of all bitterness and desperate
profaneness and blasphemy, that can be imagined in the world; for from thence
they conclude, that themselves are God, and Christ, and what God is, they are;
and what they are, God is; for say they, there is no spirit but one, and so
deny any created Angel or Spirit, holding upon the same account the living soul
in man to be uncreated, and so consequently to be God himself, and not created
by God. Now this being the groundwork of their delusion, the building is
answerable.

For first, concluding the reasonable soul to be God.

Secondly, they affirm that this soul being clothed with their humane bodies,
or flesh, is Christ, or God in flesh; hereupon they imagine that Jesus Christ
spoken of in the Gospel, as being born of the Virgin Mary, accused by the Jews,
delivered by Pilate to be crucified, dying at Jerusalem upon the Cross, rising
the third day, and ascending into Heaven, is only to be understood
Parabolically or Figuratively, speaking of one thing and intending another,
pointing at and prefiguring a work only within us, conceiving the Virgin Mary,
the Jews, Pilate, Jerusalem, the Cross, Christ rising and ascending, spoken
of in the Scriptures, to be all within them, and no such thing substantially or
in truth without.

As they conclude all things spoken of Christ, to be but in a Typical or
Figurative manner, intending and typifying out this God within, or God
incarnate in their flesh, still meaning their reasonable souls, conceiving this
to be the substance of all those shadows; so also upon this ground, they are
forced to conclude the whole New Testament, with all the Doctrines, Laws,
Rules, and Administrations of the same, to be but a shadow or figure, holding
forth a substance within. As for instance, Moses and Aaron being but figures of
the substantial Savior, and Priest to come; so the administrations of Moses as
Mosaical, were but fleshly and carnal administrations to be abolished when the
substance was come, they being only shadows of good things to come; in like
manner do they understand Christ in his Person, to be but a shadow of Christ
within, and all his heavenly and spiritual Gospel to be but a letter and carnal
History, put to an end and abolished, when they once come to apprehend that the
substance of all is within, they coming also to believe that the soul is God,
do thence infer that they are perfect, and that they are in an happy estate as
can be; for this they urge, 1 Cor. 15. 24. to the 28 verse, to show when the
Kingdom is delivered up to the Father, and then Christ cease his
Mediatorship, and consequently all his New Testament cease: Now they
conclude, that all this is accomplished, when they come to discern there is but
one Spirit, and their soul, that Spirit which is God, and then they are in the
possession of all things.

And seeing that the Scripture declares, that before our full possession of God
and glory, there must be a temporal death, and resurrection of the body, and
eternal judgment, they upon the former grounds judging themselves already
glorified, do understand this death of the body in all such Scriptures
mystically, and that the resurrection and eternal judgment are passed already
in the soul, as Hymeneus and Philetus did, 2 Timothy 2. 18. compared with* 1 Timothy
1. 19. Thence also they conclude, that faith and justification by Christ,
together with all the Ordinances of Christ, are abolished as fleshly forms,
like unto Christ that appointed them; above and without all which, they
triumphantly (in their own fancies) live when they once have attained this
supereminent life (as they sp^ak) as being in the full fruition of God,
comprehending that infinite being, (which they blasphemously affirm themselves
to do) intruding themselves into things they are altogether ignorant of.
Hereupon it is, that they, as Peter says, scoff at any second coming of
Christ, 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. and mock at the holy Scriptures, those heavenly Oracles
of God, denying them to be the Word of God, or that Law by which they ought to
confirm their lives* conceiving and uttering that there is no Law nor Rule, but
what is in man, his light being his only Law, that is to say, whatever that
spirit that dwells within (which they call God within) dictates to them, that
ought to be done by them, strengthening themselves with this opinion, that there
is no sin, but what contradicts a man's own light (which is a man's only Law) and
sin is only sin to him that thinks it so, and that there is no Hell, but
that torment that men sustain through crossing their own light, which God knows
is nothing but thick darkness.

And then they proceed to discover the wretched effect of this damnable
doctrine, in the unclean lives and conversations of the followers of them,
which (by the practices spoken against) I apprehend to be intended against the
Ranters (that abominable crew of Religious Villains) pardon the expression. And
I confess these practices are the most natural issue of those opinions, and
do most freely flow from them, especially from the tail or hinder part on it.
But when I had read some of the Quakers papers, I found them building upon the
same foundation, and making use of the same principles and materials. And I
could not but observe the artifice and skill of Satan, like a cunning workman,
employing the same stuff to several (outwardly seeming) ends, and purposes,
but in the effect and issue the same, viz. destruction, which is his proper
work and business (for the Ranters make use of them) to boulster up themselves
in all manner of lusts and sensuality, without scruple of conscience: And the
Quakers improve them, to seeming holiness and mortification, to secure
themselves in a proud humility, (which not repented of) casts down to Hell as
readily as the former.

And here, Reader, let us make a stand awhile, and consider; what say thou, Is
not here a mystery of iniquity? Is not here the head of the Serpent, that old
Serpent, that deceived our first Parents in Paradise, to the fall, and (what in
him lay) utter ruin of all mankind? And is not this the tail of that great red
Dragon, that draws and casts down a third part of the stars of Heaven to the
Earth? Nay, is not this both head and tail, and body, and all, of that
arch-enemy of Gods glory, and man's everlasting salvation? Is not here a deadly
blow given to the whole new Creation, head and members, Christ and his whole
body? Nay, is not here proud Luciferian violence, and attempt made against the
most high and glorious Majesty of God himself? The truth is, Reader, Here is an
Axe laid to the root of all Religion, Christian and other, but especially
Christian. Here Is God, and Christ, and all his Ordinances, and holy
Institutions, laid level and over-turned. Consider it a little, I shall observe
it to thee, under these three heads. They offer violence to God himself, as
God. Secondly, to Jesus Christ. And thirdly, to all his Ordinances and
Institutions.

First, They offer violence to God himself, as he is God. For whereas the
Scriptures affirm, that God is not man, nor does or acts as man; which even the
witch Balaam did acknowledge, Numb. 23. 19. And the Lord himself asks, Isa. 40.
18. To whom will ye liken God? or what likeness will you compare him to?
having in the former verse said, that all Nations before him (or compared to
him) are as nothing; and that they are counted to him less then nothing and
vanity: And whereas he says, Isa. 42. 8. that he will not give his glory to any
other, much less his Essence (which indeed to be impossible, may be evinced by
many arguments:) And to those that know (or rather being no^ able to know
fully) do admire and adore that incomprehensible Majesty, it is not needful:
Now these bold wretches, worms of Earth, Nay, in this Devils, and fiends of
Hell, (for this was Satan's sin, to be like God) they affirm, themselves are
God, and what they are, God is, and what God is, they are, and that they are
equal with God, and one with him in nature. And this they speak in respect of
their souls and spirits, upon this ground, sc. That there is but one spirit. If
this be not Devilish and Satanisme, what is? Nay, is it not worse and more
horrid pride then that of Lucifer? for he did but say in his heart, I will
ascend into Heaven, I will exalt my self above the stars of God, I will
ascend above the heights of the Clouds, I will be like the most high. But this
will not be only like, but the same with the most high God. I undertake not
the confutation, and I suppose I need not, and I hope you look upon it with
abomination, and detestation of spirit; Thus they offer violence to the Majesty
of God himself, of whom we are not to think, but with reverence and holy fear.

Secondly, they offer violence to Jesus Christ, God over all blessed for ever,
they make him, who was and is the great design of the Fathers glory, by whom he
made the world, and through whom he redeemed mankind (as is set forth in the
mystery of Godliness) but a mere fancy, but a manifestation for a time, a
Christ without us, and but a type of them who are Christ. For Christ is God and
Man, and their souls (or spirits) are God, and their bodies are flesh, and
these two together is Christ incarnate, Christ in them, who are the substance,
or chief thing typified and intended. And therefore when the substance comes
and is, and appears in them, then the shadow, the Jerusalem, Christ (as if both
cannot stand together) vanishes and ceases. Do n't ye tremble Christians at
this horrid blasphemy, and are not these accursed?

And then thirdly and lastly, they offer violence (and this must necessarily
follow) to all the Ordinances and holy Institutions of Jesus Christ, and the
Gospel. For it is fit, that as Jesus Christ in his own person, is but a shadow
of Christ within, and when this Christ appears, that must give place: So all
the Ordinances and ways of worship outwardly are but types and shadows of the
true and spiritual worship within, (as if they neither could stand together)
must cease when that outward Christ cease.

For as Moses and Aaron, and all their sacrifices, were but types of that
Christ, and ceased (Priests, and Ministers, and Services, and all their
Ceremonial Ordinances) when that Christ appeared, and died at Jerusalem: So
that Christ, and all his Institutions, are types of this spiritual Christ; and
when this Christ appears, that Jerusalem Christ, and all his Ministers, and
Administrations cease, and are no longer useful to these Christ's and Gods
incarnate.

Now beloved Reader, if thou be a Christian, what say thou, Is not here a
Mystery of ungodliness to the purpose? where was it hatched think thou?
could any less then all the Devils in Hell, keep a Conventicle to contrive and
plot this black and Hellish treason against the Majesty of God, and Christ, and
the Gospel.

Oh ye Christian Magistrates, who rule for Christ, (or should do) and to whom
you shall one day give account of your Government, how ye have ruled for him,
and how tender ye are of his honor. Where is your zeal become for Christ and
his glory, and his Gospel? Had you but so much zeal and honesty as a Jewish
Magistrate, you would tear your clothes off at these blasphemies of these
wretched souls, that make themselves equal with the almighty God, and make
level with themselves, (nay below themselves) Jesus Christ and the Gospel, He
and his Ordinances being but Types and Shadows, and they the substance.

Sir, honored Sirs, though God and Christ looks not that you should tear off
your clothes (and who can scarce forbear to manifest this indignation against
these blasphemies; certainly they expect that you manifest it, by suppressing
and stopping the mouths and pens of the blasphemers. Good Sirs, if these
wretched souls have such hellish liberty of conscience, to think thus; let them
not (upon pretense of liberty of conscience) be so audaciously blasphemous to
write and speak thus.

And O ye Servants of the Lord, my Fathers and Brethren in the Ministry of our
dear and ever-blessed Jesus; you that are the Pastors of the Lords flock, and
the Watchmen for the sheep of his pasture, lift up your voice and spare not
(neither your selves nor others) cry aloud to all your Congregations, and
fore-warn them that they be not a prey to Satan's devices; let the Wolves know,
that you are not dumb dogs, and cannot bark, and idol-shepheards that can
neither hear nor see, nor understand any thing, and that at a time of need can
say nothing. Certainly, certainly, such as these may ill look for their gain
from their quarters, they deserve it not: who, so they may be fed, care not
(nor care to discover) what devouring beasts come to destroy the flock of
Christ. But you my dear ones, who are set over the Lords folds, and who watch
for their souls, as those that must give an account, and that have a desire to
do it with joy, and for the profit of your people; read and practice what Saint
Paul gives in charge to the Pastors of the Church at Ephesus: Acts 20. 28, 29,
30, 31*
and let me give thee it here, in his own words what he gave forth to his
Son Timothy, and then I shall proceed to out business intended. I charge
thee before God and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge the quick and dead
at his appearing and his Kingdom, preach the Word (not immediate revelations)
be instant, in season, out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and Doctrine: for the time will come (and it is now) when they
shall not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts, shall they heap to
themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears
from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables (immediate revelations,
contrary to, and diverse from the Word, which he was to Preach) but watch thou
in all things, endure afflictions, do the work of an Evangelist, (or a
Gospel-Preacher) make full proof of thy Ministry.

And now having thus discovered to thee the head, body, and tail of this
mystery of ungodliness, I shall lay the same part by part, member by member,
and limb by limb, upon the Quakers; and make them (as the image of the first
Beast) appear acting in and by the same power; I ^peak in their own Dialect.

And to this purpose, I shall give you in two papers of the Quakers own
publishing, which I caused herewith to be Printed; which I rather do, because
their Books do mostly come to the hands of their own parties, and are not
therefore so common to all, especially these two, which I have taken most
notice of, and would have well considered, that you may know these men and
their spirit, when it shall be tried; For we will try their spirits, whether
they will or no; And by the written word, even in the letter, which (for all
their sleightings of it) has light enough to discover their darkness and
hypocrisy, and by it we will judge them, and they shall be judged; and if they
repent not, (for all their pretensions to perfection) they shall be condemned;
for God and his Word, (his written Word) shall be true, when all opposers shall
be found liars.

Possibly other of their Books are as base as these, for the truth is, I have
not read many of them (as not thinking it worth the while) but one of these the
largest, I took more notice of, because penned or published in the name of two
of those that were here in this City, and did seduce the people. These two
which my self with others of my brethren in the Ministry, had conference with,
before the Mayor and Aldermen, of which conference I hear they bray highly to
their disciples. But I find it observed by others, that have had to do with
these kind of men, that it is their usual practice; and as holy and perfect as
they seem to be, they can brag and lie abominably; say and unsay, affirm and
deny, even presently, as some of good credit can witness. And as for that
Conference, I leave it to be judged and censured by most that were present, and
shall proceed to the thing intended.

But before I present these papers to thee, let me entreat thee take some
directions, for thy more profitable reading of them.

First, consider whether the Queries opposed to these Quakers, be not of
highest concernment in Religion; and so whether they deserve not a sober and
serious answer.

Secondly, observe whether they be answered to at all, any of them, yea or no.

Thirdly, do but take notice, how in stead of answering, they do evade and
avoid answering; not so much as in show doing it.

Fourthly, do but take notice of the spirit of the men, whether they speak from
the Spirit of the holy God; when in stead of giving a sober and solid answer,
they rail upon and revile the Querist with hellish and opprobrious speech.

Lastly, do but observe their Heretical opinions; which for thy better and more
ready observation, I have directed to be Printed in a differing character.

ANSWERS TO SEVERAL QVERIES Put forth to the despised People called QVAKERS.

By Philip Bennett, who calls himself a Minister of Christ, but is found to be
a Deceiver. Answered by them to whom they were directed.

ALSO ANSWERS To several other subtle QUERIES, etc.

Answered by Edward Borough, and Francis Howgil, who are Witnesses unto the
Truth against this subtle serpent-like generation.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black spread-Eagle, at the West end
of Paul's. 1654.

ANSWERS To several Queries put forth to the despised people called QVAKERS.
We having received a paper which was directed to Rich. Roper, and to his
Quaking friend, which words comes from the dark carnal mind, quaking and
trembling, which the Saints and holy men of God witnessed, we own and witness,
therefore do we deny thee, and all thy dark divinations.
WHereas thou Philip Bennet, in thy note, which thou have written to Roper, in
answer to a Letter which he wrote to thee, wherein he charges thee to be a
liar, and a false accuser, and charges thee to bring any man to witness what
thou have spoken by them, whom thou says, denied that Christ that died at
Jerusalem, and who they were that denied that Christ that suffered at
Jerusalem, or else acknowledge thy self to be a slanderer; and in thy paper
thou gives no answer at all to these words, but says thou called the
Congregation to witness, but does not mention one in all the Congregation, that
will witness it; whereupon the lie rests upon thy head, and thou found to be
the liar, and the slanderer, and the false accuser.

And whereas thou says, thou have sent Queries concerning that matter, thy
Queries makes thee manifest what thou art; many of thy own tribe and
generation, if they saw thy Queries, would be ashamed both of thee, and of thy
Queries, for hundreds there are in the world that knows nothing of the true and
living God, and yet would see thee and thy Queries not to be worth answering;
yet lest thou should boast in thy filthy ignorance and darkness, and for
clearing of the truth to the simple, something in answer to them.

I. Quer. Whether was the Word made flesh, or the Son of God made of a woman,
more or oftener then once.

Answ. In this first Querie thou have manifested what thou art to all the
children of Light, and where thou art, and what spirit thou art of, a
reprobate, a child of darkness thou art; thou might have spared the other
nineteen Queries, for in this Query thy spirit is tried, and in the eternal
Light seen and known; Thou asks whether the Word was made flesh any more, or
oftener then once, which makes it plainly manifest, that thou knows not what
thou ask, and that thou do not know, nor cannot witness the Word to be
made flesh once, but art one of the Antichrists and deceivers which John speaks
of, that are entered into the world, which cannot confess Jesus Christ come in
the flesh, and therefore thou Queries whether the Word was made flesh any more,
or oftener then once; which Querie comes from thy dark polluted mind, who is
out of the Light, and a stranger to the Life, and without God in the world,
amongst the false Prophets, Antichrist, and deceivers, which are in the world,
and in the Light of Christ, which condemns the world, yea, are all seen, known,
and made manifest, and are turned away from by these who dwell in the Light,
which Light condemns thee and all thy generation eternally; and the Word made
flesh we witness which dwells amongst us, and we behold his glory, as the
glory of the only begotten of the Father, according to the Scripture, whereby
we witness thee and all thy generation to be in the sorcery, and in the
witchcraft, deceiving and betraying the simple, the Light of Christ in thy
conscience will tell thee so, for that thou must be obedient to, and witness,
before thou witness the Word to be made flesh once, for thou art darkness it
self, and the light in thy conscience, if thou would let it rise, will be thy
condemnation, and when thou can witness the Word to be made flesh once, then
thou will know whether the Son of God was made of a Woman any more or oftener
then once. But thou art the Dragon that would devour the Man-child, which the
Woman has brought forth, who shall rule all Nations with a rod of iron, and
her child is caught up to God, and to his Throne, thou, the Dragon, and thy
Angels, is cast out into the Earth, and therefore do thou persecute the
Woman, which has brought forth the Manchild, bat thou art overcome by the
blood of the Lamb, and the word of his testimony; and for thy other nineteen
Queries, thou have conjured them up in thy black art, out of the bottomless
pit which is to be turned into perdition, if thou had an ear thou might hear,
or an eye thou might read, but thou art blind.

II. Quaer. Whether did the Man Christ Jesus, the Son of God, slain (in
respect of Gods decree and efficacy of his death) from the foundation of the
world really and indeed suffer death or dissolution of soul and body, as upon
the Cross at Jerusalem, more or oftener then once?

Answ. Here in this Querie thou Diviner is found adding to the Scripture thy
divinations of thy own brain, whereupon the plagues of God is to be aded unto
thee, and poured upon thee; For as thou says, the man Christ Jesus, the Lamb of
God slain (in respect of Gods Decree, and efficacy of his death) from the
foundation of the world. Oh thou liar, let all people see, where there is such
a Scripture that speaks as thou speaks here, but in the sight of Christ thou
art seen, and in the life comprehended, and art for condemnation. The man
Christ Jesus we own and witness, and the Lambs book of life, which was slain
from the foundation of the world, we witness; the Lamb of God which takes away
the sins of the world we witness, according to the Scripture; praises,
praises, eternal praises be to the Lord God for ever, and thee to be the beast
that makes war with the Lamb, we witness, and thou Antichrist, which looks at
Christ's death at Jerusalem alone, and cannot confess him no otherwise but
without thee, here thou art but equal with the Pope of Rome, for he confesses
Christ died at Jerusalem as well as thou. So let all thy Congregation see what
they hold up that follows thee.

III. Quaer. Whether did the man Christ ever really and indeed suffer in his
own person for that end, and after that manner which he did once upon the
Cross at Jerusalem, before the time or since the time.

Answ. Here thou full of all subtilty, has made manifest thy poison and
enmity, but with the Light of Christ thou art seen and known, and with it
condemned for ever; Christ Jesus in his own person does and ever did suffer by
thee, and such as thou art, and by thy generation he did suffer at Jerusalem,
and does suffer, where he is made manifest by you, after the same manner, and
thou blind Pharisee and blasphemer, would thou have Christ to have more ends in
suffering then one?

IV. Quer. Whether was not that death the man Christ suffered once, and but
once upon the Cross at Jerusalem, so satisfactory for all the sins of the
Elect, as that the justice of God did not, does not since require any suffering
or working upon that account, either from sinner or from Saint.

Answ. Here thou Jesuit, art pleading again for a Christ far off thee,
according as thy Father does at Rome. That Christ that died at Jerusalem did
not satisfy for thee, who art an enemy to him, and does not abide in his
doctrine, but acts contrary to his commands, and art under the woe, which he
cried against them that were in the same steps where thou art, and from that woe
thou shall never fly. The death of the man Christ Jesus which suffered at
Jerusalem, we own and witness, the same Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, we
witness made manifest, and the one God, and the one Mediator we witness and
know betwixt God and man, the Man Christ Jesus according to the Scripture. And
here thou liar art made manifest to all thy Congregation to be a liar, who said
amongst them, that we denied that Christ that died at Jerusalem, so let them
all be witnesses of thy lies, and let thy mouth be stopped thou liar, who art of
the lake; and 2 Timothy 2. 10. Tit. 1. 1. 1 Pet. 1. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 6. 1 Pet. 5. 13.
whereas thou queries, whether the justice of God be not satisfied for the sins
of the Elect, here let shame strike thee in the face, that ever thou should
take upon thee to speak to any people, and knows not the Scripture; where do
thou read in all the Scripture, that God does require satisfaction for the sins
of the Elect, or laid any thing to their charge, let all people try thee here
by the Scripture, and see whether thou be not a blind ignorant sot, who does
not know what the Justice of God requires, neither from sinner nor from Saint,
Isa. 42. 1. 65. 9, 22. Luke 18. 7. Romans 8, 33.

5 Quaer: Whether you be reconciled to God by any other obedience then that
particular obedience, which Christ performed in his own person, and is
mentioned in the Scripture, or by any other suffering or death, then that which
Christ once suffered upon the Cross at Jerusalem*

Answ. Silence flesh: would thou, who art an enemy to God, and a child of
disobedience, in whom the Prince of the air rules, know how we are reconciled
to God, and by what obedience; first own the light in thy Conscience which
condemns thee, and be obedient to that, and then thou shall know by what
obedience it is that reconciles to God, for yet thou knows not obedience, nor
the death which Christ suffered upon the Cross, thou do not know, but art an
enemy to the Cross of Christ, and in the mystery of iniquity, and in the dark
power, and man of sin; what have thou to do to talk of obedience, who art
reconciled to thy lust, and sin reigns in thee, and thou art blind in the broad
way that leads unto death, as thy fruits makes it manifest who lives in strife
and envy.

6 Quer. Whether did not the man Christ suffer as a public person in the
Elects stead, or in their behalf; and for that end that none who believed in
him might dye eternally?

Answ. There thou blind guide makes many replies, but still one and the same
thing, but thou makes it manifest that thou do not know the man Christ at
all, nor his sufferings, for death reigns in thee yet, that has passed over
all men that asks this Querie, for a public person Christ is not to thee, but
a mystery which thou knows nothing of, and for the redeeming of the Elect from
under such mouths as thine, did and does Christ suffer, and those that are
brought to believe, denies such dumb Idol shepherds as thee, who as yet does
not believe, and therefore shall dye eternally.

7 Quer. Whether the sufferings of Christ now in his Saints, be all the
satisfaction that is made to, or which the Justice of God looks for, for sins
past, present, and to come?

Answ. There thou blasphemer asks thou knows not what; is not Christ the same
now as ever, and is not the sufferings of Christ satisfactory where ever, What
will thou have to satisfy, if the sufferings of Christ do not satisfy, let
all people take notice what a blasphemer thou art, or what they can learn of
such a one as thee, who knows neither the Justice of God, nor the sufferings of
Christ in his Saints.

8. Quer. Whether was not that body of Jesus, which consisted of flesh, blood
and bone, and which was offered upon the Cross at Jerusalem the one and only
Sacrifice for sin, God accepted, and to which alone exclusively the Saints
before under the Law, and the Saints since under the Gospel, did and do look to
be justified by, without any other works?

Answ. Here again thou art replying thy former sottish Queries which rises out
of thy dark mind, concerning the body of Jesus, as the Devil did about the body
of Moses, let thy mouth be stopped here, for the body of Jesus thou knows not,
nor what it consists on, and the offering of it up thou knows nothing of, but
what thou knows and hears by the outward Letter, that it was offered up at
Jerusalem, and the Sacrifice for sin thou know not, and thou art none of the
Saints, neither under the Law, nor under the Gospel, but art without in the
world, in the broad way, blind leading the blind into the ditch, and for thee
the body of Christ is no satisfaction, and thou Reprobate, what have thou to do
to talk of believing, for that is the condition of the Saints, they do believe
and are justified, and their works thou knows not, thou disobedient one, upon
whom God will render vengeance in flaming fire.

9 Quer. Whether there be not another righteousness by which the Saints are
justified in the sight of God, than that which Christ works in them and by them?

Ans. There thou accursed art made manifest, who preaches another Gospel: and
would have another righteousness then that of Christ, here thou beast to whom
the plagues of God is due, and upon whom his wrath must be accomplished, here
thou have made thy self manifest, thou who would have another righteousness
then the righteousness of Christ which he works in the Saints and by them, and
so thou would be justified and live in thy sin, but thou art shut out from God
for ever, and we witness justification by Faith, and the just shall live by his
Faith.

10 Quer. Whether does sanctification or justification in order antecede
holiness of life, or Justification by Faith go before, or whether does not God
love man, ere man loved God?

Answ. Here thou dark blind hypocrite, has shut thy self out from the
knowledge of God in any measure, oh that ever people should be so blind as to
look for to learn any thing at such a one as thee but sin and filthiness, and
what have thou been teaching them all this while; that neither knows
Sanctification, nor Justification yet, but art yet querying whether goes
before, let all people judge if thou be not a teacher of lasciviousness, sin,
and uncleanness, and how dare thou mention a holy life, or Justification by
Faith, which knows neither Justification nor Sanctification. And thee, man,
which art Cain, God does not love nor accept thee nor thy Sacrifice, and for
Justification by Faith, thou know nothing of it, which we own and witness,
and thou who art in envy does not love God.

11 Quaer. Whether the justice of God be not fully satisfied for all the sins
of the Elect, ere Christ appear to their souls, or holiness appear in their
lives?

Answ. Here thou full of all subtilty art comprehended, and with the light of
Christ thou art seen, and with the life judged and condemned, who would lay sin
to the charge of the Elect, when the Scripture says, Who shall lay any thing
to the charge of Gods Elect, It is God that justisieth, who shall condemn? The
soul that sins shall dye: Thou sorcerer does the Elect of God sin, shall the
Elect dye, to that in thy Conscience I speak

12 Quaer. Whether the holy lives, or holy works of the Saints be not excluded
from the act of Justification, from the guilt of sin?

Answ. Thou dead beast has made it manifest, that thou art a stranger from the
life of God, and is excluded from the holy life of the Saints and their works,
who art querying whether this be not excluded from Justification, Oh that ever
thou should open thy mouth to take upon thee to speak of the Scripture; does
not the Apostle say, 1 Pet. 1. 18. Forasmuch as ye know that ye were not
redeemed with corruptible things as silver and gold, from your vain
conversation, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish and without spot, who verily was ordained before the foundation of the
world was, but was manifest in these last times for you, who by him do believe
in God, that raised him up from the dead? Now let all people read this chapter
and try thee, who knows nothing of Jesus Christ, but as thou have heard of him
crucified at Jerusalem, and so thou art unredeemed from thy vain conversation,
and so art not justified before God, nor never shall be; but those that can
witness Redemption by the blood of Christ, as all the Saints of God do, are
justified, and by the same that they are justified thou art condemned in the
Lake for ever.

13 Quer. Whether is that righteousness, which is wrought by the Saints, every
way answerable to the justice of God?

Answ. There again thy blindness is made manifest; is there any righteousness
but that of Jesus Christ, and is not that every way answerable to the justice
of God? but such polluted filthy beasts as thou would have another
righteousness, as thou speaks plainly in thy ninth query: but all thy
righteousness we deny, and the righteousness of Jesus Christ we own and
witness, whose righteousness shall be revealed upon thee in flames of fire.

14 Quer. Whether none be accounted righteous in Gods sight in whom there is
any corruption, or failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every
demand of Justice?

Answ. Here thou polluted beast has made it manifest what thou have been
driving at all this while in thy queries, which is, that thou would have
corruption and filthiness to be accounted righteous in Gods sight: that so thou
might lie and wallow in thy sins and filthiness, but John says, that he that
commits sin is of the Devil, for the devil sins from the beginning, and for
this purpose the son of God was made manifest, that he might destroy the works
of the Devil, and thou man of sin would have it to stand, but those that loves
God keeps his Commandments, and they are not grievous, and God does not accept
any, where there is any failing, or who do not fulfill the Law, and answer every
demand of Justice, and he does reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment, to
be punished, 2 Pet. 2. 9. and chiefly them that walk after the flesh in the
lust of uncleanness, and there thou art.

15 Quer. Whether a soul be justified before God by the non-imputation of sin,
and the imputation of the righteousness of the person of Christ to his Faith,
or by a righteousness wrought by Christ in the person justified or to be
justified.

Answ. Here stop thy mouth, thou sorcerer, which art gathering up a heap of
confusion, which is fit for nothing but to be turned with thee into the
bottomless pit from whence it comes, wherein thou talks of imputation, and
non-imputation, and of a person justified, and to be justified; thy language is
of Egypt, and in the mystery of iniquity thou speaks it, which is condemned
into the lake of perdition by the light of Christ, and in the light thou and it
are seen and comprehended; and as I told thee before, I own no righteousness
but what is of Christ, and wrought by thee: which righteousness shall confound
thee and all thy unrighteousness and conjuration, and the same that justifies
us shall condemn thee eternally.

16 Quaer. Whether Christ be in his Saints in respect of that nature wherein he
suffered at Jerusalem?

Answ. Here thou Enemy of Christ would know how the Saints enjoy Christ; here
the Scripture is fulfilled in thee, The light shines in darkness, and darkness
comprehends it not. When thou comes to own thy condemnation, the light in thy
conscience it will let thee see thy evil deeds, it will lead thee up to Christ
from whence it comes, and then thou will know that nature that he suffered in;
but now thou art in that nature that Judas was in that betrayed him, and that
they were in that crucified him.

17 Quaer. How, and after what manner Christ, who in respect of his divine
nature is infinite and in all places, may be said to be in a Saint, and not in
a Reprobate?

Answ. What have thou to do to querie after the divine nature, who art the
natural man, that knows nothing of God, b^t what thou knows naturally as a
bruit beast, and knows not the things that be of God, because they are
spiritually discerned; and the manner of Christ's divine nature, which is
infinite, is hid from thy eyes; for of that eye which thou should see, that
with thou art blind, and his manner of being in a Saint thou knows not, who art
a Reprobate, and thou shall find him to be thine eternal condemnation.

18 Quaer. Whether does Christ now in these days assume or take upon him the
form of a servant and the seed of Abraham, that is our flesh: And whether does
not this assumption cause such a perfection of the Godhead and the manhood, as
that both of them are united together into one person?

Answ. Oh thou dark beast and Conjurer, who art querying with thy conjured
words, that which thou knows nothing of* and which is out of thy reach and
comprehension; Thou blasphemer, do thou limit Christ to days, in taking upon
him the form of a servant, and the seed of Abraham; Is not he the same now as
ever he was? And for the Union of the Godhead, and the Manhood, as thou calls
it, let thy mouth be stopped, for with the God, nor none of his children, has
any union, for God has put an utter enmity betwixt thy seed, thou Serpent, and
the seed of the woman; and the perfect union with Christ we witness, who is the
same to day, yesterday, and for ever; and therefore are we separate from thee
and thy generation.

19. Quaer. Whether is Christ now conversant upon earth amongst men, since his
ascension, as he was before, and in those times wherein the Apostles lived?

Answ. In thy Queries thy speech bewrays thee, thy language is the language of
Egypt, for in it thou makes it clearly manifest, that thou knows not Christ at
all, not in the least measure; for where the first Principle of truth is made
manifest, it is the same that ever was, and never changes. And thou asks
whether Christ be now conversant upon earth amongst men since his ascension, as
he was in the Apostles time? Do thou know what thou asks? Did he not appear
to the Apostles since his ascension in the most glorious manner that ever thou
read; and is he not the same now as he was then? What would thou make of him,
thou dark sottish beast, such a one as thy self, who would be pleading for
darkness and ignorance of God; but praise and glory to him who has discovered
thee, and all such deceivers as thou art.

20. Quaer. Whether did not Christ dwell among his Saints after another and
more visible manner, than now he dwells in his Saints?

Answ. There again thou have showed thy ignorance of the Scripture: and for thy
word Visible, he is not, nor never was visible to thee, nor to thy generation;
for those that did profess the Scriptures, as thou and thy generation does,
crucified him, and said he was of the Devil; and thou, and such as thou art*
does now: Thou blasphemer, where have thou a Scripture that says that Christ
would dwell in his Saints after anothere manner? Did he not say, It is
expedient for you that I go away, and I go and prepare a place for you, and I
will come again and receive you unto my self, and where I am, there you may be
also; and ye have heard, how I have said I go away, and that where I am, there
you may be also: and that I have said, I go away, and come again unto you; and
if ye loved me, ye would rejoice, because I go unto the Father. And Christ
Jesus faith in the 14 of John, v. 12. Verily, verily I say unto you, he that
believes on me, the work that I do, he shall do also, and greater works then
these, because I go to the Father. But all these Scriptures be hid from thine
eyes, and thou art one of those that Isaiah prophesied on, and that Scripture
is fulfilled on thee, which says, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened
their heart, that they should not see with their eyes, nor understand with
their hearts. Now blessed be the Lord that has discovered thee, and such blind
guides as thou art, so we have answered thy Queries in the eternal light and
life of God, and we have given judgment upon thee and them, which thou shall
eternally witness, without roving or wandering; but thou who art out of the
light, art roving, and wandering, and stumbling in darkness, who has put forth
these stumbling Queries, which we have answered lovingly and plainly, and in
the Scripture language and terms, and with the eternal light and life of God,
set thee in thine own place, which thou shall eternally witness.

These are matters of great concernment, and if you refuse to answer them in
writing, spare your tongues, and spare your papers, for I will henceforth
neither hear the one, nor read the other.

Ans. Thou says, these are matters of great concernment; we see that that
which makes thee manifest, and such as thou art, and which lays thee open to
poor ignorant people, which is deceived by thee, and led into the ditch, and
their souls kept in death by thee, to make this manifest is of great
concernment, as these black, dark, stumbling Queries, and thy conjured words
has done, which thou have no Scripture for, as ambiguity, efficacy,
exclusively, antecede, and non-imputation, assume, and assumption.

Now let all people read and consider what they do that hold such as thee up,
who is shut out from God, and shut out from the Saints life and language, and
art shut out of the Scriptures; though thou makes a trade of them for money,
and deceives poor people; but thou knows nothing of the Life and Power that
gave them forth: So thou art to be condemned with the Light, and with the Life
that gave forth the Scripture. Let all people read Deuteronomy 18. from the
nineth verse to the fifteenth, there the Priests and the Levites which was
ordained of God, was to have no inheritance among the people; but the Lord was
their inheritance, and they were to have it of that which was offered up to the
Lord. And this is a figure of the Everlasting Priesthood, which ministers out
of the Everlasting Treasure; and the Lord God commanded Israel, that not to do
as they did, when they came into the Land, nor to go after their abominations,
as you may see: But gave Israel their Land to possess, that did hearken unto
such as the Lord had not sent, which was abomination to him. And the Lord says
to Israel, Thou shall be perfect with the Lord thy God. Verse. 15. The Lord thy
God will raise unto thee a Prophet from the midst of thee, of thy Brethren like
unto me, unto him shall ye hearken; and so to the end of the Chapter. He that
has an eye may see, and the Lord is the same that he was; and he will not
suffer the abominations that is committed in this Land, but is discovering the
abominations of it. A horrible and a filthy thing is committed, which Jeremiah
cried against, Covetous men preach, Drunkards preach, Swearers preach, Liers
preach, Strikers preach, and Proud men preach. O wonderful, where is your eyes,
Try your Priests by the Scriptures, see if they be not found in the same
Generation that all the false Prophets and the Deceivers were in, which the
true Prophets of God cried against, and discovered, and in the steps of the
Scribes and Pharisees, that Christ cried woe against; and see if they be not the
Antichrists, and the Deceivers, which are entered into the world, which John
speaks of, which cannot confess Christ come in the flesh, but transgresses,
and abides not in the doctrine of Christ, so has not God, neither knows; but
preaches for sin, and against perfection, and denies the light which enlightens
every one that comes into the world, and so keeps people in blindness and
ignorance, and out of the knowledge of God, and never any that follows them,
shall ever come to the knowledge of the true and living God; therefore all
people see where you are, and mind the light in your Consciences, which is
pure, and which testifies against all sin; and it will let you see all your
blind guides which deceives you, to be in sin, and ignorant of God, for they
deny that which should make him manifest; therefore beware what you hold up,
and give over going after them; to that in your Consciences I speak, which
shall witness me eternally to speak the truth, if you obey it, and shall
condemn you eternally, if you disobey it.

These blind guides that are in this Land, denies the Prophets which Moses
wrote of, which is the substance of the Priesthood which was before; and here
they are found in the same generation, in the Sorcery and in the Witchcraft
which the Lord commanded should be put out of the Land where the children of
Israel went to possess. And now the other Paper I commend to thy reading, is
this.

THE Sword of the Lord Drawn and Furbish'd against the MAN OF SIN.

OR, Something in Answer to a Paper set forth by three of the chief Priests of
London, whose names are THOMAS GOODWIN, and one NIGH, and SYDRACH SYMPSON, which
they have put forth to the propagating of the Gospel; signed by him that is the
Clerk of the Parliament, whose name is HENRY SCOBEL. With their deceits and
deceitful actings laid open, and cleared from Scripture, that they have no
example in Scripture for their practice.

Therefore I was moved by the Lord God of life to lay open their deceit by the
spirit of truth, as it was made manifest in me from the Lord; that the simple
might not be deceived by them, but might have the knowledge of the Truth from
that which is for ever, and shall not change nor fade away.

By one whose name in the flesh is Christopher Atkinson, who am one whom the
World does scornfully call a QUAKER.

LONDON, Printed, and are to be sold by Giles Calvert, etc. 1654.

The Sword of the Lord drawn and furbished against the Man of Sin.
THere coming a Paper unto my hands put forth by three of the chief Priests of
London, whose names are, Tho. Goodwin, one Nigh, and Sydrach Simpson, called the
Principles of Faith, put forth to the Committee of Parliament, for the
propagating of the Gospel, as they call it; and finding them out of the
Apostles rule, and the Prophets rule, acting those things which they have no
example for, therefore am I moved of the Lord to lay open their deceits, and to
declare the living truth of God, as it is made manifest in me, and to declare
what Faith we own and practice, and what we do deny; to that end that the
simple may be informed, and the way of truth cleared from such deceivers, who
are perverters of the Scriptures, who would constrain people to follow their
imaginations instead of truth, as these men have done, whose names are
subscribed. And now a few words in answer to that you call your first Principle.

First Principle, That the Scripture is the rule of knowing God, and living
unto him, which whosoever does not believe, but betakes himself to any other way of
discovering God instead thereof, cannot be saved.

Answ. The Scriptures are not the Saints rule of knowing God and living unto
him, but that which was before the Scriptures were written, by which all the
holy men of God knew him; and here ye have made your selves manifest, that ye
have not the rule which Moses had, which is the spirit of light, by which he
made himself known unto the sons of men; and ye that teach people to walk in
another rule, are those that put light for darkness, and darkness for light,
showing forth the spirit of error: and here ye pervert the Scripture and Moses
words, which prophesied of Christ. Moses bad not the people walk by the
Scripture, neither did he tell them, that living therein was the rule of
knowing God, but he directed them to the Life, without which all their
profession was abominable: but ye are not come to walk in the Letter, whose
lips and practice does not concord with it, who are found acting those things
which it declares against: Matthew. 23. who are called of men Master* stand
praying in the Synagogues, which our Lord Jesus Christ cried woe against; and
here your Faith, and your Principle is descryed, who are not so much as found
acting in that which you call your rule. Now lest you should boast in your
glory, and the simple be stumbled by your subtilty, I am moved of the Lord to
open and discover unto all, that your Faith is no more then all the ungodly in
this Nation does profess, and also that the Rule whereby the Saints are guided,
is that which was before the Scripture They belie the Profession.
was. First, it is professed generally in this Nation, that believing in the
Scriptures is the rule of knowing God: this have you preached for Doctrine
among the people, and yet the way of God is hidden from their eyes, who are
found acting in the abominations of the Heathen, as does plainly appear by the
sins of this people; nay, what sin is there, that is not committed amongst this
people, which have professed the Scripture to be their rule, and you that
pretend to be their teachers are the greatest examples of their wicked
practices, Crying peace, peace unto them, when there is no peace, one building
a wall, and another dawbing it with untempered mortar: but ye shall proceed no
further but your folly shall be made manifest to all men. Our rule is that
which Moses walked in, and Abraham, and David, and all the Prophets which is
Christ Jesus the light of the world, which whosoever believes not in him has
not God; Moses walked in him, Abraham believed in him, and David delighted in
his Law which is perfect; and here we deny you, who deny that rule in which the
holy men of God walked in.

Second Principle: That there is a God who is the Creator and Judge, and
Governor of the world, and is to be known by Faith.

Answ. The Saints God ye are ignorant of (who put light for darkness, and
darkness for light* and before him ye cannot stand in judgment, who are found
working wickedness, making people believe, that believing in a thing without
them, will bring them to the knowledge of God, which none can know or
understand but through death; and if ever ye come to know this God whom the
Saints worship in Spirit and Truth, ye must witness a day of vengeance to pass
through: therefore stop your mouths ye proud and lustful ones, the day of
recompense is come, in which ye shall receive double for all your wickedness:
The Lord is our Judge, our Lawgiver, and our King, and this we witness though
we had never seen the Scripture: And here we deny you and your principles,
which is no more than that which the world professes: Therefore be ye ashamed,
ye wicked and ungodly ones, who live in the beastly nature, who knows no more
of God than what ye have without in the Scriptures, which they spoke forth that
witnessed him before the Scriptures were written, him we own and witness to be
our King, and by him we are redeemed out of your generation, glory to his name
for ever, who has made himself manifest in us, and has brought us to that
which was before the Scripture was.

Third Principle, That this God who is Creator, is eternally distinct from all
other Creatures in his being and blessedness.

Ans God ye know not, neither can ye see him, but are found persecutors of him,
who would divide him from what he is, by heathenish inventions, which arises
out of the corrupt sensual part, which never shall inherit the Kingdom. The
being of God is not distinct from them that are begotten by him: For as the
Father and the Son are one without distinction, so are they that are begotten
by him; and here you perverters of the truth are shut forth from God, with all
your distinctions and imaginations, which arises out of the dark mind, by
which ye have all this while deceived the people. Woe unto you, ye enemies of
God, your foundation, your compass, and your end is made manifest unto the
children of light, who would divide God from his children, whom he has
begotten unto himself through the word of faith, in which we live and abide for
ever: And here I challenge you before the Lord, to produce one Scripture which
speaks of God being distinct from them that are begotten by him; and if you
cannot prove your words by plain Scripture, let shame cover your faces, and
stop your mouths for ever.

And for your fourth thing, That God is three persons or substances, this is
also another of your lies, never such a word is declared of in Scripture: and
thus have you made your folly manifest to all men, and have cleared your selves
from the Scriptures. God is a mystery, in whom the foundation of all things
stands, and he is but one in all, though ten thousand times ten thousand.

Woe unto ye, you perverters of the truth, who blinds the eyes of the simple,
making them believe your imaginations and conceivings in stead of truth; and
this you run to the powers of the earth to propagate. Ye men of sin, did ever
the Prophets declare of such Gospel as this, or did ever the Apostles preach
any such doctrine as this, which ye would compel people to believe* and would
have the powers of the earth to propagate? Here I challenge you again to prove
your example by Scripture, and where ever the holy men of God did divide him
into three substances? And if ye refuse to prove the same, I proclaim as in the
presence of the Lord, that ye are perverters of the Scriptures, and of the
right way of the Lord; and your propagating the Gospel, and your principles are
accursed from God, having no example in Scripture.

Fifth Principle. The fifth is, That Christ is the Mediator between God and
man, without the knowledge of whom there is no salvation.

Answ. Him we witness made manifest in us, who is the Mediator: but what have
you to do to speak of his name, or profess his words, who are found in the
steps of the Scribes and Pharisees that put him to death, who are called of men
Master, have uppermost rooms at feasts* stand praying in the synagogues, as
they did that Christ cried woe against, Math. 23. Thus you are separated from
Christ who are not found in his doctrine, and are found among the Heathen whom
the condemnation is upon; and the Scripture bare testimony against you* that
you are not in the doctrine of Christ, but are found to be liars, 1 John 2. ^2.
and the acts of your fathers you are found acting.

And in the sixth you say, that Christ is the true God. Here you be witnesses
against your selves, that you divide the Father from the Son, who you say is
three distinct substances: But the Lord will make you manifest, ye that
blindfold the simple, by your subtilty and witchcraft making them believe lies
in stead of truth, and would divide that in which there is no division; for he
that has the Son has the Father also. This man Christ Jesus, who was made
with an oath, the everlasting covenant, the oath of God, is not divided from
him in whom the foundations stand; for without this man Jesus was nothing made;
and as he was, so he is. He that has an ear to hear, let him hear. And here,
Sottish minds, your imagined God beyond the stars, and your carnal Christ which
you would make appear through your heathenish Philosophy, is utterly denied and
testisted against by the light which comes from Christ, which ye resist as your
forefathers have done.

And in your seventh Principle ye are laid open. 1 John 4. 2. Hereby know we
the Spirit of God* every spirit that confesses Christ come in the flesh, is of
God; and this is he that is one with the Father, even Jesus Christ the man of
God, who was given for a covenant; but him ye are enemies unto. And whereas you
say in the eighth, that this Christ the man of God is God and Man in one
person, it is a lie. He is not divided from what he was before the foundations
of the hills were laid: but him ye know not, but as ye do imagine, and the
Heathens do; and here you are shut forth from the Scriptures, and from Christ,
and the new man, which is witnessed in the sons of God. Therefore stop your
mouths for ever, who would make people believe, that believing in those words
which are declared from the Life, without the same spirit as they had that
spoke them forth, will bring them to the same knowledge of God.

And thus in your Ninth, you have also showed forth your ignorance, and telling
people that Christ has paid a ransom for sin: This is witnessed by the
children of light; but what have ye to do to take these words into your mouths,
that never yet came to repentance for sin? and if ever you witness him a
Redeemer, you must witness the vengeance of God which is upon the man of sin:
But you men of sin, who live in your filthiness, shall receive your recompense
from the hand of the Lord; and this ye shall eternally witness, whether you
will hear or forbear.

But why is the 10 Article left out? Reader, thou shall have it anon.
And as for the eleventh, that Christ being the only God and man in one
person, remains for ever a distinct person from all Saints and Angels,
notwithstanding their union and communion with him, your words are utterly
denied and detested, and your distinctions are abominable. I challenge you from
the Lord to prove such a thing in Scripture, or else stop your mouths for ever;
for Christ Jesus is but one in all, and not distinct; and you that would divide
him and them that are begotten by him, are enemies unto him.

Why do you not put down all? most abominable impostors.
As for the twelfth, That all men by nature are dead in trespasses and sins;
this is fulfilled in you, and ye shall receive the wages of it, ye men of sin,
whose ungodly practices are laid open and discovered to the children of light,
who have obtained the victory. And I tell you plainly, that vengeance of God
hangs over your heads, and the recompense of God shall be doubled upon you that
live in your sins; except ye repent, ye shall likewise Why do you cut short the
13 article too? This is not the last; there are two more, which Reader
thoushalt have in, to discover these enemies to truth and the Gospel.
perish. And whereas ye say ye are justified and saved by grace, ye are they
that have turned the grace of God into wantoness, and holds the faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons, as is made manifest by you daily.

And in your last you say, That to continue in any known sin, under what
pretense soever, is damnable. Here be you witnesses against your selves, that
ye are proud, and that ye live in the practice of the world which is sin, and
seek for your gain from your quarters, which is sin, and the Lord sent his
prophets to declare against such, and the same woe from God is upon you that
act the same things, Isa. 56. 11. And here your practice and example is found
among the false prophets of Israel, which the Lord sent his true prophets to
declare against, which received his word from his own mouth, for which they
were both persecuted and stoned by your generation, which professed that in
words which they persecuted in the Saints, who witnessed the life and power of
what they spoke. Thus have ye brought shame upon your selves, ye deceitful
workers, who are professing that outwardly in words, which ye are enemies to
the life of. So from the Scriptures ye are razed out, and your bottom and
foundation is made manifest to the children of light, and your deceits are made
manifest by them that walk in the light, at which you are stumbling as your
forefathers did, though you profess the words declared from the light.

Thus have I returned an answer to your confused Paper, lest you should boast
your selves in your folly, and blind the eyes of the simple by your heathenish
inventions, as ye have formerly done, and have laid your shame open unto the
simple-minded, that they may discover and see your confusion.

And now a word unto you from whom this Paper was put forth: Your spirits and
your actings are contrary to the Spirit of Christ, as having no example from
him not his Apostles for it; be ye ashamed, and stop your mouths from
professing godliness, who are found in the pride, and in the wickedness of this
world, out of which the Ministers of Christ were redeemed: How can ye but deny
the truth, when as ye act those things which the Ministers of truth were sent
to declare against, therefore let shame cover you, and let your mouths be
stopped in the dust for ever professing Christ or his Gospel, who are found
enemies to it. And now ye covetous Priests, who seek for your gain from your
quarters, ye may be ashamed of your profession: How often have ye declared
against the covetous practice of the world, in words outwardly, and yet your
selves are found acting in them, in covetousness and and extortion, as is daily
made manifest by you, and is contrary to the practice of the Apostles: For
shame ye covetous Priests give over your wicked practices, and your beastly
actings, lest the Lord rip off your coverings, and lay you naked to all men.

Thus have I cleared my conscience to you, and to all the world in the presence
of the Lord, whether you will hear or forbear.

There is another (which is all I have read thorough of theirs) that I would
have inserted; but because I feared it would make my Book swell too much, I
have omitted it, only I shall give you the Title of it, because I shall make
use of it to discover their opinions: And those who have the Book, may examine
my Quotations, which I shall do faithfully, reserving the Book by me to
satisfy any that have it not, and may desire to see it, to that purpose. The
Title is thus; Truths defense against the refined subtilty of the Serpent, Held
forth in diverse Answers to several Queries, made by men (called Ministers) in
the North; Given forth by the light and power of God, appearing in George Fox
and Richard Hubberthorn: Printed for Tho. Wait at his house in the Pavement in
York, 1653.

And now having given you a view of these pieces of the Quakers, which are
their own, and received from one of their Proselytes in this City, I shall
desire thy patience, Reader, to go a little further with me, and thou shall see
these Quakers acted by the same spirit of delusion, and doing Satan's work,
though seemingly otherwise. That deceiver of the Nations being now almost cast
out of the profane Ranters (who made such foul work, that I suppose the devil
himself was ashamed of them. And now he will appear in his white garments, as
an angel of light (under the disguise of humility, and mortification) to carry
on his dark design of divelism to the overthrow of all Religion.

And first let me tell the Reader, I have very good ground to conclude as I
suppose, the mystery of the Quakers to be the same with the Ranters, for this
reason (besides that it will manifestly appear afterward, when I come to lay
part to part (as I promised) because I find the Quakers in a book of theirs,
called, A word from the Lord, unto all the faithless generation of the world,
etc. Printed 1654 By George Fox, and James Nayler, wherein they have a word
(among others) to the Ranters; I find these Quakers giving this Testimony (13
page of the book) to the Ranters in these words, The word of the Lord God (say
they) to you which are called Ranters, You had a pure convincement, I witness,
which did convince you, but having fled the Cross, and now to it are become
enemies, which turns the Grace of God into wantonness, etc. and then they blame
them (as justly they may) for their abominable profane conversation.

But however it seems they had a pure convincement, that he witnesses. So that
their light (their Doctrine) was good, however they abused it, They had a
convincement under the Law (as they say) and started up to be as Gods (by that
pure convincement it seems that God and they were one, and not distinct; but
(as they still say there) they never came through the Prophets, nor Moses
house, nor Christ. Mark their language, They never came through the Prophets,
nor Christ. Here the Prophets, Moses, and Christ are all proposed, not to be
rested in, but to be gone through; They must go through Christ as they go through
the Prophets and Moses. Christ as well as Moses, must cease and be gone through;
not rested in. And the Ranters it seems abused their good Principles (their
pure convincement) whereby they started up as gods: but falling into
profaneness did not rightly improve their Godship. And so came short of their
Christ ship (which these Quakers) by hearkening to the light of their own
Godhead within them attain unto.

Thus for the Ranters, but now as for the Anabaptists, Independents, and
Presbyterians, they fall upon them, and quarrel their very light and doctrine,
as living and teaching in the letter, and taking up outward commands, are
witches, etc. As may be seen in that book of theirs. So that the light and
principles of the Ranters is more pure in these men's eyes: Its true, the
Levellers (to whom they there spoke also) they have some indifferent esteem
with these men (if they had gone on) for they tell them, that they had a flesh
in their minds (I suppose some of this pure light, for they add) a simplicity,
but their minds run into the earth (they say) and smothered it, and much of it,
they say is withered, not all, it seems. So that Reader, thou may hereby
plainly see, what Principles and Lights these Quakers most approve of, and so
consequently follow, sc. the Ranters in the mystery of ungodliness before
discovered.

And you will not think it strange that one and the same Principles are made
use of, to such seemingly differing ends as these are, by the Ranters and these
Quakers: if you consider, that even the sacred truths of God, by the subtilty
of the Serpent working in man's heart, are abused, and the Grace of God turned
into wantonness, by lascivious and fleshly spirits: For observe Reader, one of
the same persuasion or opinion (yea or truth) works diversely, as it is diversely
received, as they are that entertain it. A Truth meeting with a sober and
temperate spirit, will strengthen and increase his temperance. For men natural
improve every thing that agrees with their temper, and constitution, and the
same Truth meeting with an unsober and intemperate spirit shall find the same
entertainment, sc. advance his actings according to his temper, either to
excuse him and uphold him in his intemperancy* or by irritation to provoke him
to more intemperance. So that let truth be what it will, most men are what they
were. Only they know and can say more then they did before. And in truth this
is the Religion (if I may give it that name) of all men in the world, except of
those whose hearts the Lord changes and makes suitable to spiritual truths, and
they made new men, as has been opened in the mystery of godliness, which only
makes a man a Christian, whatever the Quakers, Arminians, and Papists say (of
general Light, universal Grace and Free Will) to the contrary. And which one
truth is able and sufficient to overturn all their rotten and ungodly, and
ungospel-like opinions.

But now Reader, that these Quakers are acted by the same cursed, ungodly,
ungospel-like principles of the Rantors before opened, I shall prove from their
own writings and expressions. And first (as the Rantors offer violence to the
Majesty of God himself) as you have seen, by making themselves equal with, and
not distinct from the Majesty and glory of God himself (which I suppose thou will grant is high blasphemy, and the sin, the principal and capital sin of the
devil;) so do these Quakers: For it is their downright and plain expression,
That they are equal with God, as Fox said the words expressly, I am equal with
God. And Naylor being speaking upon the point of perfection, being asked,
whether he did believe that any could be as holy, just, and good, as God
himself, answered, That he did witness that he himself was as holy, just, and
good as God. All which you may find in a Book called the Perfect Pharisee,
written by some Ministers of Newcastle. And they also affirm, that the nature
and glory of the elect (mark, the nature as well as the glory) differs not from
the nature and glory of the Creator. These are the words of Howgill and
Borough, in answer to certain queries put by one Reeve and which are printed
together with their Answers to Bennets Queries, here before inserted; and which
I had a purpose to print also, but that I was unwilling to make my book swell
too much in bulk, and so discourage the Reader in regard of the price; and the
rather I omitted it, because in it the answers are longer by much then those to
Mr. Bennet, and full of impertinences, which I feared would tire and discourage
the Reader in that regard also.

But Reeve, having proposed this Query, which is his second, Whether is not
this an infallible demonstration to all men, that a man is sent forth by the
eternal Spirit, if he have received a gift from the holy Ghost to demonstrate
what the true Creator was in his own distinct essence, nature and glory, from
all eternity, in time, and to all eternity and wherein elect men and Angels
differ in their natures and glory, distinct from their Creator in their persons?

They (after some revilings, and judging the Querist) say (as before) That the
nature and glory of the Elect, differs not from the nature and glory of the
Creator. And add thus; For the Elect are one with the Creator, in his nature
enjoying his glory, which was from eternity unto eternity: He that reads, (say
they) let him understand.

And then further add, Thy word, Distinct essence, I deny: For, the Elect is
not distinct from the Creator, but lives by the dwelling of the Son in him and
with the Son the Father dwells also; if thou have an ear thou may hear.

And in their Answer to the first Query (which I had omitted) where the
Question was thus, Whether these men (meaning the Quakers) were sent forth by
the eternal Spirit to Preach, I must take* the questions as these Quakers set
them down, for that they do belie men in misreciting their words, I shall
prove afterward
which in the least cannot demonstrate, what the only true God is in himself,
and how he is a distinct being from all living creatures, and how he reigns in
the elect, by a created word, voice, or spiritual motion only?

They give this Answer, God is a Spirit, and he is not distinct from living
creatures, for in him living creatures lives, moves, and has their beings, and
he is not far from them, nor distinct from them. Which minds me of one
Sebastian Frank (a man of this gang in Germany) who has this blasphemous
expression: In trunco Deum esse truncum, in porco porcum, in diabolo diabolum.
In English thus (which I do with abhorrency and trembling* In a log God is a
log, in a swine he is a swine, in a devil a devil. And whether these men be not
of the same mind, who say, That God is not distinct from the creature, let any
man judge.

And for their equality with God, its their common judgment, as may be seen in
a discourse called, p. 2, 3.
A brief Relation of the Irreligion of the Northern Quakers; Sold at the three
Pigeons in Paul's Churchyard* And also in a Book Entitled, The perfect
Pharisee, under Monkish holiness, opposing the Fundamental Principles of the
Doctrine of the Gospel. p. 3, 4.
A Book penned with much judgment, by five Ministers living in Newcastle, Mr*
Weld, Mr. Prideaux, Mr. Hammond, Mr. Cole, and my reverend friend Mr William
Durant, Printed for Richard Tomlins at the Sun and Bible near Pye-Corner 1654.
To which Books (for brevity sake) I refer the Reader, and close this Head with
what I find written by the Quaker Atkinson, in his Book (called, The Sword of
the Lord, etc.) herewith before printed, where thou shall find this solid
principle of truth laid down by those reverend men.

That God who is the Creator, is eternally distinct from all other creatures:
So the se Quakers languages it, as if God were a creature too; whereas those
worthy men say in their Proposals thus, That he is eternally distinct from all
the creatures; not Ans. to 3. Art.
using the word (other) they say (according to the truth) That he is distinct
in his being and blessedness, after some revilings, charging them upon this
Principle of truth, with Heathenish inventions (as thou may see there) have
said, That the being of God is not distinct from them that are begotten by him.
And further add, That as the Father and the Son are one without distinction, so
are they that are begotten by him. Now ye know that the Father and the Son are
one eternally, both in essence, and all glorious excellencies. And these
blasphemers say, That as they are one without distinction, so are they that are
begotten by him.

Reader, I took not upon me to confute or answer them in this, or any of that
which follows (for recitasse, est confutasse) but to let thee see what bold,
impudent audacious, blasphemous wretches these Quakers are, and that they build
upon that rotten foundation, that mystery of ungodliness formerly represented
to thee: and that they offer violence to the Majesty of God himself, as God,
levelling him with the creatures, which is the head, and the first principle of
this man of sin, and the first thing propounded.

And unto this we may add their denial (direct denial) of God, as he has
revealed himself in the Scriptures; and that is, that he is three in one (which
for brevities sake, supposing our meaning to be understood by our people, who
are instructed in this principle) we express by the word (Trinity.) And for the
better apprehension (as the creature now is able to apprehend of God) we
express by three subsistances or persons: Whereas I say we are taught in the
word, That God is three in one.

Answ. to the 4th Art. or Principle
Atkinson (in his Sword drawn, before printed) says, that this is one of their
lies: and says, that God is but one in all, though ten thousand times ten
thousand, make out what they can.

So that here is manifest and horrid violence offered to the Majesty of the
Almighty both in his nature and essence, and to the doctrine of the Trinity And
now in the second place I shall show thee, that they offer violence to Jesus
Christ, the Lord our righteousness, God over all, blessed for ever. For, as for
Christ, though they often mention him, yet in deed and truth they make no more
use of him then they do of Moses and the Prophets: I say, in deed and in
truth; for they are mere juglers, they speak one thing, and mean another,
jesuitically equivocating: So that it is a harder matter to find out their
doctrines, then to confute them. Its usual with them to say, they witness Jesus
Christ; and the death of the man Christ Jesus which suffered at Jerusalem, they
own and witness. But what do Answer to four Art. by Howgil a Bar.
they mean by these words, they own and witness? Is it any more (in truth) then
what the very Devil is forced unto, sc. that there was such a Christ, and that
he did such and such things? But as for Christ, and the death of Christ, and
his righteousness wrought and done in his own individual person to be relied
upon, and by faith rested in for justification of the Saints to life, without
any thing wrought or done in them or by them for that end; this they utterly
deny. And whereas the Word proposes Christ the rest of souls, they on the
contrary say that he is not to be rested in: They say that we must go through
him, as we go through Moses and the Prophets; as thou have seen in Foxes and
Nailors book, called A word from the Lord; where they blame the Ranters, that
they never came through the Prophets nor Moses house, nor Christ.

I have in part opened this already; but if thou would (Reader) more fully
know their meaning, what it is to go Also what it is to go through, Farnworth
exponds in his Answer. Truths defense, p 69.
through Moses and the Prophets and Christ, read but a passage in that book of
Fox and Hubberthorne, the title whereof I have formerly given thee, (sc. Truths
defense) and there p. 68. l. 24. thou shall find the meaning, (for he that will
understand the language of Cut-purses and pick-pockets, must learn it of their
fellows) and there thou shall find what it is to come through the Law. The
Answerer to the Queries says, that many do profess the Gospel and the new law
of righteousness, and are not come through the Law. And that is (as he there
explains himself) that the Law has no more power over a man, and that he is
dead to it: misapplying that which the Apostle there speaks of, the law of sin,
(or sin ruling by the Law to death and condemnation) to the holy Law of God,
the Moral Law it self, the eternal rule of righteousness; as if a Christian
should ever be dead to that, and free from that, as not to be bound to observe
it. And that this is his meaning, the next page shows; (there in the beginning)
he says, the Law and the Prophets were until John, and John until Christ: and
bids those that can receive it (that is, understand him) receive it; and if
they can, they may: So he says, implying a mystery, something more then
ordinary to be intended by him in that expression. And then tells them, that
when they come to go through Moses and through the Prophets and through John to
come to Christ, then they shall see the light is but one, sc. the light of
Moses and the light of Christ; for that was the question propounded, Whether
there were any distinction between them? as thou may see in that book, Quer.
4. There Is just ground of exception against that too; but 'twould be endless to
follow them to every by-path. But by this thou see their meaning, what it is
to go through Moses, the Prophets, and John, scil. to go beyond them, and to be
dead and free from them.

And the same say those Quakers in their short Answer to the 7 Priests: who
style themselves those Quakers who shall make all the world to quake and tremble:
printed by Calvert, 1654. In the first page of that book, they give good words
of the Law, viz. that it is holy, just and good, and perfect and pure. But for
these good words, they presently in the next line say, that it is but a
Schoolmaster till faith; and when faith is come, we are no longer under a
schoolmaster. And this (say they) is witnessed amongst us. And in the 8* page
of that book (speaking of the Moral Law) they say, that is without, and there it
shall stand as you are (the Priests) in the first nature; and that (in their
tongue) is the perishing nature. Why now, says Naylor and Fox, the Ranters
failed, in that though they had a pure convincement, and started up to be as
Gods, they did not proceed, they never came through the Prophets nor Moses
house, nor Christ. All must be gone through, we must not so much as rest in
Christ.

And indeed, what need is there? For if we be once come to be equal with God
(as they say) perfectly righteous in our own persons, so that we can perfectly
keep the Law, and not sin in any thing; what need Christ, as a Mediator or an
Intercessor? and so no need of him for any thing. This one desperate opinion is
the very cutthroat of Christ and Christianity, and makes Christ (especially as
to a believer) of none effect and useless. They are now their own Christ's, they
have gone through him and beyond him: They have now no more to do with our
Sword of the (...) drawn, p. 5.
imagined God beyond the stars, and our carnal Christ, which they say those
precious and godly servants of Christ would make appear through their
heathenish Philosophy.

Nay, beloved Reader, do they not make Christ altogether useless to the Saints,
whenas they say, the Elect were never defiled? as they do in their answer to
the 4. Querie, put by Reeve, and answered by Borro and Howgill. And in the
answer to the 5. they say again, the Elect are not, nor ever were defiled. And
surely if so, no need of a Christ, a Savior; and if the Elect have no Savior,
none else shall, and so no need of Christ at all: then he came in vain, and
dyed in vain, unless it be only to be a figure, an example, (which is the
cursed doctrine of the Socinians, and which (as in the brief Relation of the
irreligion of the Northern Quakers, p. 5. error 13.) stands charged, and not
answered in the Lancashire- Charge against them. And well may this be their
opinion, if every man have a light within him sufficient to lead him to
salvation, then sure there is no absolute necessity of a Savior.

Thus do they offer violence to Jesus Christ our Savior, making him a mere
shadow, a type, a temporary manifestation, to be gone through, not to be rested
in; and making void the chief end of his coming in the flesh, and nulling his
death and sufferings. I might farther manifest this unto thee (Reader) how they
offer violence to him by their suspicious expressions, sometimes concerning his
Divinity, sometimes his Humanity, sc. the truth of his humane nature, calling
him the Man of God, urging the words as of the Article; whereas they say God
and Man, as in the 8. Article following* where thou shall have them timely
expressed. But I am not willing to deal upon suspicions, although there be ground
enough to charge them: And I profess I am weary with raking in the stinking
puddle of their blasphemous writings. Only I desire thee, Reader, to remind one
blasphemous position of these men expressed in the last mentioned piece, viz. The
sword drawn. In the answer to the 7. Principle, the Quaker says, that whereas
they in the Article say, that Christ the man of God, is God and man in one
person, it is, says the Quaker, a lie. And I cannot omit (what I had almost
forgot) to tell thee what account they make of Jesus Christ; by an expression
of one of their eminent Proselytes, given out to an Inhabitant of this City,
(one of credit, who will make it good upon oath at any time when lawfully
required:) Art thou such a fool (said he) as to hope to be saved by that Jesus
Christ that died at Jerusalem sixteen hundred years ago?

And (to contract) that they do deny salvation by that Jesus Christ* (for they
cant, they juggle and equivocate, when they speak of Christ;) I say, that they
do deny salvation by that Jesus Christ that died at Jerusalem, in that way and
whole manner and progress as is and has been taught and professed in England
ever since the Reformation from Popery, is most manifest, not only by what I
have here declared, but also by shuffling, avoiding, and not answering those
plain questions in these things, by several who well know their opinions,
proposed unto them: And by quarrelling with, and snarling at those solid
Principles of Christian religion set forth by these godly learned and able
Divines, Dr. Goodwin, Mr. Nigh, and Mr. Sidrach Simpson. Yea, and which does
most manifestly discover them to be wicked and ungodly liars and impostors, by
their mangling of their words, and rendering them falsely; as thou may, Reader,
perceive by comparing them, when I shall presently give them unto thee. And not
only so, but leaving out whole Articles of most eminent concernment, and not so
much as mentioning them, because they durst not answer them for fear of being
discovered.

1. THat the holy Scripture is that rule of knowing God, and living unto him,
which whosoever does not believe, but betakes himself to any other way of
discovering truth, and the mind of God, in stead thereof, cannot be saved. 2.
That there is a God, who is the Creator, Governor and Judge of the world, which
is to be received by faith, and every other way of the knowledge of him is
insufficient, Heb. 11. 3. 3. That this God who is the Creator, is eternally
distinct from all the creatures, in his being and blessedness. 4. That this God
is one in three persons or subsistences. 5. That Jesus Christ is the only
Mediator between God and man, without the knowledge of whom there is no
salvation. 6. That this Jesus Christ is the true God. 7. That this Jesus Christ
is also true man. 8. That this Jesus Christ is God and man in one person. 9.
That this Jesus Christ is our Redeemer, who by paying a ransom, and bearing our
sins, has made satisfaction for them. 10. That this same Lord Jesus Christ is
he that was crucified at Jerusalem, and rose again, and ascended into heaven.
11. That this same Jesus Christ being the only God and man in one person,
remains for ever a distinct Person from all Saints and Angels, notwithstanding
their union and communion with him. 12. That all men by nature are dead in
trespasses and sins; and no man can be saved, unless he be born again, repent
and believe. 13. That we are justified and saved by grace, and faith in Jesus
Christ, and not by works. 14. That to continue in any known sin, upon what
pretense or principle soever, is damnable. 15. That God is to be worshipped
according to his own will; and whosoever shall forsake and despise all the
duties of his worship cannot be saved. 16. That the dead shall rise, and that
there is a day of Judgment, wherein all shall appear, some to go into
everlasting life, and some into everlasting condemnation.
And now Reader observe, besides, as I said, the mangling of their words, and
so perverting the sense (as I could clearly make appear, but that I dare not
thrust my dull sickle into the harvest of those worthy and expert Laborers,
whose names shall live when their opposers shall rot in oblivion,) Observe that
this Wretch, besides his not answering to any one, but evading and railing,
has wholly left out the tenth and two last. Look upon them again, Reader, and
seriously consider them, and then tell me what religion these men are of, are
they Christians? And that thou may not think this the judgment of this wretch
alone, thou shall observe such dealings from his fellows, when they come to
questions of the like nature; say nothing, or evade them* Good Reader, I must
again entreat thee to read those three omitted Articles, and satisfy me or thy
self, why they are left out; but that they are not willing to own and witness,
that the same Lord Jesus Christ, God and man in one person (which as thou have
seen before, they said was a lier, is he that was crucified at Jerusalem, and
rose again, and ascended into heaven, as the ^rticle expresses it; and so of
the other two. And to add a little to this, do but take notice of th^^^
judgment concerning this Christ (for they have another (...)hemselves) take
notice I say what they are charged with in that notable piece before quoted,
viz. The Perfect Pharisee. Their seventh position there charged is, That Christ
in the flesh, with all he did and suffered therein, was but a figure, and
nothing but an example: Which the Authors of that book thus assert by way of
proof (this, meaning the last mentioned position) is expressly found in their
book called Saul's Errand to Damascus; also this was written in that Letter
which Naylor wrote to one in Lancashire, which was objected against him by D^*
Marshal, upon account of another principle in it, viz. That he that expected to
be saved by him that died at Jerusalem, should be deceived. And this Mr.
Jaques, Minister at Bolton in Lancashire, sent his testimony under his hand,
that he would make appear when sent for.

And they may well be thus bold with him that is a mere nullity, a nothing (if
their opinion of him were true) for they question (if not deny and destroy) his
natures, both divine and humane; for which I will appeal to their expressions:
For as for his divine nature, his absolute Godhead, when as the eight Article
proposed (as before) by Mr. Goodwin, etc. says, That Jesus Christ is God and
man in one person (which as before) most blasphemously they answer, was a lie.
What does he mean to alter their words, and to call him only the man of God,
not God and man, as they express it? Whereas you say in the eight (says he)
that this Christ, the man of God, is God and man in one person, it is a lie. If
he did believe him to be God and man, would he have altered their words, and
given him such a diminishing appellation, as the man of God? a title given to
mere creatures. And as for the humane nature of Christ (his distinct,
particular, and proper body) do they not deny it? For a query being put to
George Fox, Whether Jesus Christ have a body in heaven, and whether it be the
same that appeared among men in the flesh, etc. Thou shall find him answering,
That Christ has but one body, which is (says he) the Church: and he says, he
remains in the Truths defense, page 78.
heavens; but he will not say he has a humane body there.

And being asked (as before) Whether it be the same that appeared amongst men?
He answers, It is the same that did descend, the same did ascend; not
acknowledging any other body, than what did descend. And in the eighty page,
being asked, with what bodies the Saints shall arise, and dwell, and live in
for ever? And whether every particular Saint shall have a particular body? He
answers, The Saints shall arise in that body which Christ does live in; for
(says he he is the Savior of the body, he is the head of the body, and the
resurrection, and the life of the body, and his body is but one.

So that here thou see that Christ and the Saints have no distinct bodies of
their own, and but one common body, all blended together.

And as they thus offer violence to Jesus Christ in his nature and person, so
do they also to him, in his death, bloodshed, and merits. This in part appears
by what has been showed already, in their scoffing at our hopes of being saved
by that Jesus Christ that died at Jerusalem, and in saying that they are
redeemed by the blood of Christ, but not at Jerusalem only; but (say they)
made manifest in us. So that there is something in themselves whereby they are
redeemed. Truths Defense, page 95. and in the 86. page of the same Book, they
say, There is that light and power in every man, which if he take heed to it,
and wait within, there he shall find his Savior. Mark there (within) he shall
find his Savior.

And affirming the elect were never defiled, etc. But it appears further, in
that they hold, the sufferings of Christ, now in the Saints, to be satisfactory
for sins past, present, and to come. For Howgill and Borr. as thou may see in
their Answer, herewith printed before, to the seven Queries, say thus, Thou
blasphemer* asks thou knows not what, is not Christ the same now as ever? and
is not the sufferings of Christ satisfactory wherever? Nay (which is more
horrid) if we take the question and answer together, do they not in effest say
(for they will not yet speak out all their mind) that the sufferings of Christ
now in the Saints, is all the satisfaction to, or which the Justice of God
looks for, for sins past, present, and to come For that (as thou may see) was
the question; and they answer as thou see.

Are not these men their own saviors? and as they make satisfaction for their
sin by their own sufferings, so they hold they are justified by their own
righteousness. This also shall thou find in the last quoted book, in their
answer to the 9 query, where they rail upon the querist, for asking, Whether
there be not another righteousness, by which the Saints are justified (meaning
the righteousness of Christ, as in the former query) then that righteousness
which Christ works in them, and by them? viz. the saints. For this they most
wretchedly revile and rail upon the querist, because he would have another
righteousness then the righteousness of Christ, which he works in the Saints,
and by them*

Reader, if thou be a Christian, and know any thing of Christ and the Gospel,
tell me, woulst not thou have another righteousness than that righteousness of
Christ, which he works in thee and by thee? I know thou would have (and
shall, and must have, if ever thou be saved) the righteousness of Christ
wrought in thee, and by thee, for thy sanctification: But Truths Defense says,
that the faith of God justifies alone* without imputation: and thy imputed
faith (say they) we deny.

Page 93.


do thou not look for, and rely upon another righteousness for thy
justification, viz. the righteousness of Christ wrought in his own person, and
made thine by faith and imputation?

Reader, as I told thee before, so I tell thee again, I am weary with raking in
the filthy puddle of their blasphemous opinions, and I will follow them no
further here. If thou would be confirmed in this, that these are their
received opinions, and more of the same nature, I refer thee to two Books
written by those who dwell amongst them, and have most to do with them, and
have known them longest, viz. The perfect Pharisee, and The brief relation of
the Irreligion of the Northern Quakers, both before mentioned. But as for these
men and their opinions; and particularly as to the last mentioned (I profess in
the presence of the great God) were I to choose my Religion, I would rather be a
Papist, then of these Quakers persuasion: for the Papist, though he bring in
inherent righteousness, and righteousness wrought in us and by us, as the
matter of justification yet he grants and owns another righteousness, as
necessary (yea as most necessary) viz. the righteousness of Christ wrought in
his own person; which these Quakers deny, as thou have seen. Nay further, in
express English they deny it. In their answer to the 15 Query, I own no
righteousness but what is of Christ, and wrought by thee. Oh fearful blasphemy
against the Gospel! Thus they offer violence to Jesus Christ.

And lastly (which naturally, and must necessarily follow) they offer violence
to all the ordinances of the Gospel. As they deny an outward Christ, or a
Christ without (as they call him) so do they deny all outward ordinances. So
Fox and Nailor in their book, [A word from the Lord] We deny them whose law is
without, their law without, their Church without, their baptism prayers and
singing without, their Christ without, their righteousness without, etc. If
they had denied that which is only without, they had said something; but thou
see it is otherwise, here is all outward ordinances, worship, and Christ, and
righteousness without, struck off at one blow.

And those Quakers before mentioned in their Answer to the seven Priests say,
that who are of the Lord are freed from the ordinances of men (so they call
Gospel Ordinances) and outward means; and for it most wratchedly abuse these
words, For where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. And Truths
Defense says, p. 68. That when the life of Jesus is made manifest, the
substance of all figures is come, there is no more observing them. And two
lines after they say, Who are here in their state denies all the carnal outward
observances and traditions. And in the 32 page of that book they say, (speaking
of the Ministry) that they bewitch men, in telling them of carnal means; and
call Ordinances a graven image and an Idol: and as for Baptism in particular,
they say, Christ did not send forth his Disciples to sprinkle a little dirty
water upon childrens faces, as your filthy dreamers do: and they say Christ did
not mention any water to his Disciples when he sent them forth. So that here is
no baptism with water at all, neither for one nor other; and thereupon call it
a beastical tradition, which was never commanded. Truths Defense, p. 98. And in
the next page, being demanded whether Christ did not institute his last supper
with bread and wine? For answer they tell the Querist, The cup which thou
drinkest we deny (...)or thy cup is the cup of devils and thy table is a table
of devils which is an idol and an imitation, and thy sacrifice is to devils,
and not to God. And as for Prayer, I suppose (Reader) if thou would pray to
God for any thing, thou would pray to him for Grace: but that they say is a
tempting of God, because the grace of God has appeared to all men freely.
Truths Defense, page 65. Indeed they speak it there of all means in general;
And many can witness their expressions in this kind.

Reader, I have done with this; and I suppose in these few lines it appears
that they offer violence also to all the Ordinances of the Gospel. And now what
say thou to the whole matter? Are not these, think thou, these Locusts
that are come forth upon the opening of the bottomless pit, mentioned Rev. 9.
with whom comes forth a smoke by which the sun and the air are darkened? Read
there their description: Certainly the King that rules in them and over them,
is no other then that Abaddon, Apollyon, mentioned there v. 11. Vastator, that
destroyer, that dissolver (as the word signifies) of all religion and duty. And
surely were I persuaded that the Book of the Revelation were written for the
Meridian of England, I should be also persuaded that these were the Beast
mentioned v. 13. to whom was given a mouth speaking great things and
blasphemies, who opened his mouth in blasphemy against God, to blaspheme his
name and his tabernacle, and all that dwell therein. Never men spoke higher
blasphemies with more (or so much) confidence and impudence against God, and
Christ, and Gospel, then these wretches do, except those that are professed
enemies to Christ and Christianity. And therefore so much the more abominable,
in that under the name and vizor and disguise of Christian religion, they
dissolve and destroy all. Which is that which makes it a mystery of iniquity,
and is indeed the very name and title of that great Deceiver, The Antichrist,
Rev. 17. 5. Upon her forehead was written a name, Mystery, Babylon the great,
The mother of harlots and abomination of the earth. And though he has horns
like the lamb, yet he speaks as a dragon, Rev. 13. 11. And he does great
wonders, so that he makes fire come down from heaven on the earth in the sight
of men, and deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the means of those
miracles, v. 13, 14.

But, Reader, there is one mark of the Beast upon these wretches, which I must
needs mind thee of before I leave them, which I find in the first of Tim. 4.
beginning, which because it so fully sets them forth, I Will give thee in the
words, Now the Spirit speaks expressly (and therefore you may expect it) that in
the latter times some shall depart from the Faith, giving heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrins of Devils speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their
Consciences seared with a hot iron, forbiding to marry, and to abstain from
meats, etc.

They speak lies in hypocrisy, and what is this? But to dissemble, and to
deceive, to jugle and play the cheater, speaking one thing, and meaning
another, to speak plain words, that other men use; But with a reserved sense to
themselves of their own coining: So that no man knows how (in an ordinary way)
to understand them, they pretend to speak and approve of the truth, but they
lie and play the deceivers, not using words in that sense they are usually
taken, and commonly understood. And if ever men were guilty of this kind of
hypocrisy, these Quakers are. It would be endless to trace them all along.
I Will instance in one or two, by which thou may judge of them in other things
they speak.

Its usual with them to say they own the Scriptures, yea we confirm, we
establish the Scriptures, etc. Yea that they do, And they witness the
Scripture. Now an honest man (that means plainly) would think, that they held
forth nothing but what is in, and agreeable to the Scriptures: and that they
did believe the Scriptures (which we call our Bible) to be the written Word of
God. And the rule of a Christian to walk by in things to be believed and
practiced: And that whosoever walks accordingly shall be saved. And that whosoever does
not, cannot be saved. Thus I dare say honest plain hearted men, would think by
those words, to be their meaning. But these wretches speak lies in hypocrisy:
they mean otherwise, they say in express words elsewhere, The Scriptures are
not the Saints rule of knowing God and living unto him. Answer to the first
Principle, in their sword drawn, here before Printed, I will not quarrel them
as I might, for mangling the Principle, and so altering the sense: But what
say thou Reader to their own words, do these men establish the Scripture in
thy sense, and the usual sense of that word, do not they presently say that to
affirm the Scriptures to be the Rule, is to put darkness for light, and light
for darkness. What mean they then by the Scripture? Not the written word
without, But that word (that light) that is within; and which every man has
that comes into the world; but that some stiflle it. This is the Rule. This is
the Scripture. The Scripture Short Answer to the Priests, p. 15.
in its right place, The Scriptures are not laid aside (say they) but witnessed
every Scripture in its place, i. e. within. So they page 13, 14. Let all see,
say they, you to be liars, whether we do no set the Scriptures in the heart of
every one. How, they tell you in the next words, For, say they, every one
having the light within, which shows his evil deeds, which light is his
condemnation that hates it: (And brings up to salvation, where followed, as
elsewhere often) And this say they is Scripture within. The Scripture without
is not their Scripture: We believe his Truths defense p. 10.
Doctrine (say they) not an outward testimony; And page 43. by way of reproach.
Thou say it, because the Scripture says it. Nay do they not in page 90 of
the same book, answer to the second querie, call the letter of the Scripture
dust: And calls him Serpent for asserting the word preached, as the means of
Faith, Serpent like (says he) thou feedest upon dust. And in the next page,
Answer to the fourth query; All thy hearing, and all thy prattling of that which
thou call the word, by it thou shall never get Faith (which is the gift of
God) but it is all the Serpents meat which feeds thee, thou serpent, which art
cursed above all the beasts of the field. And do not they say page 104 of that
book Answer to querie the thirtieth, That their giving forth of papers, or
printed books, it is from the immediate eternal Spirit of God. And then what
difference between their stinking rotten blasphemous papers, and the sacred
Scriptures: Yea (to make up the measure of their blasphemy) do they not say,
the Short Answer to the seven Priests, p. 20.
same spirit which gave forth the Scriptures, which gives forth now, is as true
as the Scriptures, and not contrary to the Scriptures. The charge being against
them for magnifying papers equal to the holy Scriptures, what damnable
hypocrites are these, to say they establish the Scriptures; If we take their
words in every honest man's sense. But what mean these hypocrites then, in
saying they establish, and they confirm, and they witness the Scriptures; Why
forsooth it pleases their Godship, and Christship (or rather devilship) to
speak from their eternal spirit, in the Scripture language, and so add their
Authority to it, as the Papists; The Scriptures are but as Aesops Fables with
them, if not allowed of and confirmed by the authority of their Church, Or else
they establish it by asserting it to be within them in the power of it. (For I
would allow them all fair interpretation.) But I pray, are not the Scriptures
truth, and the written and sacred Word of God in themselves, whether man does
believe or entertain them, yea or no? Does man's believing them, make them the
Word of God, more then they were before? Its true, as to his comfort or
advantage that receives them not; to him they are not, as the Word of God. But
in themselves they are, and will be, though all men in the world reject them.
They speak lies therefore in hypocrisy, in saying they establish the word. But
further (to discover their lying hypocrisy) they speak not forsooth from the
letter of the Scripture, i. not as taught by or from the letter, i. what they
get by reading of the Scripture in the letter. No: though the Scripture had
never been written, they could have spoken as they do, from and by the eternal
and immediate and infallible spirit. But oh ye hypocrites: I Will ask you a
question, did our English Translators of the Scriptures, teach the eternal
Spirit to speak English? Or (if you would speak without lying) Did you never
read the Scripture in our English translation; that you speak the very words
for the most part: except your canting language, from Jacob Behmen (as the
straying of Eves mind and lust into the visibles: and being redeemed out of
the perishing nature; and such like stuff) will any man believe that the
spirit (which gives the gift of utterance and expression) could not have spoken
the same truths, in other English; As every one knows, may be done, and yet
keep the same sense and truth? But it must pedantically teach you (like
schoolboys) to speak so by rote? Fie for shame, It smells, leave your
hypocritical lying, and do not so poorly and basely belie the spirit, and speak
against that light which is within you.

But once more (and a little further to this) what leads your Holiness forth to
speak in Scripture language? Is it not hypocrite-like, that thereby you might
catch poor simple, plainhearted people in your snares, who having a due and
reverent esteem of the Scriptures, you allure by pretenses of establishing the
Scripture to insinuate those poisonous doctrines, which I have before
discovered you to be guilty of? As for Antichrists other two Doctrines of
forbidding to marry, and abstaining from meats, I shall not now prosecute, I
may speak of that when I shall a little open the effects of their teachings!

But before I speak to that, I shall but suggest my apprehensions of the end
these men may have in their undertakings, and on whose errand they are come: I
will present them, and leave them to thy judgment.

They may come in their own, Antichrists, or the Devils errand*

First, they may come in their own, to cheat the people of the money, and this
hypocritical lying too: For though they rail upon Ministers, as Preaching for
hire (which who so does, let him answer for himself) yet they themselves do
teach, That where they have planted and sown, there they may reap: Which in
plain English is this, Those whom they have seduced, they may take money of:
and whether they do or no, time will discover: Sure I am they have necessary
supplies for nature, which some able Ministers have not: and no doubt a large
Diocese which these ramble over, will yield more then any particular Parish.
And they plead hard for Community; for in their Answer to the seven Priests,
page 22. whereas it seems they had charged them with reading for it.

The Quakers there answer and say, Here you are against the Spirit of life: For
(say they) they that did believe* were of one heart; and they that do believe,
are born of God; and amongst such there was no oppressor, no taskmaster; and
its said all things were common, and no man said, this is my own: And conclude
thus, You who are not come to Christ's Doctrine, who is not come to give your
coat, yet who has two, you we deny.

So that though they come not for money beforehand, they can take it
afterward; and though (with the Friars) they may not touch money, they have a
poak in their sleeve, into which if you put it, some can take it out, and know
what to do with it. So that this may be one end of their coming.

Secondly, they may come upon Antichrists errand; and not much improbable; for
Lancashire and those parts, is as famous for Papists as Witches; and on good
grounds we may conceive them to be Antichrists factors, if we consider their
doctrins: For any intelligent Reader may easily discover the doctrines of
Universal grace, Free Will, Satisfaction by our own sufferings, Justification
by inherent holiness, Ability to keep the Law, Perfection: Nulling the Doctrine
of Original sin, and the Popish real presence. All which, with some other
things, I intended particularly to evidence from their writings; but I fear,
being too large. There are many other wretched opinions of theirs, worse then
the Papists, which others have discovered from other of their writings, which I
have not seen; and I leave it to others who have more strength and leisure, if
they see cause, to discover to the world. And truly it is not improbable that
some of these fellows themselves may be of the Popish tribe, and Scholars,
though professing themselves mechanic; for is it not usual?

And there is a notable story to this purpose lately printed, alled The false
Jew, wherein is expressed his design, and his discovery, from his own
acknowledgment, how that he was sent over from Rome by a special order from the
Jesuits, and with personal unction, and benediction from the Pope; and how one
while he was to have come over under the notion of a Tailor, with direction to
join with the Anabaptists, and to preach Notions. But now he came over under
the pretext of being a Converted Jew being an excellent Hebritian) and
circumcised at Rome for this purpose. To what, and whither will not a deluded
spirit lead a man! And in that relation you shall find how he joined with the
Anabaptists at Wrexham* and was rebaptized by them, where he preached notions
among them: Amongst others this was one, That that place, Luke 17. 21. where it
is said, The Kingdom of God is within you, he gave this as the most proper
sense of the Original, sc. The Kingdom of God is so within you, as that it is
not without you in Forms and Ordinances: with which interpretation he said
Lieutenant Col. Paul Hobson *a Teacher among the Anabaptists) was mightily
taken* How many flies may the blind man swallow.

Another design of this deceiver, was to bring the authority of our Translation
of the Scripture into question. And prevailed so far that some of them
entertained scruples about it. But now the design is new molded. And now, not
translations only, but all outward Scriptures must be denied and rejected. And
these men can from their infallible spirit make new ones. Witness the daring
boldness and impudence of these Quakers, and their hypocritical lying, and
belying the Truths defense, P. 39.
Scriptures. For Fox, and Hubberthorn, in their book bring in these words, Take
heed to the light of God within you. And not only produce them in another
character (the same with their Scripture quotations) But also urge them as the
Apostles words thus: sc. As the Apostle said, Take heed to the light of God
within you. Neither citing what Apostle, or where* As indeed, it is no where in
all the Scripture And Farnworth in his late piece of women's speaking in the
Church; Printed by Calvert 1654. In the head of his discourse, where usually in
printed books the Text is placed: He has these words in a distinct character,
as his Authority for his following discourse. But the spirit of truth may
declare through the Temple, and dwell in it, which the world cannot receive.
And then quotes, 1 Cor. 6. 19. and Joh. 14. 16, 17. Now what man in the world
can find any such words as the former part, in all the Scriptures. Should we
add to, and mangle the Scriptures thus; how should we be cursed and raild at: as
well we might, by every true Christian; but not by these men.

Indeed Reader it is manifest, these men's intents are to fetch people off from
the Scripture altogether: That so the Authority thereof being rejected; they
may be the better prepared upon a new assault (in another disguise) to
entertain the infallible Authority of the Romish Chair. For the same course the
Papists take to render them of small esteem: do these men run. For the
learned of them, pick out all such places as seem contrary one unto another:
and urge them to the people: denying to any a power of reconciliation;
referving that to their own un-erring spirit And from thence assume a power to
make the whole Authentical; or otherwise. And do not these men the same? It may
therefore be very probable, (all forewritten considered) they come of
Antichrists errand.

And thirdly and lastly, They may come of the devils errand. He has many
messengers and servants, and some serve him more eminently and immediately then
others. And they are Heretics, False Teachers, and Seducers. I shall take this
for the present granted. And that these men are sent by him in a more especial
manner is extremely probable.

If you consider the manner of their coming, and their matter. Their matter you
have seen, sc. reviling, railing, reproaching, lying, falsifying blaspheming,
etc. And for the manner, entitling the Eternal, Holy, most pure, and unerring
Lord God to all these horrid abominations. Being seconded with preternatural
obsessions, possessions, and operations upon the bodies and spirits of men
women and children, by violent impulsions, motions, and actions. The parties
being so carried on, without confederacies, and fore-contrived designs: And
merely patients in the business: and not able to withstand them: And being for
confirmation of such diabolical doctrines: must needs be the devils operations.
For this is a sure Conclusion. The blessed spirit of Truth will never give
testimony to lies. And indeed the very nastiness and beastliness of their
quakings (purging upwards and downwards) with most distorted gestures, may
easily persuade, they come from that unclean spirit. And that they are swinish
possessions: not divine raptures. I shall not enter upon discourse of these
things: It has been done by others. I shall therefore give the Reader in two
stories from the North, which may give some satisfaction in this particular.
Both stories I have taken out of the Mirror for Saints and Sinners, written by
that industrious servant of Christ Mr Samuel Clark Pastor of Benet-Finck
London, the second Edition.

The second story is by him contracted, and I was the more willing to to take
it so: to save labor. I had the story it self at large in print: but having
lent it forth could never recover it.

The first is this.

ANno Christi 1653. about the month of October, came some Quakers out of the
North into Wales, about Wrexham, endeavoring to win some professors to their
party. Their principal design was to disgrace the Ministry and all public
Ordinances. They held Universal redemption, Free Will, and falling from grace:
They published that all men have the pure seed of God in them, boasting that
themselves were perfect, and without sin; that they knew at the first sight,
sincere Christians from hypocrites. At meetings after long silence, sometimes
one, sometimes more, fell into a great and dreadful shaking and trembling in
their whole bodies, and all their joints, with such risings and swellings in
their bellies and bowels, sending forth such shreekings, yellings, howlings and
roarings, as not only affrighted the spectaters, but caused the dogs to bark,
the swine to cry, and the cattle to run about, to the astonishment of all that
heard them. By these artifices, one William Spencer was drawn to leave the
Church, and to follow them; whereupon at several times he fell into the same
quaking fits; and lying with one of them three several nights, the last night
being much troubled, and not able to sleep, upon a sudden he heard something
buzzing, and humming about the Quakers head like an humble-bee, which did sore
affright him, whereupon he sought to rise; but the Quaker persuaded him to lie
still, and immediately there arose a great wind and storm, which shook the
house wherein they lay; which adding much to his former fear, he again
attempted to arise; but the Quaker still pressed him to lie still, persuading
him to expect the Power to come (which they often promise to their Proselytes)
and thereupon he again heard the former humming noise, which more and more
terrified him* so that he strove vehemently to rise; but the Quaker laid his
head upon Spencers shoulder, and did blow hard like the hizzing of a Goose
several times toward his face, or mouth, which made him leap out of his bed in
a great astonishment, crying for a light, and guide to conduct him to a
neighbors house: and upon this occasion left them all together; testifying the
truth hereof to the Quakers face, before many witnesses, the Quaker not denying
it, attested under several hands.

The second, which is a story published by one that was seduced and possessed,
and is set forth by himself by way of recantation and admonition.

IN May last, 1653. in Kendal in Westmerland there was one John Gilpin, who was
very desirous to associate himself with the Quakers at their meeting; and
speaking with one of them about it, he much encouraged him to hold on his
purpose, and accordingly he went to them, when one Chapter Atkinson was speaker,
whose drift was to deny all Ministerial Teaching and Ordinances, together with
all Notional knowledge gained by the use of such means, and to become as if
they had never learned any such thing; and now to be taught of God within
themselves, by waiting upon an inward light, which (as he said) lies low hidden
under the earth, viz. The old man which is of the earth, earthly.

Gilpin was immediately so taken with this new doctrine, that he resolved to
close with them, was afraid to read any good books, or hear any preaching
Minister, or to call to remembrance any thing which he had formerly learned
concerning God, Christ, his own estate, or any other subject contained in the
Scriptures; for they told him that all such knowledge was but Notional, carnal,
and hanging upon the tree of knowledge, adding, Cursed is every one that
hangs on this tree.

One of them told him, that Christ was as man, had his failings, distrusted
God, etc.

At his next meeting, the Speaker urged him to take up the Cross daily, saying,
Carry the Cross all day, and it will keep thee at night. He urged him to
hearken to a voice within him, spoke much of a light within them, which Gilpin
not yet finding, was much troubled, desiring that he might fall into quaking,
thinking that thereby he should attain to the immediate discoveries of God to
him. And accordingly shortly after as he was walking in his chamber, he began
to quake so extremely that he could not stand, but fell upon his bed, where he
howled and cried in a terrible and hideous manner (as others of them used to
do,) yet was he not afraid, but looked upon it as the pangs of the new birth.
After half an hour by degrees he ceased from houling, and rejoiced that now he
could witness against the Ministers of England as false Prophets and Priests of
Baal. All the night after he was much troubled with dreams about his sins; and
when he awaked, he thought thereon; he perceived something lighting on his
neck, and giving him a great stroke, which caused much pain; and so a second,
third, and fourth, each less then other, descending till it came to the middle
of his back, and then he discerned something to enter into his body, which
Satan suggested to be the Spirit of God like a Dove, and he thought he heard a
voice within him saying, It is day; adding twice, As sure as it is light, so
sure shall Christ give thee light.

Two or three days after he waited for more light, and walking in his garden,
he lay down with his face to the earth, at which time his right hand began
extremely to shake, and he was in a great rapture of joy, apprehending it to be
a figure of his spiritual marriage and union with Christ: Then did the power
within raise him, and set him on his feet, and afterward laid him on his back,
brought his sins into his remembrance, causing his hand at every sin to strike
the ground; and he heard a voice saying, Now is such a sin mortified: then was
he persuaded that all his sins were mortified at once. Then rose he up, and it
was said to him, Ask what thou will of the Father in my name, and he will give
it thee. Then said Gilpin, What shall I ask? It was answered, Ask wisdom in the
first place. Then he desired that such things might be given him as made for
Gods glory, and the good of others. It was answered, that his request was
granted, and that he should be endowed with the gift of Prophecy, and singing
praises to God.

Presently after he went to another of their meetings, where Atkinson was again
the speaker: with which he was more affected then formerly, for that (as he
conceited) he could inwardly witness to what he spoke. Atkinson having done,
one John Audland spoke; in the time of whose speaking Gilpin was by the Devil
within him, drawn out of his chair, and thrown upon the ground, where he lay
all night; all which time his body and members were all in motion, being turned
from his back on his belly, and so back again several times, making crosses
with his legs, and his hands moving on the ground as if he had been writing,
and he heard (as he thought) a voice saying, that that writing with his hand on
the ground, signified the writing of the law in his heart. Then were his hands
moved to his head, and he heard a voice saying, Christ in God; and God in
Christ, and Christ in thee. Which words he was compelled to sing forth in a
strange manner, and with such a voice as was not his own; he sung also diverse
phrases of Scripture, which were given into him. Then the Devil raised him up,
and bade him be humble: then brought him on his knees again, and he heard the
voice saying, Stoop, low, low! and when his face was almost at the ground, it
said to him, Take up thy cross and follow me.

Then rising, he was led out of the house by the Devil at a backdoor to the
River, and back again, and then into the Town, where he was drawn down the
street, to adore that he knew not. Whereupon two of them that followed him,
said, Whither will you go? this is the Fiddlers house. Gilpin answered, Be it
whose house it will, Christ leads me hither, and hither I must go. Then was his
hand forced to knock at the door, and a voice bade him say, Behold, Christ
stands at the door and knocks. The Fiddler opening the door, he went in, and
taking down a Base-Viol, he was forced to play on it and to dance. Whereupon he
questioned what power led him to such actions? and the voice presently answered
him, This is not because I love Music, for I hate it; but to signify to thee
what joy there is in heaven at thy conversion, as also what spiritual melody
thou shall have hereafter.

Then was he led out of the house, and carried through the Town, being forced,
as he went, to proclaim, I am the way, the truth, and the life. Then went he to
his own house, and there by the Devil was thrown down, and forced to make
circles with his hands; the voice telling him, that he was now putting off the
old man. His hand also was forced to take up a stone which lay on the floor,
which he thought to be like a man's heart; and the Voice told him, that Christ
had taken that stone out of his heart, and given him an heart of flesh. Then
holding it forth to the spectators, he was forced to say* Except you see signs
and wonders, you will not believe. And throwing the stone amongst them, he
said, Lo here is my heart of stone.

Then was he cast upon his back on the ground, and the voice said, Thou shall
have two Angels to keep thee, and immediately two Swallows came down the
Chimney, and sat on a Shelf near him; whereupon he cried, My Angels, my Angels,
and withal he held out his hand to them, expecting they should have come to
him, but they flew up the Chimney again, though the Doors and Windows were
open. Then was he carried upon his hands and knees out of the doors into the
street; and when his wife would have stopped him, he said, he must not be
stopped, he must forsake wife, children, and all to follow Christ.

Thus went he up the Street, thinking that he bore a Cross upon his neck, till
some pulled him out of the mire and dirt, and by force carried him into his
house; whereupon, pointing at one of them, he said, Christ points at thee, Thou
art a wicked woman, and have hindered the work of the Lord. Then the voice asked
him, Where is thy Cross? upon which he thought he saw a visible Cross hanging
in a thread, which with his hand he put behind his neck. Thus he continued till
the Evening, when many of the Quakers coming to him, said, Be lowly minded, and
hearken to the voice within thee; and so they left him, his strength being
almost quite spent with his restlessness.

His wife and family going to bed, he remained alone, when he began to question
whether these strange actions were divine or diabolical: whereupon he trembled,
and his hand was forced to take up a knife which lay by, and to point it to his
throat; and the voice said to him, Open a hole there, and I will give thee
eternal life. But he threw away the knife, and his wife coming to him, at her
persuasion, he went to bed* and all the night after he assured himself, That he
was possessed of the Devil; and in the Morning he roared and cried out: Now the
Devil is gone out of me; at which instant, he and his family heard it thunder,
though no others heard it.

Shortly after the Devil came to him again, and told him, That it was Satan
that had possessed and seduced him hitherto, but now Christ was come, and had
cast out Satan; and told him also, That what he had done the day before, was in
obedience unto Satan; and that as he had served Satan the day before in his
clothes, so now this day, he must undo all that he had done in his shirt, in
obedience to Christ; whereupon he rose out of his bed, went into the Street in
his shirt, but some stopped him; whereupon the Devil within, told him, That he
must be carried into the house by four women, or else, That he should for ever
stand there like a Pillar of Salt, as Lots wife did. Then four women carried
him into his bed; whereupon he told them, That the day before he had been doing
the Devils work, but now he must do Christ's work, etc.

Then he fell to acting in his shirt upon the bed, as he had done the day
before upon the floor, Playing topsie-turvey from one bed to another, the Devil
biding him not to fear; for, says he, I will give thee strength. Then it told
him, That the day before the Devil bad him bare his Cross, but now Christ bad
him lay it aside, for Christ takes no pleasure in Crosses; nor will be
worshipped, as yesterday he had done. It said further, Yesterday the Devil made
thee lie all day long on the ground, but now I have provided a bed for thee;
for my yoke is easy. He promised also to give him Bread of Life to eat, and
Water of Life to drink; and that out of his Belly should flow Rivers of Living
waters. Then were his Teeth moved, as if he was eating, and he thought that he
felt in his Belly a flowing up and down of waters. He was told also, That
yesterday the Devils Angels waited on him; but now Christ's Angels should guard
him: Hereupon he saw two Butterflies in the Windows, and his hand was forced to
take one of them, and to put it into his mouth, which he swallowed down; then
he was moved to take the other, and put it to his Throat; and he was told, That
it should enter in there; For (says the voice) nothing is impossible to him
that believes. Then he was forced to make circles on the bed; whereupon he
began to suspect, that he was acted by Satan; and thereupon in great fear cried
out, Lord what will thou have me do? But the Devil answered, It is too late to
cry unto God; for sentence is already passed against thee* Hereupon he lay down
in despair; but presently the Devil told him the third time, That it was a
white Devil that deluded him this second time; but that now Christ was come
indeed, and would cast him out; and accordingly he thought the Devil was
ejected: But then all his members fell on working, as if the pangs of death had
been upon him, the voice telling him, That they were the pangs of the New
birth; and that now Christ was new born in him. Thus he continued a whole day,
and the Devil told him, That now he should work wonders, and cast out devils in
Christ's name. Then came in two of the Quakers, to whom he said, I have two
Devils cast out of me; but now Christ is in me of a truth. Then said the Devil
to him, I was crowned with a crown of thorns, but I will crown thee with a
crown of glory; and bad him set his fist upon his head, Which (says he) to the
standersby, shall appear as a glorious crown When he did this, he asked them,
what they saw; they answered, nothing: Whereupon the Devil told him, That they
saw the Crown on his head, but were so stricken with admiration, that they could
not express what they saw. Then the Devil bad him tell one of the Quakers,
That he had a Devil in him, but he should cast it out; and, that he should
quake and tremble, which accordingly he did: Then the Devil bad him to speak to
him to fall flat on the ground, which he did, and presently rose again;
whereupon Gilpin asked him, Whether now the Devil was gone out of him? to which
he answered, not; but the Devil told him, That he was now ejected, etc.

A while after he began again to question, Whether in all this he were not
deluded by Satan, which made him fall into a great fear; and then the Devil
told him, That all this while he had been serving him, and blaspheming God; and
that now it was too late to repent. Hereupon he fell into despair for a time,
Thinking that every thing, which he either saw or heard, was the Devil, that
came to fetch him away: Sometimes he thought* That he should be taken away in a
flame of fire; other times, That the Earth would open, and swallow him. Yet at
last it pleased God (as it seems) to give him repentance and peace in his
Conscience; whereupon he published a Narrative of these things, to discover the
danger of these ways; and to be for Caution to others, to take heed how they go
out of Gods ways, and forsake his Ordinances; least falling into the error of
the wicked, they decline from their former stedfastness; and least not
receiving the love of the truth, that they might be saved, God gave them over
to strong delusions to believe a lie.

This is attested under the hand of the Major of Kendal, the Minister,
Schoolmaster, and some others.

And now Reader are not these Arguments of Diabolical Possessions; and in the
last story, was not the Devil many times devout, as it were, and
seemingly-humble and religious: I wont enlarge. But remember, the Devil will
advise to some good things, with a purpose to deceive. And there thou may
read our Quakers Mortification, and the end on it, sc. to overthrow Religion.

And thus you see on whose errand these men come, and whose work they do;
either their own, the Popes, or the Devils, or all three. But sure not from
God* it being his, neither for matter, nor manner; and they having no call,
either ordinary, or extraordinary: For besides the no-satisfaction given to us
by them, before the Magistrates in this particular (which they all attest) a
Merchant of this City upon the Road discoursing with one of them, and demanding
of him what miracles they wrought to justify their extraordinary call; he
answered, We do work miracles, but thou have no eyes to see them Much after the
conceit of a dame of this Town (now of* the gang) who some few years since,
having some conference with one, once a Minister in this City, from whom I
received it. She affirmed she was God. Why then, said he, you can do all that
God can do: I can said she. And there lying upon his Table a Greek Testament;
why then, said he, make me such another Book as this is. To which she replied,
It is done. Let me see it then said he, where is it? In my fancy, said she. And
indeed this is a short Summary of all their Religion; it is all in their fancy,
and no where else. I thought to have set forth the effects of their doctrines
(for their fruits discover them, and will do more and more) As breaking the
bonds of duty in all relations, which we evidently find here already, Husband
and Wife, Parents and Children, Masters and Servants, Magistrates and Subjects,
Ministers and People. I need not instance, it is so evident; though I bless the
Lord, I find it not in my Family, nor Congregation: And I look upon it as a
singular mercy.

There are one or two things which seem to take much with people, sc. The
multitude of followers; and the effect of their teaching; in prevailing with
people to lay aside pride, and worldly contentments. I will say little to the
first; not much to either.

To the first: Novellism is the reigning sin of this age; the multitude are as
unstable as water; they are led by opinion; run for company; and are
sufficiently ignorant. And for those few, who seem to know more then others,
and pretended to Religion: They are for the most part (if not all) very
fanatic* and withal proud of their knowledge, and self-conceited. And stepping
beyond their line and call, to teach others; by degrees have come to scorn to
be taught by others: And at length (as error is fertile) they have come to
slight all outward Ordinances, as too gross and carnal for their more refined
spirits: Which has been nursed and cherished by some flattering Teachers, which
they heap up unto themselves, for that purpose; All others being an abomination
to them.

And now if such as these be given up of God to delusions to believe lies, Is
it a wonder? I conclude this, Multitude of followers is no Argument of truth.
If so, Antichrist were the best Christian; and St. Peter, 2 Epist, 2 Chapter at
the beginning, tells us, We must look for many Seducers, and many followers.

As for the second, Laying aside pride, and worldly contentments. Laying aside
Apparel, is not always laying aside pride; nay, may not the putting off
Apparel, be the putting on of pride? What else prompted the Pharisees to
disfigure themselves, and to look ugly? But that they might appear to men to be
religious; that they might see, they fasted and exercised acts of
Mortification. Was not this pride?

I could enlarge here; but I will not; because I fear too large already. But
may not an unknown Devil go forth to make way for more? What may the meaning be
of that, Luke 11: 24, 25, 26. Of an unclean spirit going out of a man, and
returning again, finds his house swept and garnished; and then goes and takes
seven Devils worse then himself, and they enter in and dwell there; And so the
man's end is worse then the beginning. Worse then when that unclean Devil was in
him* Cannot the Devil change sides and shapes, and gain by it? What think you
of the mortifications, pennances, whippings, fastings, pilgrimages, etc. of the
Papists, is not (think you) the Devil well pleased with it? Does not he farther
it all he can, to confirm them in their Superstitions and Idolatries: and to
draw others to their persuasions? It is but one Devil giving way to another (or
more) to advance their masters service; and if there be not seven Devils in
these men's hearts worse then that one Devil upon their backs, Let all men
judge, by what I have discovered.

If ever men were possessed with spirits of lying, railing, proud censuring,
blaspheming, dissembling, equivocating, prevaricating, forging, and falsifying
the writings* both of God and men; These men are.

Reader, I suppose, I have demonstrated all this clearly to thee; I will give
thee but a Testimony of one of their own Countrymen (that knew them sooner,
longer, and better then I have) concerning their excellency in the first, and I
shall hasten to an end. And it is the Author of The brief Relation of the
Irreligion of the Northern Quakers; Who in his Preface professes he has not
aggravated any thing, nor made a mountain of their molehill. And he tells
the^* that those who are acquainted with them, know, that what he has said, is
rather a molehill to their mountain. And he in 24, 25, pages of that Book
says, Many of them will be as ready to say, and unsay any thing, as if lying
was a virtue. They make no Conscience of raising false reports, against those
especially who do any way oppose them: Witness that lying Pamphlet of Saul's
errand to Damascus, wherein there are a hundred untruths, as may be proved by a
hundred witnesses. It is, says he, the Testimony of a faithful Minister of
Christ concerning them. Not in half an hours discourse, with most of those I
have discoursed with, but you shall find plain and downright lies. Some of
them, says he, have come to my house, and said, they had a message from God to
me. Upon my speedy demanding it, they have point blank (almost in the same
breathing time) denied it.

When some that have been in some measure able, from the Word of Truth, to
manifest their errors, have discoursed with those Wells without Water: Though
themselves have stood like men inwardly convicted and ashamed, utterly unable
to gainsay, and sometimes totally silenced, and as mute as fishes. Yet when
these Champions of Errors have gone away, they have boasted of their conquests,
and how gloriously they had foiled, and stopped the mouths of their adversaries.

Thus, says he, wholly by lies, lying Doctrines, lying Revelations, lying
Wonders, lying Reports, they do endeavor to build up the Kingdom of the father
of lies amongst us. And for a close of all (and for a further manifestation of
the impostures, juglings, and prevarications of these men) I propose to be
considered by any rational man or woman in the world; and let them satisfy me,
or themselves, in their own consciences, What may the meaning of that
expression of theirs, so often uttered among their Proselytes, and sometimes in
the hearing of others, be, That they have something to deliver to the world,
which it is not yet fit to receive? I do not remember whether I have proposed
this already: But if I have, it is worthy again to be remembered and considered.
And I say, let any one tell me, what it can mean; but some such desperate and
horrid opinion* which should they yet publish, all true Christians would
abominate and avoid them. Some such a one as this, which they have whispered
into those whom they have made sure to their party, sc. That they are not such
fools, as to hope to be saved by that Jesus Christ that was crucified at
Jerusalem above sixteen hundred years ago. And then let any man judge, whether
these be not the men the Apostle Peter prophesies of, in his second Epistle and
the second Chapter.

I have done my work: It remains now for thee to do thine; which is to make a
wise improvement of all to thy self. Of the Mystery of Godliness; to make it
thine own, by getting an interest in it, and in walking according to it. Of
ungodliness; by avoiding, and eschuing it, and the fautors and abettors of it.
In doing whereof, God will have the glory of his Free Grace; and thou shall
have the comfort, the benefit; And my self the end, my labor.

Only according to promise, I am here to give in the copy of certain Queries,
sent to the Ministers of this City; by the two Quakers, Howgil and Borough.

To all you who call your selves Ministers in the City of Bristol, and has
taken the Office upon you.
Query. 1. WHether have you that light, that lights every one that comes into
the world, which is the light of Christ, yea or no? And if so, then why do you
deny and say, he has not enlightened every one, which light does teach and
guide all that love it, to God; and condemns them that disobey it, as Christ
says who is the light?

2. Whether there be any condemnation, but the light which Christ says is the
condemnation of them that hate it?

3. Whether they be not Antichrists that acts those things now which Christ
Jesus forbad? then seeing Christ forbad such things then as you uphold now, did
he deny them then, and justify them now, or did he cry woe against them then,
and justifies now? As have the chiefest places in the Assemblies, as you have
inward and outward, who sits high in your imaginations and thoughts, and are
called of men Masters?

4. Tell us what Christ that is that has made you free, who you are made free
by, seeing you act contrary to that Christ which gave forth the Scriptures,
which the Prophets and Apostles witnessed, and preached the resurrection of,
and are in the steps of the Pharisees, which the true Christ cried woe against,
and are those that are called of men Master, and that stand praying in the
Synagouges like the Pharisees, which the true Christ that made his Apostles
free, bid them not pray as they did, which the woe was against: Can you deny it?

5. Whether any shall ever attain to any thing but in the way which is Christ,
or taking heed to the light of Christ within them, yea or no?

6. Whether they are not Seducers that draw people from the light within, which
is the light of Christ, to observe the imaginations, as to sprinkle Infants,
and to tell of Sacrament, and so leads them into a carnal unity from the light
of Christ.

7. Whether you have the same eternal spirit, which gave forth the Scriptures,
yea or no?

8. Whether the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles gave a right meaning to the
Scriptures, when they gave them forth, or left them to you to give a meaning of
them, yea or no?

9. Whether the Plagues be not added to them that add to the Prophesies written
in the Book, and whether his name be not diminished out of the book of life,
which diminishes ought therefrom, and whether you can witness this name, yea
or no?

10. Whether you have an infallible judgment, to judge of things eternal, yea
or no?

11. Whether you have heard the voice of the living God of heaven and earth,
yea or no? or whether you take not the Prophets words, and the Apostles words,
and say he says, when as he never spoke to you?

12. Why do you sing David's experiments in rhyme and meter, and when you read
them, you keep on your hats, and when you sing you put them off?

13. Whether any man shall so grow up under your Ministry that he need no man
to teach him, yea, or no? seeing the Apostle says you shall not need to teach
every man his brother; and how many have you that have been so long teachers,
that have been brought up in this condition?

14. Where did the Apostles baptize any and preach repentance to them 20. or
30. years after? show an example for these things that you do?

15. Whether there be any other light, but the light of Christ, that convinces
of sin, and whether the light be not one and the same in him that loves it, as
in him that hates it, show us this by the Scriptures?

16. Whether is he one and the same, that condemns for sin, and which justifies
the Saint from sin?

17. What that grace of God is, and where it is, that has appeared to all men?

18. Whether that in you which judges upon the Scriptures, upon the Saints
condition, and upon them you call deceivers, be eternal and infallible, yea or
no?

19. Whether did Christ send any of his Disciples forth to preach the
Scriptures, and the letter, yea or no?

20. What are the marks of the false Prophets and Antichrists, which is in the
world? and whether to preach for hire, and to seek for their gain from their
quarters, and to use their tongues, and say, he says, when he has not spoken
to them, be not signs of false Prophets now?

21. Whether or no are ye Ministers of that Church of which Christ is the head?

22. What that everlasting Gospel is, which the Apostles were witnesses of, and
where it is?

23. Whether a man shall ever overcome the body of sin, whiles he is here,
seeing no unclean thing shall enter, etc.

24. Whether will you own a Purgatory, yea or no? if a man must not be cleansed
from sin whiles he is here, declare us from the Scriptures, where that place of
cleansing is?

25. Whether they put not Christ to open shame, who say he is not able to save
to the uttermost, those that come unto him.

And for answer, I say they have most (if not all) been answered already by
others. As by Mr. Samuel Eaton, and some whose names I have forgotten; I
perceive they are their common baubles that they toy withal every where. And
for my part I have better work to do, then to be so employed, and so I think
have the rest of my Brethren here; but especially my Lord and Master advises me
Not to give that which is holy unto dogs, nor to cast pearl before swine, least
they trample them under their feet, and they turn again and rend me. That which
I have written, I writ it not for them, but to make them better known to
others. I expect that according to their beastly nature (of which thou have a
sufficient discovery) they will be barking, and howling, and snarling; but I am
resolved they shall not bite: I shall (as I said before) consider I am a
Traveller, and have business to dispatch, I must not therefore make a stop at
the barking of every dog, but ride on my way and answer them with my horse
heels. And when their commanding favorites here, shall grow so honest as to
make restitution of those considerable sums they have gotten by briberie,
oppression, withholding men's lands and rents, and detaining the dues of orphans
and widows, and to be humbled, and repent indeed, and dissemble no longer, nor
cousen us with their old clothes. And when these Quakers themselves shall leave
lying, and railing, and speak to the matter in question; when they shall
soberly answer these twenty solid and substantial Queries proposed unto them
by Mr. Bennet herewith before printed; then I Will answer theirs; till then I
resolve with him, and with his words I conclude,

These are matters of great concernment, and if you refuse to answer them in
writing, spare your tongues and spare your papers; for J will henceforth
neither hear the one, nor read the other.

And so here is

The End.

