IMPRIMATVR

Liber cui Titulus, Christian Loyalty, etc.

Ex Aed. Lamb. Julii 10. 1678. Geo. Thorp, Rev. in Christo Patri and Dom.
Domino Guliel. Archiep. Cant. a Sacris Domesticis.

Christian Loyalty: OR, A DISCOURSE, Wherein is Asserted that just Royal
Authority and Eminency, which in this Church and Realm of England, is yielded
to the KING.

Especially concerning Supremacy in CAUSES ECCLESIASTICAL.

Together with The disclaiming all Foreign Jurisdiction; And the unlawfulness
of Subjects TAKING ARMS Against the KING.

By WILLIAM FALKNER, Preacher at S. Nicholas, in Lyn Regis.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for Walter Kettilby, at the Bishops-Head in St Paul's
Churchyard, MDCLXXIX.

To the MOST REVEREND FATHER in GOD, WILLIAM By DIVINE PROVIDENCE LORD
ARCHBISHOP OF CANTERBVRY, Primate of all ENGLAND and Metropolitan; And one of
His Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace,
I Have in the following Discourse, undertaken a Vindication of those public
Loyal Declarations of this Church and Kingdom, which are of great concernment,
not only in the Civil Government, but also in the Christian Religion: and I
hope your Grace will therefore not account it improper that this should be
presented unto your self. For the chief things I have taken upon me to defend,
are such special Branches of the Doctrine of our Church, that in this part and
Age of the World, they are in a manner peculiar to it, and to them who with it
have herein embraced the true Reformed profession. But both the Roman Church,
and diverse other different Sects and parties, among their other Errors and
Heresies, entertain such disloyal Positions as are of dangerous importance unto
Government, wherein (besides some other things) there is too near a Conjunction
between them.

And these things are of so great consequence in Christianity, that the main
Foundations of Righteousness, Peace, and Obedience are thereby established, all
which necessary duties are much insisted on by our Saviors Doctrine. And
therein the regular and orderly behavior of inferior Relations, is
particularly enjoined, for the gaining reputation to our Religion; because a
temper fitted for Christian subjection, supposes Pride, Passion, and
Perverseness to be subdued; and that in the fear of God, an Humble, Meek, and
peaceable Spirit is introduced, which are things wherein our Savior has given
us his Example.

And the principal matter of this Discourse concerning the Kings Supremacy in
all Causes, and the unlawfulness of Subjects taking Arms, is of the greater
concernment, because the contrary ill Principles which many have imbibed, have
been very pernicious to several parts of the World, for many hundred years
past. Which hurtful Positions have prevailed the more among men, by their being
covered over with plausible pretenses: as if those of the former sort were
needful, to assert the just interest and honor of the Christian Church; and
those of the latter sort, to provide for the safety of the Commonwealth, and
of every Man's own propriety. All which would represent the secular Authority,
which was ordained by divine wisdom for the good of Mankind, to be a thing
exceeding hurtful and mischievous to the World.

Wherefore since men are much led by the consideration of their interests, that
what I propose may be the more successful and effectual; I have showed that
Obedience, and peaceable subjection to Governors without resistance, is not
only a duty, which is enough to persuade all good men to practice it, but that
it is the common advantage of the World, as the whole duty of Man is, both to
Rulers and to Subjects. And that Royal Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical, is
not prejudicial to the Christian Church, I have only expressed more covertly
and succinctly; because though this may be considered by some men, there is
another interest, to wit, that of the boundless ambition and avarice of the
Romish Court and Church, which chiefly instigates their opposition hereunto:
and I must confess that the truth I defend, does not gratify this interest. But
that tends best to promote the advantages of the Church in the World, when
the goodness of our Religion, and its preserving all just rights of Superiors
as well as others, does so recommend it to the World, as may gain to it the
good opinion of all men, the favor of Princes, and the blessing of God.

And though I am conscious to my self, that by reason of the greatness and
copiousness of the subject I have taken in hand, there may be several defects
in my performances, notwithstanding my diligent endeavors; yet I presume
humbly to tender them to your Grace, in confidence that your Candor, and
readiness to give a favorable acceptance to well designed, and not unuseful
undertakings, and to make charitable allowances for their imperfections, does
bear an equal proportion with other parts of your great worth, by reason of
which you possess your great dignity with a general satisfaction to good men,
and the Friends of Truth and Peace. And that you may long and happily continue
here to the benefit of the Church, and may see the Church it self in
Prosperity, and true Piety flourishing, all the days of your Life, is the
desire and Prayer of him,

Who Honors your Grace With humble and dutiful Reverence, William Falkner.

TO THE READER.
THE Government and Constitution of this Realm requiring a solemn
acknowledgment to be made, by all who bear any office therein, concerning the
Regal Power and Dignity; and the different parties using their several methods
and pretenses, to oppose the matters of these public Declarations; I have
endeavored in the following Discourse, to give a true and clear account of
these things, in order to the removing those mistakes or doubts, which may
either perplex any persons, or tempt them to neglect their duty. And I have often
thought, that those things which are publicly professed in this Church and
Realm, by these particular acknowledgments, which are made by so many persons,
are very useful to be discoursed of; both because these things themselves were
selected as being of great concernment, by the grave and prudent consideration
of public Authority, and the due compliance with them includes the practicing
Obedience, and following the things which make for Peace; and also because the
unjust oppositions made against these things, are either managed by ill
designs, or at least have a tendency to promote ill effects in Church and
State. And the truth which in this Discourse I undertake to maintain, does also
speak much the Integrity and Simplicity of the Christian Religion; that it is
not a Worldly contrivance, or a way laid to entitle any Professors thereof to
claim, or to enable them to usurp upon, or oppose the temporal Power and
Authority; as has been shamefully done in the Church of Rome, and not a little
by other sorts of men: a considerable part of the Popish Usurpations being
founded, in their unjust encroaching upon the Rights of Sovereignty.

And they who have observed the State of the World, cannot be unsensible, what
Horrid and Mischievous Conspiracies, have been frequently contrived, against
the Safety and Welfare of Princes, and their Kingdoms; as the consequent of the
wicked Positions which I have undertaken to refute. But all these attempts,
which are Pernicious and Destructive to Humane Society, will, I hope,
sufficiently appear by the following Discourse, to be perfectly opposite to the
Christian Doctrine also, and severely condemned by it. Wherefore the things
treated of in this Book, are of such a nature, that they are of great
concernment, for the good Order, Peace and Settlement of the World; the
security of Kings and Kingdoms; and the vindicating the Innocence of the
Christian Religion.

Upon this Account, I could wish my self to be more able to discourse of such a
subject as this, every way suitably to, and worthy of it self. But as I have
herein used diligent care and consideration; so I can freely say, I have every
where endeavored impartially to discover, and faithfully to express the truth;
and have never used any unworthy Artifices, to evade or obscure it. And
therefore, if the sober and judicious Reader shall in any thing of less moment
(as I hope he will not in matters of great moment) discern any mistake, I shall
presume upon his Candor and Charity. In the manner of handling things, I have
avoided nothing which I apprehended to be a difficulty or considerable matter
of objection: but in the return of Answers, and the use of Arguments to confirm
what I assert, I have often purposely omitted many things, in themselves not
inconsiderable, for the shunning needless prolixity; and have waved several
things taken notice of by others, for this cause sometimes, because I was not
willing to lay any stress upon such things, as seemed to me not to be of
sufficient strength. On this account, for instance, in discoursing of the
Supremacy of Princes over Ecclesiastical Officers, I did not insist on our
Savior and S. Peter paying Tribute, Mat. 17.24, -- 27. For though many ancient
Writers speak of this as paid to Caesar, and some expressions in the Evangelist
seem to favor this sense; yet I suppose there is rather greater likelihood,
that this had respect to the annual oblation unto God himself, which the Jews
paid for the service of the Temple, to which St Hilary and some other Ancients
refer it.

Yet in rendering unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, I still reserve unto
God, the things that are Gods; acknowledging the primary necessity of embracing
the true Worship of God, and the Doctrine and practice of Christianity, and
that all Christians ought to bear an high reverence to the establishment of the
Kingdom of Christ under the Gospel, and to that Authority, and those Officers,
which he has peculiarly established therein. But there is a very great
miscarriage among men, that there are those who look upon many weighty things
in Christianity, as if they were merely secular Constitutions, and were no
further necessary to be observed, than for the securing men from outward
penalties. These men do not observe and consider, that there lies a far
greater necessity, of keeping and valuing the Communion of the Church, of
devoutly attending Gods public worship, and orderly performing its Offices,
with other things of like nature, from the Precepts and Institutions of Christ,
and from the Divine Sanctions, than from the countenance or establishment of
any civil Law, or secular Authority whatsoever. The lively sense and
consideration of this, was that which so wonderfully promoted and preserved
both Piety and Unity in the Primitive Church, when it had no encouragement from
the Temporal Power. But there must be no opposition made between Fearing God,
and Honoring the King, but a careful discharge of both; and these Precepts
which God has joined together, let no man separate.

And now I shall only entreat that Reader, who is inclined to have different
apprehensions, from the main things I assert, to be so just to his own reason
and Conscience, as impartially to consider and embrace the evidence of Truth:
which is the more necessary, because truths of this nature are no mere matters
of speculation, but are such Rules to direct our practice, which they who are
unwilling to entertain, act neither charitably to themselves, nor accountably
to God. And he who is the Father of Spirits direct the hearts of all men into
the ways of Goodness, Uprightness, Truth and Peace.

Lyn Regis June 21. 1678.
THE CONTENTS.
THE First BOOK.
Chap. I. THE Kings Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical declared. Sect. 1. The
Royal Supremacy acknowledged, and asserted in the Church and Realm of England.
Sect. 2. The true meaning of Supremacy of Government enquired into, with
particular respect to Causes Ecclesiastical. Sect. 3. The Declaration of this
sense by public Authority observed. Sect. 4. The spiritual Authority of the
Ecclesiastical Officers, is of a distinct nature from the Secular power, and is
no way prejudicial to Royal Supremacy. Sect. 5. A particular account of this
Supremacy in some chief matters Ecclesiastical, with some notice of the
opposition which is made thereunto. Chap. II. The Supremacy of Kings in matters
Ecclesiastical, under the Old Testament, considered. Sect. 1. Their supreme
Authority over things and persons sacred, manifested. Sect. 2. The various
Pleas against Christian Kings having the same Authority about Religion, which
was rightly exercised under the Old Testament, refuted. Chap. III. No Synedrial
Power among the Jews, was superior or equal to the Regal. Sect. 1. The
Exorbitant Power claimed to the Jewish Sanhedrim reflected on, with a
refutation of its pretended superiority over the King himself. Sect. 2. The
determination of many weighty Cases claimed to the Sanhedrim, as exempt from
the Royal Power, examined and refuted. Sect. 3. Of the Antiquity of the
Synedrial Power among the Jews, with reflections upon the pretenses for a
distinct supreme Ecclesiastical Senate. Chap. IV. Royal Supremacy in Causes
Ecclesiastical, proved from reason, and the Doctrine of Christ. Sect. 1. The
evidence hereof from the nature of Sovereign Power. Sect. 2. The same
established by the Christian Doctrine. Sect. 3. What Authority such Princes
have in matters Ecclesiastical, who are not members of the Church. Sect. 4. An
enquiry into the time of the Baptism of Constantine the Great, with respect to
the fuller clearing this matter. Chap. V. An Account of the sense of the
ancient Christian Church, concerning the Authority of Emperors and Princes, in
matters of Religion. Sect. 1. Of the General Exercise of this Supremacy, and
its being allowed by the Fathers of the first General Council of Nice. Sect. 2.
This Supremacy owned in the second General Council at Constantinople, and the
third at Ephesus. Sect. 3. The same acknowledged in the Council of Chalcedon,
and others. Sect. 4. Some Objections concerning the Case of Arius, and Arianism
considered. Sect. 5. Other Objections from the Fathers, concerning the eminency
of Ecclesiastical Officers, and their Authority. Sect. 6. The Canons of the
Church, concerning the exemption of the Causes of the Clergy from secular
cognizance, considered; with other things which have affinity therewith, from
Mat. 18.17. and 1 Cor. 6. Chap. VI. Of the renouncing all Foreign Jurisdiction
and Authority, and particularly the supreme Power of the Bishop of Rome. Sect.
1. The latter part of the Oath of Supremacy considered. Sect. 2. The high
claims of Papal Supremacy declared. Sect. 3. Such claims can have no Foundation
from the Fathers, and have none in the direct expressions of Scripture which
they allege. Sect. 4. Other Arguments for the pretended Papal Authority
answered, and refuted. Chap. VII. The Romish Bishop has no right to any
Patriarchal Authority, over the Church of England. Sect. 1. The whole Christian
Church was never under the Patriarchal Sees. Sect. 2. No Patriarch ever had any
just right, to Patriarchal Authority in this Island. Sect. 3. The present
Jurisdiction of those Churches which have been called Patriarchal, ought not to
be determined by the ancient bounds of their Patriarchates. Chap. VIII. Some
pretenses of other parties, against the Supremacy of Princes, in Causes
Ecclesiastical, refuted. Sect. 1. Of Liberty of Conscience and Toleration.
Sect. 2. Of some other rigid and dangerous Principles, against the Supremacy of
Princes. Chap. IX. Corollaries concerning some duties of subjection.
The Second BOOK. Of the unlawfulness of Subjects taking Arms against the King.
Chap. I. THE public Forms of Declaration, against the lawfulness of resisting
the King by Arms, considered. Sect. 1. Of the Oath of Allegiance or Obedience,
and its disclaiming the Popes Power of deposing the King, or licensing his
Subjects to offer any violence to his Person, State or Government. Sect. 2. Of
the unlawfulness of taking Arms upon any pretense whatsoever against the King.
Sect. 3. Of the traitorous Position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority
against his Person, or against those who are Commissionated by him. Chap. II.
The Laws of Nature, and of General Equity, and the right grounds of Humane
Polity, do condemn all Subjects taking Arms against the Sovereign Power. Sect.
1. The preservation of Peace, and common Rights, will not allow Arms to be
taken in a Kingdom, against the Sovereign. Sect. 2. The Rights and properties
of Subjects may be secured, without allowing them to take Arms against their
Prince. Sect. 3. The condition of Subjects would not be the better but the
worse, if it were lawful for them to take Arms against their Sovereign. Sect.
4. The Plea that Self-defence is enjoined by the Law of Nature, considered: and
of the end of Sovereign Power: with a representation of the pretense, that
Sovereign Authority is in Rulers derived from the people, and the inference
thence deduced, examined. Sect. 5. The Divine Original of Sovereign Power
asserted. Chap. III. Of the unlawfulness of Subjects taking Arms against their
King, under the time of the Old Testament. Sect. 1. The need and usefulness of
considering this Case. Sect. 2. The general unlawfulness of Subjects taking
Arms against their Prince under the Old Testament, evidenced. Sect. 3.
Objections from the behavior of David answered. Sect. 4. Diverse Objections
from the Maccabees, Zealots, Jehu, and others answered. Chap. IV. The Rules and
Precepts delivered by Christ and his Apostles, concerning resistance; and the
practice of the Primitive Christians declared. Sect. 1. The Doctrine delivered
by our Savior himself. Sect. 2. Of the Apostolical Doctrine against
resistance; with a reflection on contrary practices. Sect. 3. The practice and
sense of the Primitive Church concerning resistance. Chap. V. Of the Extent of
the Duty and obligation of non-resistance. Sect. 1. Resistance by force against
the Sovereign Prince is not only sinful in particular private persons, but also
in the whole body of the people, and in subordinate and inferior Magistrates,
and Governors. Sect. 2. Some Cases which have respect to the Prince himself
reflected on and considered.
ERRATA.
PAge 64. line 8. read 2 Kin. 1.10, 12. p. 71. l. 19. Marg. r. de Vit. Constable.
l. 4. c. 40. p. 95. l. 2. r. (...) p. 100. l. 1. r. (...). p. 106. l. 3. Marg.
r. n. 6. p. 107. l. 4. r. Frischmuthius. p. 219. l. 14. r. Sword: and p. 223.
l. 25. r. (...). p. 265. l. 1. Marg. r. Comen. p. 268. l. 25. r. Patriarchdoms.

Christian Loyalty.
The First BOOK. Of Regal Supremacy, especially in matters Ecclesiastical; and
the renouncing all Foreign Jurisdiction.
CHAP. I.
The Kings Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical declared.
SECT. I.
The Royal Supremacy acknowledged and asserted, in the Church and Realm of
England.
1. THE things established in the Church of England, which all Ecclesiastical
persons are required to declare their consent unto, B. 1. C. 1.
do concern matters of so high importance; that both the being, and the purity
and perfection of a Church, does very much depend upon the consideration
thereof; to wit, the order and way of its worship, the due honor it gives to
the King and Secular Authority, the truth of its doctrine, and the right and
regular ordination of its Ministry. That the public worship of God in our
Church is free from all just exception, and agreeable to the rules of
Christianity, and the best and primitive patterns, I have given some account in
a former Treatise: And in this discourse, I shall treat of that Authority and
Dignity, which is justly yielded and ascribed to the supreme civil power.

2. Loyal Principles useful to the world.
And if a general right understanding of this matter could every where be
obtained, together with a practice suitable thereunto, it would greatly
contribute to the advancement and honor of Christianity, and the peace of the
world. The great miscarriages and irregular practices, by not yielding to
Sovereign Princes their due Authority, has strangely appeared in the enormous
Usurpations of the Romish Church, and the frequent distractions of the Empire
and other Kingdoms, which have been thence derived. For the Roman Bishop, who
still claims even where he possesses not, matters Ecclesiastical, and
thereupon in Civil also; did advance himself unto the highest step of his undue
Papal exaltation. And he thereby also more firmly fixed, and rivetted his
usurpation over other Christian Bishops, and put himself into a capacity of
propagating his corrupt doctrines, without probable appearance of any
considerable check or control, and with the less likelihood of redress and
reformation. And from the like cause have proceeded diverse exorbitancies, in
opinion and practice, concerning the Church and its Government, in another sort
of men. And the want of Conscientious observance of the duties of subjection,
has too often manifested it self in the world, by the sad effects of open
tumult and rebellion, all which has highly tended to the scandal of Religion.

3. It seems also considerable, that almost all Sects, and erring parties
about matters of Religion, (and many of them to very ill purposes) do nourish
false conceptions and mistaken opinions, concerning the civil power. They
either beyond due bounds exalt it so high, as not to reserve that respect which
belongs to God, and Christian institutions, which is done by some few; or
else depress it so low, as to divest it directly of its authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, if not to erect and acknowledge some other power, Papal or
popular, as rival, or paramount thereunto. And therefore it is a work worthy
the care and industry, of one who loves truth and goodness, to endeavor the
healing such a Fountain of deadly evil, which has diffused it self into so
many several streams and Channels. And I heartily and humbly beseech the
Almighty God, and Governor of all the Earth, that he will guide and assist my
undertaking, and dispose the hearts of all men to a right understanding of
truth, and a serious performance of their duty.

4. Now for the preservation of the peace and Government of Kingdoms, these two
things are especially necessary. 1. That there be an acknowledgment of the
Rulers just authority in his Dominions, against all false pretenders, and those
who would undermine it, or incroach upon it. 2. And are asserted in this Realm.
That there be due care for maintaining that fidelity in the subjects, which is
suitable hereunto. And both these things are so far provided for, in the
Constitutions of our Church and Kingdom, that the Royal Authority is therein
fully acknowledged and asserted; and all Ecclesiastical persons (and together
with them civil and military Officers, besides diverse other subjects of this
Realm) are required to yield to the King that authority and duty, which
consists chiefly in these two things. 1. The asserting in the King the
Supremacy of Government in all causes, against the claim of any Foreign
pretenders, or any others, and their engaging to maintain all those Royalties,
which belong to the Crown. 2. That such a faithful Allegiance be performed to
him, as disclaimeth all right and power, whether by pretended Papal
Excommunication or otherwise, to set free any of his subjects, from their duty
of Loyalty and obedience, and particularly declares it unlawful, upon any
pretense whatsoever to take Arms against him. And of the matter of our public
acknowledgments, which relate to these two heads, I shall discourse concerning
the former head in this Book, and the latter in the second Book.

5. The Supremacy of Government in the King of England, over this Realm, In our
Statute Laws.
and all other his Dominions, which is his just and undoubted right, is plainly
declared in our most solemn public Constitutions, both Civil and
Ecclesiastical. It was asserted in our Laws, in the time of King Richard the
Second, 16 Ric. 2.5.
that the Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been in
no earthly subjection, but immediately subject to God, in all things touching
the Regalty of the same Crown, and to none other. And in the time of King Henry
the Eighth, 24 Hen. 8.12.
it was declared in Parliament, that this Realm of England is an Empire, and so
has been accounted in the world, governed by one supreme Head and King, having
the dignity and Royal Estate of the Imperial Crown of the same; unto whom a
body politic -- of spiritualty and temporalty, be bounden and ought to bear
next to God, a natural and humble obedience. And it is usual for the Lords and
Commons jointly, even in the framing Acts of Parliament, to mention the King
under the style of Our Sovereign Lord the King, which is obvious in our
Statutes. By out Laws also since the Reformation, the usurpations which had
incroached upon his Supremacy are discarded, the ancient right of Jurisdiction
restored to the Crown, 1 Eliz. 1.
and the Oath of Supremacy established, wherein this Royal Authority is
solemnly owned, acknowledged, and declared, and which is taken by all the
Clergy of England, and many others.

6. The Oath of Supremacy.
The Oath of Supremacy contains in it three things.

1. The asserting the Kings Highness to be the only supreme Governor of this
Realm, and all other his Dominions and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things or causes, as temporal. 2. A disowning and renouncing all
foreign Jurisdiction and authority, within this Realm. 3. An engaging true
allegiance to the King and his Successors, and a defense of the Jurisdictions
and pre-eminencies of the Crown. The lawfulness, fitness, and reasonableness of
which things, as they are expressed in that Oath, I am the more inclined
carefully to consider, Weights and Measures, Chapter 20.
because a very learned man too readily and unadvisedly, expressed his
dissatisfaction, concerning some clauses thereof. But as the two first things
contained therein, will be the chief matter of my discourse; so under the first
nothing else need be much enquired after, save the supremacy of the King in all
spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes.

7. For, that the Kings Majesty is in general the chief Governor of this
Realm, is as evident, as that this is the Kingdom of England; and it is as
needless a thing to say any thing in proof thereof, as to go about to prove the
Sun to be risen at Noonday. For there is an actual, constant, visible exercise
of this Government, in such an ample manner, as to extend it self to all
persons whomsoever in the Realm; and this authority is very plainly
acknowledged and confirmed, throughout the whole body of our English laws, and
the Constitution of the Kingdom. And the Title of our present Sovereign is
manifestly undoubted, by clear succession and descent, not only from the Kings
since the Conquest, but from those before it. For Margaret the Heiress of the
Saxon Kings, was about the time of the Conquest, married to Malcom King of
Scotland, from whence our Sovereign is descended: and thereby, M. Paris an.
1067.
as M. Paris expressed it, Regum Angliae nobilitas ad reges devoluta est
Scotorum.

8. And Ecclesiastical Constitutions.
This Royal Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, is frequently asserted in the
Constitutions of our Church. It is owned and declared in the Book of Articles.
Art. 37.
And the Canons of our Church not only acknowledge this Supremacy, Can. 1.
but also enjoin Ministers frequently to teach the same. Can. 36.
And they moreover require subscription thereunto, according to the purport of
the Oath of Supremacy, from all persons who come to be ordained, or to be
admitted to any living or employment in the Church; Can. 2.
and denounce Excommunication ipso facto, against all impugners thereof in
causes Ecclesiastical.

SECT. II.
The true meaning of Supremacy of Government enquired into, with particular
respect to causes Ecclesiastical.
supreme Governor, Of Supreme Government.
which will easily be discerned, if we first consider, what is understood by
Governing. Now as Governing e^cludes a power of superiority over the persons
governed, and an obligation upon them unto obedience; so the chief and special
works of secular Government are frequently expressed in the Holy Scripture; by
judging, and doing judgment and justice, 1 Kin. 10.9. Jer. 22.15. (hence the
ancient rulers of Israel, were called their Judges) by being as a Shepherd unto
the people, Number. 27.17. and also by giving praise to them that do well, and
executing wrath on them who do evil, Romans 13.3, 4. 1 Pet. 2.14. Phil. de praem.
and poen. p. 918. and de Vit. Mos. l. 2.
And Philo accounts the authority of Government, to be a power of commanding
and prohibiting. (...), which encludeth an authoritative power over the persons
of others, and being the life of, and giving execution to the law. The sense of
which, and especially of the Scripture expressions is, That the Governing power
includes an authority, to take care of the Community, and of what is just and
right, and to command and encourage well-doing: and when occasion requires, to
take an account of the actions and causes of inferiors, acquitting or
punishing them, according to their merit, and opposing all injurious and evil
doers. And he who has a right to do all this, toward all other persons in his
Dominions, without being governed by, subject to, or accountable before, any
other superior authority upon earth, is a Supreme Governor.

2. But it is neither necessary, nor most suitable to supremacy of Government,
that the rules by which the Governor proceeds, should be altogether at his
own will and pleasure. But it is sufficient that these rules be such, as he
either judges to be good, and therefore chooses of himself; or else freely
accepts and consents to them, if they be formed to his hands, or proposed
by others. For it is no abatement of the high Sovereignty of the Glorious God
over the world, that all his government and executing judgment, is ordered
according to the natural and eternal rules and measures of goodness and
justice, and not by any such arbitrary will, which excludes all respect
thereto. And man has not a less but a greater government over himself, when he
guides himself by the rules of reason; nor is it therefore any diminution of
the power of a Governor, when the exercise thereof is, and ought to be managed
by rules of common equity. Yea, the Kings of Judah enjoyed a complete
Supremacy, though they were to govern according to the law of Moses; and so
much more may Christian Kings do, while they maintain a Religious respect to
the positive laws of Christianity. And there are some Kingdoms, where without
any disparagement to the Supremacy of their Prince, they are governed by the
fixed rules of the civil law; and others where other laws, established by their
Predecessors, are standing rules. And if in the last place we consider, that
when great Emperors yielded to their conquered and tributary Principalities,
at their Petition and desire, the privilege of being governed by their own
former laws (as was done to Judaea, by their Persian, Josep. Ant. l. 11. c. 4.
etc. 8. lib. 12. c. 2. etc. 3. lib. 14. c. 17.
Grecian, Egyptian, Syrian, and Roman Governors, under whose Dominion they
were) this was no giving the Supremacy of Government out of their own hands;
much less can it be a Plea against the Supremacy of Government, in a free
natural Prince; where the consent of his Subjects in Parliament, is always
taken in, for the forming and enacting any new law, which he establishes at
their request and Petition.

3. And as such a model of framing laws, is very well consistent with the
Supremacy of the Prince; so it is a great privilege to the subjects of such a
Realm, which they cannot but be sensible of, and which will make their
subjection more cheerful and free. And it further encludeth this advantage to
the Government it self, that there is like to be greater care of obedience to
those laws, where the people are not only obliged thereto from the duty of
submission, and the fear of penalties, but have also given their own consent
and agreement, to their being and constitution. St. de Marlbridge, St. de
Bigamis St. quo Warranto, and passim.
To this purpose the things established by our laws, are called things agreed
and assented to, and concordata; and very often they are declared to be enacted
by the Kings Majesty, with the advice and assent of the Lords and Commons; but
always it is acknowledged, that neither, nor both Houses of Parliament, have
any legislative power without the King; and whosoever shall assert the
contrary, is by a late statute declared to be under a Praemunire. 13 Car. 2.1.


4. And it is plainly evident, Supremacy is a right of governing, not of
performing all particular offices.
that the supreme government in all things or causes, is quite of a different
nature, from the right of performing the actions or offices of all persons, who
are under this government (which, for the most part, are inconsistent with the
dignity of Supremacy) though some have been willing to confound these things,
and thereby hinder themselves and others, from a right understanding of them.
De Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 7.
And Cardinal Bellarmine himself, spent his strength and courage in fighting in
the dark, when he somewhat largely insists on this argument, That secular
Princes have not a supreme Government with respect to the Church, because they
cannot perform the offices of other Governors of the Church, Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons; and argues, they may not baptize and consecrate, non sunt igitur
Reges supremi Ecclesiae Magistratus. But no man need be to seek for the true
sense of supremacy, as it is acknowledged in this Church and Realm, who does
consider duly those very words, both in the Oath of Supremacy, and the
Canonical subscription, That the King is supreme Governor, as well in all
spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as temporal. Wherefore

5. Obs. 1. In temporal things or causes, there are some rights of power and
authority, Some authority besides the supreme, by peculiar divine institution,
both in spiritual and temporal things.
which are wholly derived from the King; as the Commanding an Army or Navy, and
the governing any place or County in his Dominion: but there are others which
depend upon divine institution, which institution must be reverenced, and the
rules thereof attended unto by all sorts of men; such is the authority and
right of the Husband over his Wife, in the state of marriage appointed of God.
And in Ecclesiastical matters, there are some things in our ancient laws,
reserved as peculiar to the Ecclesiastical power, not without good reason, and
yet much by the favor of the sovereign authority; as the power of proving
wills and testaments, 21 Hen. 8.5.22 and 23 Car. 2.
and granting administrations, concerning which our late Statutes have made
some additional provisions; but there are other matters of Ecclesiastical
authority, which entirely flow from the institutions of Christ, as the right of
consecrating, ordaining, and the whole power of the Keys does. Now the
asserting the supremacy of Government, is never designed in any wise to
violate, either these divine or Christian institutions, or to assert it lawful
for any Prince to invade that authority and right, which is made peculiar
thereby, whether in matters temporal or spiritual. Grot. de Imp. S. m. cap. 2.
n. 1. Abbot. de suprem. pot. Reg. prael. 2. n. 2. Mas. de Min. Angl. l. 3. c.
5. n. 2. and l. 4. c. 1. Ecclesiastical and civil rights asserted.
Wherefore there was just cause for understanding men, to tax the vanity and
inconsiderateness of those men, who will understand nothing else by the Kings
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, but this, that he may assume to himself the
performance of all proper Ecclesiastical actions.

6. Obs. 2. Since the asserting the Kings Supremacy in things temporal, does
not exclude the subject from a real propriety in his own estate, nor declare it
lawful for a Prince, when he pleases, to alienate his subjects possessions and
inheritance; the owning his supremacy in matters Ecclesiastical, must not be so
far strained, as to acknowledge that the revenue of the Church may be alienated
at the pleasure of the Civil power. For besides, that in our English laws, this
has the same legal security that all other properties have, Magn. Char. c. 1.
and with a priority and precedence thereto; it is but reasonable, that that
possession which bears a respect to God, should be as inviolable as the
rights of any men. And that revenue which is set apart for the support of the
service of God, and of those administrations which tend to men's eternal
felicity, ought not to be less secured, than what concerns their temporal
welfare.

7. Obs. 3. Things good and evil cannot be altered, but must be established by
authority.
The Sovereign power is so supreme in things temporal, as that whatsoever is
good or evil by the law of nature, or the command of God, cannot be altered
thereby ( viz. so as to make theft and murder good, or justice, chastity and
speaking truth evil). And in things Ecclesiastical, all matters of faith,
worship and order, which Christ has determined in his Church, must remain
equally unmovable and unalterable, notwithstanding the acknowledgment of Royal
Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. And in temporal affairs, what authority the
God of nature has planted in any other persons, still remains entire
notwithstanding the Royal Government over them; thus for instance, the power,
right, and authority of Parents, is still acknowledged such, as that it is
neither derived from the regal authority, nor can be forbidden by it. And this
power, which both the laws of nature and of Christianity establish, has been
universally owned throughout the world; and it is observed by Philo, Phil. de
Leg. ad Caium.
that when Tiberius, the Son of Drusus, a minor, was left Copartner with
Caligula, in the right of the Empire, by the will of Tiberius the deceased
Emperor; Caligula by this subtle and wicked method, brought him to be so
under his immediate government, as to have opportunity to destroy him, adopted
Son. And as the paternal power must be preserved, so likewise whatsoever
officers, or order of men, Christ has committed his authority unto in his
Church, this authority does fully still remain and reside in them; and as it is
not derived from any temporal power, neither may it be taken away or abolished
thereby. But the supreme civil government, has in all these things a right and
authority, V. Thorndike, Right of the Church. Chapter 4. p. 168.
of enjoining to every one the performance of their duty, and also of
determining many particularities, which have relation to these general heads,
and to punish irregular exorbitances and miscarriages.

SECT. III.
The declaration of this sense by public authority, observed.
1. Though these things might of themselves seem clear enough, we have yet
further two authentic expositions of this supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical,
confirmed by the greatest authority of this Church, and Realm. The former with
a particular respect to the Oath of Supremacy, was at first published in the
Queens Injunctions. There the Queen disclaiming all authority, of ministering
divine offices in the Church, In the Admonition to simple peopled deceived by
malicious.
as that which cannot by any equity of words or good sense, be intended by the
Oath; does declare, that no other duty or allegiance, is meant or intended by
the Oath, nor any other authority challenged therein, than what was challenged
by K. Hen. 8. and K. Edw. 6. and which is, and was due to the Imperial Crown of
this Realm (the more particular explication of which, follows in these words)
that is, under God to have the Sovereignty and rule, over all manner of
persons, born within these her Realms, Dominions and Countries, of what estate,
either Ecclesiastical or temporal, soever they be, so as no other foreign power
shall have, or ought to have any superiority over them. And then it follows,
and if any person shall accept the same Oath, with this interpretation, sense
and meaning, her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such person in that
behalf, as her good and obedient subjects.

2. But this explication received a more solemn and ample public Sanction, by
a statute law, not long after the publication of these Injunctions. 5 Eliz. 1.
Therein it was enacted, that the Oath of Supremacy, should be taken and
expounded, in such form, as is set forth in an admonition, annexed to the
Queens Injunctions, in the first year of her Reign; that is to say, to confess
and acknowledge in her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, none other authority,
than that was challenged and lately used, by the noble King Henry the Eighth,
and King Edward the Sixth, as in the same admonition it plainly may appear.

3. The other publicly acknowledged exposition, of the sense of this
Supremacy, is in the Articles of the Church of England, agreed on in the
Convocation, and confirmed or established by a legal Sanction. 13 Eliz. 12.
Artic. 37.
Therein are these words, Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty, the chief
Government, by which title, we understand the minds of some slanderous folk to
be offended, we give not our Princes the ministering of Gods word, or of the
Sacraments, the which thing the Injunctions set forth by Elizabeth our Queen,
do most plainly testify; but that only prerogative, which we see to have been
given always, to all godly Princes in holy Scripture, by God himself, that is,
that they should rule all estates and degrees, committed to their charge by
God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or temporal, and restrain with the civil
sword the stubborn and evil doers.

4. And when Bishop Usher in his Speech at the sentencing some Recusants, in
the Castle Chamber at Du^lin explained the Kings Supremacy, according to this
article of our Church; At the end of his Answer to the Jesuits Challenge.
King James so approved his explication thereof, that he returned him
particular thanks for the same, which is printed with his speech. And the
Bishop therein plainly asserted, that God had established two distinct powers
on earth; the one of the Keys, committed to the Church; and the other of the
Sword, which is committed to the civil Magistrate and by which the King
governs. And therewith he declares, that as the spiritual Rulers, have not
only respect to the first table, but to the second; so the Magistrates power,
has not only respect to the second table, but also to the first.

5. From all this we have this plain sense, That the King is supreme Governor
(that is under God, say the Injunctions, and with the civil sword say the
Articles) as well in all spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes as
temporal; that is, he has the Sovereignty and rule over all manner of persons
born in these Dominions, of what estate soever, either Ecclesiastical or
temporal, say the Injunctions, and to the same purpose the Articles. Only here
we must observe, that the King's being supreme Governor in all things and
causes, is one and the same thing, with his having the chief Government over
the persons of all his subjects with respect to their places, actions, and
employments; and therefore is well explained thereby. For it must necessarily
be the same thing, to have the command or oversight of any Officer, subject, or
servant, about his business; and to have a command or oversight concerning the
business in which he is to be employed: and the same is to be said concerning
the power of examining their cases, or punishing neglects and offenses.

6. And from hence we may take an account, Of supreme head of the Church of
England. Def. of Apol. Part 6. Chapter 11. div. 1.
of the true sense of that title, used by King Henr. 8. and King Edw. 6. of
supreme head of the Church of England. This style was much misunderstood by
diverse Foreigners, seemed not pleasing to Bishop Juel, and some others of our
own Church, was well and wisely changed by our Governors, and has been out of
date for above sixscore years past. And though this title was first given to
King Hen. 8. Tit. Of this civil Magistrate.
by a Convocation and Parliament of the Roman Communion, it was used all King
Edwards days, and then owned even in the book of Articles. And the true
intended sense, from the expressions above mentioned, appears manifestly to
be this, to acknowledge the King to be head or chief Governor, even in
Ecclesiastical things, of that number of Christians, or that part of the
Catholic Church, who reside in these Realms, and are subjects to his Crown,
even as Saul by being anointed King, Wh. Treat. 8. chapter 1. div. 4. Bishop Saund.
Episcop. not prejud. to reg. p. 130, 131. Mas. de Min. Anglic. l. 3. c. 4.
was made head of the tribes of Israel, 1 Samuel 15.17. And according to this
sense, the use of this title, was allowed and justified by very worthy men,
such as Bishop Whitgift, Bishop Saunderson, Mr Mason, and others. And to this
end and purpose, it is the just right of the King of England, to own himself
the supreme Governor of the Church of England, which was a style sometime
used, by our pious and gracious King Charles the First, Declar. before 39.
Articles.
in his public Declaration about Ecclesiastical things, but with due respect
to the Ecclesiastical Officers.

7. In the ancient Church, it was not unusual for him, who had the chief
preeminence over a Province, or a considerable part of the Christian Church, to
be owned as their head: Can. Apost. 34.
whence in the ancient Collection or Code called the Canons of the Apostles,
the chief Bishop in every Nation, was required to be esteemed by the rest
(...), as their head. And that Bishops may be called heads of their Churches,
is asserted by Gregorius de Valentia, from that expression of Scripture lately
mentioned concerning Saul; Tom. 4. Disp. 1. qu. 8. punct. 4.
which yet must more directly and immediately prove, that title to be
applicable to a Sovereign Prince. And as the name of head, is only taken for a
chief and governing member, the Author of the Annotations upon the Epistles,
under S. Hierom's name, was not afraid of this expression, In 1 Cor. 12.
Sacerdos caput Ecclesiae, the Priest is the head of the Church.

8. And though that Statute, whereby the title of supreme head of the Church of
England, was yielded to King Hen. 8. 26 Hen. 8.1.
does assert the Kings power to correct and amend, by spiritual authority and
Jurisdiction; yet that this was intended only objectively, concerning his
government in spiritual and Ecclesiastical things and causes, or his seeing
these things be done by Ecclesiastical Officers; and was only so claimed and
used, we have further plain evidence, both concerning the time of King Hen. 8.
and King Edw. 6. Under the Reign of King Hen. 8. by his particular command, for
the acquainting his subjects with such truths, as they ought to profess, was
published a Book, called, The Institution of a Christian man, which was
subscribed by twenty one Bishops, and diverse others of the Clergy, and the
Professors of Civil and Canon law; and in the dedication thereof to the King,
Of the Sacr. of Orders. f. 39.
by them all, is given to him this title of Supreme head in Earth, immediately
under Christ, of the Church of England. In this Book, besides very many other
things to the same purpose, it is asserted, That Christ and his Apostles did
institute and ordain in the new testament, that besides the civil powers and
governance of Kings and Princes (which is called potestas gladii, the power of
the sword) there should also be continually in the Church militant, certain
other Ministers or Officers, which should have special power, authority, and
commission under Christ, to preach and teach the word of God, -- to dispense
and administer the Sacraments, -- to loose and absolve, -- to bind and to
excommunicate, -- to order and consecrate others in the same room, order and
office. f. 40.
And again, This said power and administration, in some places is called
claves, sive potestas clavium, that is to say, the Keys, or the power of the
Keys, whereby is signified a certain limited office, restrained unto the
execution of a special function or ministration. f. 41.
And yet further we have therein this very clear passage, That this office,
this power and authority, was committed and given by Christ and his Apostles,
unto certain persons only, that is to say, unto Priests or Bishops, whom they
did elect, call and admit thereto, by their prayer and imposition of their
hands.

9. And concerning the office and power of Kings, the Doctrine and positions
then received were such as these, which are in that Book expressed. f. 49.
That God constituted and ordained, the authority of Christen Kings and
Princes, to be the most high and supreme, above all other powers and offices,
in the regiment and governance of his people. f. 50.
Unto them of right and by Gods commandment it belongs, principally to defend
the faith of Christ and his Religion, -- and to abolish all abuses, heresies
and idolatries. Notwithstanding we may not think, that it does appertain unto
the office of Kings and Princes, to preach and teach, to administer the
Sacraments, to absolve, to excommunicate, and such other things, belonging to
the office and administration of Bishops and Priests: but we must think and
believe, that God has made Christian Kings to be as the chief heads and
over-lookers, over the said Priests and Bishops, to cause them to administer
their office and power committed unto them purely and sincerely; and in case
they shall be negligent in any part thereof, to cause them to supply and repair
the same again.

10. And for the time of King Edward, it is manifest from the Book of
Ordination, that the offices of Bishop, Priest, and Deacon, the power of
remitting and retaining sins, and the Pastoral authority in the Church, was
accounted by ordination to be committed to those persons only, who receive such
ordination. And in his time, the royal authority and dignity is described, K.
Edw. Inj. 1.
and asserted in his Injunctions, in the very same words, whereby it is
declared in the injunctions of Queen Elizabeth and no otherwise; Qu. Elizab.
Injunct. 1.
and almost in the same phrases which are made use of in our Canons: Can. 1.
1603.
i. e. that the Kings power, within his Realms and Dominions, is the highest
power under God, to whom all men within the same Realms and Dominions, by Gods
law owe most loyalty and obedience, before and above all other powers and
potentates upon earth.

11. Now these things do clearly manifest, that the spiritual authority of the
Clergy, was both in King Hen. and King Edwards reign, owned to be really
distinct from the secular authority, and was not swallowed up into it. And this
I have the rather taken notice of, because it gives us a clearer prospect into
the plain sense of the interpretation of the Kings Supremacy, Admonition,
annexed to the Queens Injunctions, unto which the explication of the statute,
and Articles do refer. And what is herein observed, from the Institution of a
Christian man, is the more considerable, because that Book was then designed by
the King and Bishops, as a guide to direct the Bishops and Preachers, what they
should teach the people committed to their spiritual charge, as is very often
expressed throughout the whole Book, almost in every leaf of a great part
thereof.

SECT. IV.
The spiritual authority of the Ecclesiastical Officers, is of a distinct
nature from the secular power, and is no way prejudicial to Royal Supremacy.
1. The wisdom and goodness of God is eminently conspicuous, both in founding
his Church, and establishing an Ecclesiastical Society and authority, and also
in ordering a civil polity in the world. And these two things were well
observed by Justinian, to be high instances of the great goodness and bounty of
God toward men; Maxima inter homines dona Dei sunt, a superna collata
clementia, Novel. 6.
sacerdotium and imperium. And these two being both of them from God, do not,
if rightly understood, clash with, but are useful and helpful to one another.

2. Of old the same person often King and Priest.
Whilst God was worshipped only in some particular Families, of the holy
Patriarchs, he who was the chief Governor of those Societies, was also in the
place of a Priest to that Family, whence Noah, Abraham and Job offered
Sacrifice. And in those ancient times, in some principalities, the same person
was King and Priest; as Melchisedec was both King of Salem, and Priest of the
most high God; and (...) which in the Hebrew is the ordinary word to express a
Priest, Phil. de vit. Mos. l. 3. p. 681.
does also signify a Prince. And Moses himself before the Jewish Government was
completely formed, sustained the office both of a Prince and a Priest; whence
Philo in his description of a complete Governor, makes the Priesthood to
reside in him, as then it was in Moses.

3. And from the traditions of the ancient times, the general custom of diverse
Pagan Nations might have its original, who in several distant parts of the
world, conjoined in the same person the royal authority, and the Priesthood.
This was done, says Clemens Alexandrinus, by those who were the wisest of
them; Cl. Alex. Str. l. 7. p. 720. Diod. Sic. l. 3. c. 1. Aelian. Var. Hist. l.
14. c. 34.
and is particularly averred by Diodorus Siculus, concerning the ancient
Ethiopians; and of the Egyptians also by Aelianus, as also by Plato in Politic.
and by Synesius Ep. 121. And that Jethro Moses his Father in Law, was both King
and Priest, is expressed by Ezekielus, a Poet of Jewish Extraction, in some
Verses mentioned by Eusebius. Eus. Pr. Evang. l. c. 28. Cont. Ap. l. 1.
That the same usage did sometimes take place among the Tyrians of old, appears
from Josephus; and in the time of Aeneas his travels, Virg. Aeneid. 3.
after the destruction of Troy, at Delos, there was, says Virgil, Rex idem
hominum, Phoebique sacerdos. The Pagan Emperors at Rome, had likewise the
Office of Pontifex Maximus, and used this title in several Edicts, as part of
their style of dignity, of which we have a plain instance in Eusebius, Hist.
Eccl. l. 8. c. 29.
concerning Galerius Maximinus, and Constantius. This was also ordinarily
impressed upon their coins, where sometimes the proper imperial title was
stamped on the one side, and that of Pontifex Maximus on the other, as appears
in that Medal exhibited to this purpose, M. Freh. Tr. de Numism. census.
Xenoph. de Inst. Cyr. l. 2, 3, 8.
by Marquardus Freherus. And that Cyrus the King of Persia, did himself both
Sacrifice, and annex his Prayers therewith, is observed by Xenophon. And there
are several learned men who assert, that this title of Pontifex Maximus was
retained, Bar. An. 312. n. 94, 95, 97, etc. and an. 383. n. 6. Seld. de Syn. l.
1. c. 10. a p. 329. ad 344.
as an ordinary part of the Imperial style, even by the first Christian
Emperors, until the time of Gratian, who, according to the testimony of
Zosimus, is said to have rejected it, as unsuitable to Christianity. And it is
certain, that this title was given to some of them, and even to Gratian himself
as well, and as often as to any other, in some few public inscriptions, which
are urged to this purpose by Baronius and Seldom. But as these inscriptions
were probably ordered by others, and not by these Christian Emperors
themselves; so we have this evidence, that none of these Emperors affected, or
ordinarily used this title, if they did at all own it, not only in that Gratian
openly declared against it, but also, 1. In that none of them used it in any of
their public edicts, as was done usually by the Pagan Emperors. 2. Nor so far
as can be collected from the various medals stamped in their times, did they
make use thereof as the Pagan Emperors had done, in any of their Coins, which
Mr Seldom acknowledges. Seld. ibid.
3. It is mentioned by Sozomen, Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 1.
as one of the notes of Julians forsaking Christianity, that he called himself
(...), or the Pontifex.

4. But when God eminently revealing his will by Moses, had formed a more
public, Ecclesiastical and civil power, separated in the old Testament.
ample, and visible establishment of a Church in the World, under the Jewish
dispensation, than was before it, he then divided the Kingly authority and the
Priesthood, into distinct hands. And nothing is more manifest, than that under
Judaism, the Priesthood was fixed in the Family of Aaron, Ex. 28.1. chapter 40.15.
And when Corah, who was of the chief Family of the Levites, which had the
charge of the most holy things, ( Number. 16.1. compared with Number. 4.4. etc.) and
his Company, undertook presumptuously to invade this office, they were punished
with severe, dreadful, and miraculous judgments, in that the earth opened its
mouth, and swallowed up the Company of Corah, Number. 16.32, 33. and the fire that
came out from the Lord, consumed the two hundred and fifty men that offered
incense, Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 4. c. 3. Phil. de vit. Mos. l. 3. p. 693.
v. 35. and as the ancient Jewish Writers tell us, there was not any member of
these men remaining, which could receive a Burial; and from hence the Jews
received a strict admonition, that no man whosoever, who was not of the seed of
Aaron, should come near, to offer incense before the Lord, v. 40. And this
peculiar privilege of the Family of Aaron, was further confirmed, by the
miracle of Aarons rod blossoming, Number. 17.1.-10.

5. And that the King and chief ruler among the Jews, being not of the line of
Aaron, might not intermeddle with the execution of this Priestly Office, is
manifest, besides the general rules of the law, from other special instances.
For when Saul undertook to offer Sacrifice, 1 Samuel 13.9, 13, 14.
he was sharply rebuked by Samuel, and thereupon God denounced this heavy
judgment against him, that his Kingdom must not continue. And when Vzziah
attempted to offer incense, he was smitten with leprosy for this transgression,
Ant. Jud. l. 9. c. 11.
2 Chr. 26.16, 22. to which Josephus adds other testimonies of the divine
displeasure against him, and tells us that this judgment upon Vzziah, was
inflicted on one of their solemn Feast days; which, if it was so, might render
it the more remarkable.

And the reason why God fixed the Priesthood in the Family of Aaron, and not in
Moses, and the successive Governors; was not chiefly, Ant. l. 3. c. 10.
as Josephus represents Moses to speak, from the worth and desert of Aaron:
But it tended much to excite the greater reverence and awe, toward the majesty
of God, and an higher veneration for the offices of Religion, that no person,
no not the highest among men, might perform these sacred offices, of
approaching to God by offering Sacrifices and Oblations, save only those
persons, whom God had particularly set apart for that purpose. And withal the
Priest blessing in the name of the Lord, and especially Aarons putting the sins
of the people upon the head of the live-Goat, Lev. 16.21, 22. which included
the applying Gods pardon to them, and other Priestly performances, which were
not mere actions of natural Religion, but depended upon Gods institution, could
not be performed, but by an especial and peculiar authority derived from God to
that intent, or in the language of the Apostle, Heb. 5.3. No man takes this
honor to himself, but he that is called of God, as was Aaron.

7. And in the state of Christianity, And under the Gospel.
as Christ has established the Officers of his Church, so there seems rather
more reason, for the peculiar distinct institution of these Officers, under the
Christian Church, than under the Jewsih. For while the Jewish Priests chiefly
acted for men toward God, in Sacrifices and Oblations, the Christian Officers
do in more things than they did, act from God and in his name toward men;
which in the nature of the thing, does more especially require an authority,
peculiarly received from God. For who can deprive any person, of the communion
of that Society which Christ has founded, or receive and restore them unto it,
but by the authority which he has appointed? Or how can any persons consecrate
Symbols, and dispense them, as sealing the Covenant of grace, and exhibiting
from Christ, the blessings and benefits thereof to the due receivers; unless
they be those, who have received Commission from him to this purpose? Or who
can pronounce absolution in Christ's name (which is also implicitly included,
in the administration of the Sacraments, and other ministerial Offices) unless
he has given them such particular authority? And the same may be said of
solemn Ecclesiastical benedictions, with imposition of hands, and particularly
of the ordination of such Officers in the Christian Church, who are to be
invested with this authority.

8. And that this Ecclesiastical authority under the Gospel should be committed
to peculiar Officers, and not fixed in them who have the civil power, is that
which the wisdom of our Savior has appointed, who did not call secular rulers
to be his Apostles. This was partly requisite, because there are different
qualifications, to fit persons for secular government, and for presiding in the
Church; and because the Christian Church being called to take up the Cross,
should not be destitute of its guides in a time of persecution, when it may
need them most. But this also makes the communion of the Church it self, as it
is a peculiar Christian Society, and its dependence on the grace of God, and
its relation to him, to be the more visible and remarkable, by the distinct
Officers and authority, constituted to dispense the mysteries of his grace. And
it tends also to conciliate an higher honor and veneration, for the
particular institutions of God and our Savior, in the new Covenant, in that
the administration of them, is the proper designed work, of such peculiar
officers of his appointment. And therefore if any would make the Ecclesiastical
offices, to be an authority appendent or annexed unto the civil, he undertakes
to unite those things which are in Synesius his phrase, (...), Synes. Ep. 57.
such as cannot be knit or woven into one another.

9. But it is to be observed, Ecclesiastical Officers not excluded from all
civil Government.
that though these offices be so distinct, that none ought to perform the
Ecclesiastical ministrations, but they who are ordained thereto, and that no
Ecclesiastical person has any civil power, by mere virtue of his
Ecclesiastical office; and though the intermedling with such matters of civil
affairs, as in the nature of them are unsuitable to the Clergy, are reasonably
prohibited by the ancient Canons: yet it would be against all reason to
imagine, that all civil Government because civil and political, is inconsistent
with the state of an Ecclesiastical person, since he is a part also of the
civil Society, or the body politic. In the Jewish state, Syn. Ep. 121.
in some extraordinary cases, that was very true which Synesius observed, that
the chief secular power was in the Priest; so it was under the government of
Eli, in the days of the Maccabees, and the succeeding times, when Aristobulus
is observed by S Hierome, Hier. in Dan. 9.
to be the first who there joined the royal authority and Diadem, with the
Priesthood. But even under the reign of David, the Levites; and in the time of
Jehosophat, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8.-12.
the Priests and Levites are plainly according to the law declared to have been
appointed, for Judges and Officers of the Realm, 1 Chr. 26.29-32. 2 Chr. 19.8.
and many other expressions of the Old Testament, are interpreted by Mr
Thorndike to import the same, Of Religious Assembl. c. 2.
concerning other times of the Jewish Government. And in the time of
Christianity, I suppose no man will doubt, but that according to the Command of
the Apostle, those who are Officers in the Church, ought to take care of the
Government of their own Families, which is a civil affair and authority. And
whilst the Church was under Pagan Princes, V. Constable. Apostol. l. 2. c. 46. Chapter
5. Sect. 6.
it was usual for the Officers thereof to sit in judgment, to decide all
matters of controversy among Christians: which was according to the direction
of our Savior, Mat. 18.17. and of this Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. as I shall in
another place take notice. And the making peace and deciding differences, was
thought a work so well becoming such persons, and was so usually practiced by
them, about S. Austins time, Aug. de Oper. Monach. c. 29. Posid. de Vit. Aug.
c. 19.
that he mentions these things as those, the hearing and determining of which,
took up a considerable portion of his time. And nothing is more manifest, than
that diverse Imperial Edicts of pious Princes, did peculiarly reserve the
cognizance of most causes relating to the Clergy, besides others, Sozom. l. 1.
c. 9. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 4. leg. 7, 8. Novel. 83, and 86, and 123.
to the hearing and decision of the Bishop. And as Ecclesastical Officers are
members of the Community, and subjects to their Prince, it is very allowable,
that they should so far as they can, be every way useful unto both, and thereby
also to the Churches good.

10. But this distinct constitution of the Church and its Offices, A distinct
Ecclesiastical power, no prejudice to the civil.
is no diminution of the civil authority and its supremacy, but rather an
enlargement thereof, and an advancement of its dignity. For the whole state of
the Christian Church, is founded in the superabundant grace, and favor of God
toward man; and the Ecclesiastical authority of its Officers, being the
ministry of reconciliation, is quite of a different nature from secular power,
being wholly superadded over and above it, and without any infringment thereof.
Right of the Church, chapter 4. p. 168. Review chapter 1. p. 13. Didocl. Alt. Dam. cap.
1. p. 15.
And hereupon the whole power of the Church, is by some Writers termed a
cumulative, and not a privative power, as taking nothing from the civil; and
the same terms are used, concerning the right of the secular power, in matters
Ecclesiastical, as being without any abatement of the proper spiritual power.
Yea, the whole civil authority toward all subjects whatsoever, does not only
still remain entire to the secular Ruler, but he also receives this accession
thereunto, from the constitution of Christianity, that the object of his
government is so far enlarged thereby, that he has a right of inspection and
care, even of those matters, which the grace of God, or the Gospel dispensation
has established. And this does also so much the more exalt his honor and
dignity, in that not only all subjects, in their general capacity as such,
Officers of the Church, which in their Realms are established, by the peculiar
appointment of Jesus Christ, the King of Kings, are also included under this
duty, and are not the less subjects, notwithstanding their relation to the
Church. To which I may add, that there are peculiar arguments, for honor and
reverence unto Rulers, which the doctrine of the Christian Church affords.

SECT. V.
A particular account of this Supremacy, in some chief matters Ecclesiastical,
with some notice of the opposition which is made thereunto.
To give a more particular account of Supremacy, in some chief matters
Ecclesiastical, we may observe, 1. The Princes care about the power of the Keys.
That though the power of the Keys, in admitting any person into, rejecting him
from, or guideing him in the Communion of the Church, as a Society founded by
Christ; and the dispensing Christian mysteries, can be exercised by none, but
the particular Officers of Christ's Church, to whom it is committed; yet the
Prince may command them to mind and do their duty therein, and if need so
require, punish their neglect. Indeed it belongs to the Ecclesiastical power
to determine rules, for the due exercise of the power of the Keys; and the
ordering such rules is part of that power, which has been frequently exercised
in very many Canons of several Councils. But the sovereign power has a right
to take care, that these rules of Government be practiced and observed. Cod. l.
1. Tit. 3. l. 3. Nov. 6. and 123.
And the establishing laws of this nature, was very frequent, both in the
Empire, and in other Christian Kingdoms: and those of Justinian have been
especially taken notice of to this purpose. And though the late Canonists do
broadly censure him, as intermedling too far in Church affairs; yet Baronius
himself is here so modest, Annal. Eccles. An. 528. n. 1.
as to allow low that there is much in this particular to be said in his
excuse; and the late learned Archbishop of Paris, P. de Marc^, de Concord.
Sacerd. and Imp. l. 2. cap. 10.
has sufficiently showed, that the more ancient Bishops, Patriarchs and
Councils, did applaud and honor these his Constitutions in things
Ecclesiastical.

2. And the worship of God.
2. Touching the worship of God, since the divine establishment of the public
Christian service, is contained in the Gospel, no authority upon earth has any
right to prohibit this. And those Christians, who rightly worship God, in the
true Catholic Communion, according to the Apostolical and Primitive Church,
have a right to hold such assemblies for the Christian worship, as appear
useful for the Churches good, though this should be against the interdict of
the civil power. As this is well and largely asserted by Mr Thorndike, Right of
the Church, Chapter 1. p. 4. etc.
so was it practiced by the Christians under their Persecutions, and even by
the Catholic Bishops under the Arian Emperors. But the Sovereign Ruler has a
right to promote this public worship, and to establish it by a civil Sanction,
to protect the Church therein, and to punish those who neglect it, and in this
sense Princes are, as Amalarius styled Ludvicus Pius, Amal. Pras. lib. de
Eccles. Offic.
Rectores totius Religionis Christianae, quantum ad homines pertinet;
Governors in what relates to the Religion and worship of Christianity. And the
civil Ruler has also a right to oppose those, who are guilty of schisms and
occasion unchristian divisions, in the public worship of God, and in so doing
S. Austin undertakes to warrant him, as well he may, from the doctrine of the
Apostle. That he who resists the power resists the ordinance of God, Aug.
Ep. 164.
and they that resist receive to themselves damnation, that he is a terror to
evil works, and a revenger to execute wrath on him who does evil: tota igitur
quaestio est (says he) utrum nihil mali sit sohisma; the only thing to be
enquired into in this case is, whether there be no evil in the sin of Schism.
And though the method and rule of the public worship it self, is to be
determined by the Ecclesiastical Officers, to whose immediate care the Church
is committed; yet the secular power has a right to see that this be done, to
establish such orders of worship by their Sanctions, to provide for their due
observance, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 3. l. 10.
and that they may be performed without disturbance. And such things as these
were established by the Imperial law.

3. And the doctrine of Christianity.
3. Concerning the Christian doctrine and profession, though no authority has
any right to oppose any part of the Christian truth; Princes may and ought to
take care of the true profession thereof in their Dominions, and to suppress
such dangerous errors as are manifestly contrary thereunto; Cod. l. 1. Tit. 1.
and G. Novel. 132.
as was done by the pious Emperors in the ancient Church, against Arianisme,
Donatisme, Manicheisme, and other Heresies. But in cases of difficulty, for the
deciding or ending of controversies, about matters of faith, the disquisition
and Resolution of the spiritual guides ought to take place and to be embraced;
because they are by their office Pastors and Teachers, and their joint and
regular determinations of great moment for the Churches peace; and also because
the Church as a Christian Society (and therefore the guides and Officers
thereof, in the first place) is the pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15.
Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 16. Cod. ubi sup. Novel 131.
Upon this account were many ancient Councils convened, and even the first
general Council of Nice. And accordingly has the doctrine established in the
four first general Councils, been constantly received in the Christian Church:
hence also both the Imperial law, and the Canonical decrees, Did. 15. c.
sicut, etc. Sancta.
reverence the doctrine of these Councils, tanquam sacras scripturas, and a
very high respect is given to them in our English laws. And the Arian Emperors
who lived after the Council of Nice. could not by their Imperial power, null
its decision of doctrine, after its plenary establishment and confirmation. V.
Chapter 5. Sect. 1, 2, 3.
But in such cases the Catholic Christian Emperors, did by their authority
establish the decisions of the Ecumenical Councils. And as it is no abatement
of the Royal Supremacy in civil matters, that when controversies are determined
by able Judges, and sometimes by a consultation of many of those Sages, their
determinations should be established by the royal power; no more is the like
proceeding in matters of Religion, any diminution of the royal power, when the
regular determinations of Catholic Councils are owned thereby: but this method
of proceeding does in both the cases mentioned, evidence that the royal power
is exercised with due Christian care, for the best attaining the designed end.
But in matters of truth which are plain and manifest, from the holy Scriptures
themselves, and the primitive Christian Doctrine, or the Declarations of
approved Councils agreeing therewith; the secular Governor so far as is
necessary, may proceed upon the evidence thereof to his own understanding.

4. Supremacy concerning order, decency, and peace in the Church.
4. In establishing rules and Constitutions for order, decency, and peace, it
belongs to the Ecclesiastical Officers, who are Guides and Overseers of the
Church, to consult, advise, and take care thereof, and this was a great part of
the business of many ancient Councils, and the Canons thereof. But yet this is
with such dependence upon the regal power, as I cannot better express, than in
the words of our late Sovereign King Charles the First If says he, any
difference (in the Church of England) arise about the external policy, Decl.
before 39. Articl.
concerning Injunctions, Canons, or other Constitutions whatsoever thereto
belonging, the Clergy in their Convocation is to order and settle them, having
first obtained leave under our broad Seal so to do, and we approving their said
Ordinances and Constitutions, providing that none be made contrary to the laws
and customs of the land. But in such an extraordinary case, as that in the
primitive times was, when the civil power will not own the Church, the
Ecclesiastical Governors by their own authority, may establish necessary rules
of order, as was then done. But since the external Sanction of such things,
does flow from the general nature of power and authority; wheresoever the
temporal power will take that care of the Church which it ought, it has a
right to give its establishment to such Constitutions; and the Ecclesiastical
Officers as subjects, are bound to apply themselves thereto, for the obtaining
it. And as the Canons of Councils were usually confirmed by pious Princes, so
the Constitutions of the Imperial law, did require the Canons to be observed as
laws. Nov. 6. and 131. Cod. l. 1. Tit. 2. l. 6, 12. And the Calling of Councils.


5. 5. The calling of Councils, so far as is needful for the preservation of
the peace and order of the Church, may be performed as the former, by
Ecclesiastical Officers, where the civil disowneth the Church. But this being
no particular exercise of the power of the Keys, but only of a general
authority, does peculiarly belong to the Prince or supreme governor, if he
will make use thereof, as has been declared by the chief persons of this
Church. Can. 1. 1640.
And the ancient right and exercise of the authority of Kings, in summoning
provincial or national Councils, De Conc. Sac. and Imp. l. 6. c. 18, 19, 22,
23, 24, etc. The Kings just authority in matters Ecclesiastical opposed.
is sufficiently observed and asserted by P. de Marca.

6. But against these just rights of the Princes power, there are various
oppositions. Such are the claims of the Romish Bishops universal Supremacy,
either in all affairs, or at least in all things Spiritual and Ecclesiastical;
as also the pretense for the necessity of general liberty, and exemption from
all authority in matters of Conscience and Religion, Chapter 6. and 8.
which things I shall so far as is needful, in due place particularly consider.

7. The Writers of the Romish Church, do 1. V. l. 2. Decretal. Tit. de Jud. c.
At si clerici. c. Clerici. Tit. de foro comp. c si diligenti. Bellar. de Cler.
c. 28.
Generally assert (and some other parties also incline the same way) that the
state of the Church, and all Ecclesiastical affairs, are exempt from the civil
power, and not under the inspection and government thereof; and that the Clergy
as such, are not subjects to the secular Governor; and that they are not
accountable before him; no not so much, say diverse of them, as in criminal
causes, nor yet in civil. Layman. l. 4. Tr. 9. c. 2, 4, 5. and seq.
2. Not only the Canonists, but many others also, do found this Ecclesiastical
immunity upon a proper divine right, Innoc. 3. in Conc. Lateran. Leo 10. in
Bull. Reform. in Conc. Later. 5. Ses. 9. Azor. Tom. 1. l. 5. c. 12. Laym. ubi
sup. c. 8. Greg. de Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 9. qu. 5. p. 4. Bannes in 2. secundae
qu. 6^. Art. 1. Dub. 2.
in such Councils as they call General. And some of their Writers run so high
as Layman Theol. Moral. l. 1. Tr. 4. cap. 13. and diverse others by him there
cited, as to assert that no civil or secular laws, do lay any obligation
directly upon the Clergy, as having no authority over them. But if I shall show
that all members of the Christian Church, are nevertheless subjects or the
Realm, and that the nature of civil Sovereignty, does directly include a right
to givern them, and an obligation to take care of the affairs of the Church,
this will sufficiently refute these contrary positions.

8. But these Writers are sensible, that in the general practice of the
Christian World, almost in all ages thereof, secular Governors have interposed
in many cases Ecclesiastical. And the great advantages, from Christian Religion
being established, and Gentilisme opposed, by the Laws and Constitutions of
Constantine, and other worthy Christian Emperors, are so visible, that they
cannot be denied; and therefore the Romanists do acknowledge, that the Princes
care of the Church affairs, is of great use, I. Zecch. de principe l. 2. cap. 5.
and that he is as Laelius Zecchius expresses it, Ecclesiae brachium, and
Religionis propugnaculum; the arm and defense of the Church, and the fortress
of Religion. Greg. de Valentia ubi supra. Laym. l. 4. tr. 9. c. 10. P. de Marca
de Concord. l. 1. cap. 12. and in Prolegom. p. 28.
Yet that all this may be consistent with the former positions, we have another
device set on foot, which acknowledges, that this useful power of Sovereign
Princes, in things Ecclesiastical, must be owned only as a privilege, granted
them by the Bishop of Rome, and that they must act therein as by his favor,
and as his deputies, and by the right of protecting the Church which he
commits to them.

9. Now though this pretense will fall with the former, if it be manifested
that the nature, end and constitution of civil government, as established by
God, is to be extended to matters Ecclesiastical; yet concerning this pretense,
I shall here further note these things. 1. That they must cast reflections upon
the wise and good God, who asserting the great usefulness of the civil Ruler
interposing in matters Ecclesiastical, will not grant that the wisdom and
goodness of God, should be as ready to allow the Church this advantage, as the
prudence of the Pope. 2. That if this anthority in matters Ecclesiastical, be
against the rules of the divine law, which God has established, for the honor
and freedom of his Church; the Bishop of Rome deals ill with the Church,
touching its freedoms, by giving them away, and makes very bold with God, by
daring to confront Gods laws with his privileges, and indulging any person to
disobey them. 3. That Christian Princes would be in a very unsafe condition,
whilst they act any thing about the affairs of the Church, if they have no
better foundation to bear them up, than the pretense of the Popes power to
dispense with the laws of God. Surely had Justinian thought, Novel. 58.
that his care of the Church had been so ventuous and hazardous an enterprise,
it would have cooled the heat of his zeal, that he would never have professed,
his care for the Churches wilfare, to be equal to that for his own life. 4.
That whilst any persons do think it meet, that Princes should act under the
Pope, as his deputy, in the affairs of Religion, to whom they owe no
subjection, and from whom they receive no ruling authority; it must certainly
be much more reasonable that they should act under God, and as his Deputies,
whose Vicegerents they certainly are, and from whom I shall now design to
prove them, to have authority in matters Ecclesiastical. B. 1. C. 2.


CHAP. II.
The Royal Supremacy of Kings, in matters Ecclesiastical, under the Old
Testament, considered.
SECT. I.
Their supreme authority over things and persons sacred, manifested.
1. Kings in the Old Testament governed about things of the Church. Art. 37.
THE inference which may be made, from the authority of the Kings, under the
Old Testament, is an argument to which our Church has a great respect, in
asserting the Royal Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. In her Articles she
declares, this acknowledgment of Royal Supremacy, to be a yielding that only
prerogative unto our Kings, which we see to have been given always to all godly
Princes in holy Scripture, Can. 2.
by God himself And in her Canons she threatens excommunication, against them
who shall affirm, that the King has not the same authority in causes
Ecclesiastical, that the godly Kings had among the Jews. Wherefore I shall for
the enforcing this argument, show, 1. That the Kings of Judah had, and
exercised a supreme power of Government, in things belonging to the Church. 2.
That they did this by such a right, as is common to all other Sovereign powers,
and not by any peculiar privilege; and that whatsoever difference is
pretended, between them and Christian Princes, is of no force to exclude the
latter, from enjoying the like authority.

2. The Ark.
Concerning the first I shall design to omit many things, but to observe so
much as is needful, under these several branches. First, concerning the Ark of
the Covenant. This was in a peculiar manner sacred, and none might carry it but
the Priests, or Levites of the Family of Kohath; and Vzzah died for touching
it, and the men of Bethshemesh for looking into it. It contained the two tables
of the Covenant, which were the writing of God, Buxt. Lex. Rab. in (...) p.
2395, 2397, 2398. Lempereur in Middoth. c. 4. Sect. 5.
was placed in the holy of holies; the top of it was the mercy-seat, and
thereupon the Cloud which was the Symbol of divine presence, the peculiar
Shecinah so much magnified by the Jewish Writers: and the Ark and this divine
presence, were two of the five eminent things, wanting in the second temple,
and there was nothing more sacred than this, R. Dav. Kimchi in Hagg. 1.8.
in the peculiar Economy of the Jewish dispensation. Yet whereas the Ark was
sometimes separated from the tabernacle, and the temple, it is evident that it
was David the King, who ordered and appointed the removing of the ark of God,
from Kiriathjearim to the House of Obededom, and from thence to the tent, which
he had pitched for it in Zion, 2 Samuel 6.1, 2, 10, 12. 2 Chr. 1.4. and when he
fled from Absalom, by his command to Zadok and Abiathar, the chief Priests, the
Ark of God which did accompany him, was carried back again to Jerusalem, 2 Samuel
15.25, 29. And it was at the command of King Solomon, that the Ark was brought
from Zion, and placed in the temple, which he had built, 2 Chr. 6.11. 1 Kin.
8.1, 4. And when amongst other corruptions in Religion, the Ark was removed
from the holy of holies, it was again replaced there, by the authority of King
Josiah, 2 Chr. 35.3. So that the Kings of Israel and Judah took care of this
holy thing, Salian. M. 2544. n. 431.
which as Salianus expresses it, was nobilissima pars sanctuarii, quasi
thronus Dei, and locus unde oracula fundebantur.

3. The Temple.
The holy temple was the house of God, and it with the Altar, were in an
especial manner dedicated unto God, and yet the Kings authority had to do with
it, and the affairs thereof. The Laws of God required, that the presumptuous
and wilful murderer, should be taken from Gods altar, that he might die, not
allowing as Philo notes, Phil. de l^g special.
that the temple which was Gods holy place, should be a refuge for those unholy
persons, who are enemies unto God. Whereupon by Salomons authority, Joab was
commanded from the bornes of the altar. 1 Kin 2.30. and when he refused to come
from thence, this his carriage considered, the command of Solomon to Benajah to
slay him there, seems warranted by the law abovementioned, and is vindicated
even by Salianus, and Cornelius a Lapide. Salian. an. 3022. n. 21. A Lapide in
3 Reg. 2.31.
The cleansing and purging the temple from all defilement, was performed by the
commandment of Hezekiah, 2 Chr. 25.3, 5, 15. and the like was again done, in
the reformation undertaken by Josiah, 2 Kin. 23.4, 6, 7. The repairs also of
the temple, and the manner of disposing of the treasures thereof to that
purpose, are taken care of by the order and command of Joash, 2 Chr. 24.4, 8,
11, 12, 14. and by the commandment of Hezekiah, were Chambers prepared, within
the limits of the temple building, for the receiving of offerings, and tithes
and things dedicated, 2 Chr. 31.11, 13.

4. The Priests and Levites.
The Kings had a manifest Sovereignty over the Priests, who were the chief
officers of the temple service, yea even with respect to their service, in the
worship of God. After the Priesthood was established in the Family of Aaron,
Aaron himself though high Priest and elder Brother, Abarbinel in Ex. 30. Phil.
de praem. and poenis. Seld. de Syn. l. 2. c. 2. n. 2, 3.
acknowledged Moses to be his Lord, who had the secular sovereignty, is in the
Scripture styled a King in Jesurun, and is acknowledged by the Jewish Writers
to have had a royal authority, Ex. 32.22. Number. 12.11. And though Moses enjoyed
a singular dignity, in being a divine Legislator, yet that this title was
given, and was due to Moses, as chief civil Governor, is manifest, because
Ahimelech also the High Priest, gives unto Saul the same title, owning him to
be his his Lord, and himself to be his servant, 1 Samuel 22.12, 15. And David
speaking to Zadok the Priest, takes to himself this title of being his Lord, 1
Kin. 1.33. and gives him a command to anoint Solomon. And it was very usual for
the Kings, by their authority to command the Priests, even with respect to
their temple service, and to have such commands observed, as appears in the
reign of Solomon, 2 Chr. 8.15. of Hezekiah, 2 Chr. 29.21, 24, 27. and of
Josiah, 2 Chr. 35.10, 16. The courses of the Priests attendance on their
service, was ordered by David, 1 Chr. 24.3. by Solomon, 2 Chr. 8.14. and by
Hezekiah, 2 Chr. 31.2. And by the authority of Hezekiah and his Princes, the
great Passover in the second month was observed, 2 Chr. 30.2, 3, 4, 5. which
was acceptable to God, v. 12, 20.

5. Gr. de Valent. Tom. 4. disp. 9. qu. 5. punct. 4. Layman. The. Mor. Lib. 4.
Tr. 9. c. 8. n. 2.
Wherefore that argument which some Romanists make use of, to prove that
Princes have no authority over Ecclesiastical persons, because God under the
Old Testament took the Levites to be his, and he gave them unto Aaron and his
Sons, Number. 3.9, 12. and Number. 8.11. -- 19. and therefore, say they, they were
under subjection to no secular power, nor to any other save only to Aaron and
his Successors; is a very weak inference, sinc the High Priests themselves,
were manifestly under the Royal authority. For this being Gods Ordinance, and
his people being under its government, it can be no way incongruous, that what
is his, should be under the inspection of that which has his authority. And
that the Levites were under the Government of the Kings, is obvious from the
holy Scriptures, 1 Chr. 15.4, -- 11, 12 -- chapter 16.4. 2 Chr. 29.30. and from
many other places. E 4 6. The

6. The Kings Sovereignty over the Prophets, is also very evident. The Prophets.
For though the Prophets when they delivered their message from God, and in his
name, might require obedience, even from Kings, unto the God, of Israel; yet
that themselves as subjects of the Realm, were under the Kings authority, is
sufficiently testified, by the instance of the Prophet Nathan, besides what I
shall superadd in the following Chapter. For Nathan acknowledged himself the
servant of David, 1 Kin. 1.26. and that David was his Lord, v. 11, 27. and
David owned himself to be his Lord, v. 33. and gave him command concerning the
inaugurating of Solomon, v. 32, 33, 34. which Nathan observed, Schickard de
Jur. Reg. Heb. c. 4. Theor. 13. Carpzov. in Schick. ibid.
v. 38. And the testimony of the Jewish Rabbis, Maimonides and R. Bechai, have
been by others observed, who from the example of Nathan, 1 Kin. 1.23. declare,
that a Prophet is to stand before the King, and to do reverence to him, with
his face to the Earth.

7. Idolatry, etc.
Concerning other general and necessary matters of Religion, it is so plain
from the History of the Scriptures, that idolatry, witchcraft, and other such
gross pollutions, were punished and suppressed, by the authority of the good
Kings, that it is needless to refer to particular places. When Micah and the
Danites had an House of Gods, it is particularly observed, that in those days
there was no King in Israel, Jud. 17.5, 6. chapter 18.1. which words do plainly
intimate, that if there had been then a King, or settled Governor, it should
have been his care to prohibit, and root out such transgressions against God;
and S. Aug. asserteth, Aug. Epist. ad Bonifac.
that other Kings ought to serve God as hezekiah did, who destroyed the Groves
and Temples of Idols. And that Josiah the King was to destroy the Altar of
Bethel, was foretold, 1 Kin. 13.2.

8. Now though most of these things, with many others of like nature, have been
frequently observed by other Writers, yet I thought it necessary, somewhat
particularly to take notice of them, in the management of this argument,
especially because of the opposition I must meet with, and encounter in the
following Chapter.

9. But lest any should say, Their governing herein was approved of God.
that all these things were indeed matters of fact, but undertaken without
right, it must be further considered, that the exercise of this royal authority
in things Ecclesiastical, was approved and commended by God himself, and
therefore was no unjust usurpation. Thus for instance, Asa's care of reforming
Religion, and establishing it tbroughout all Judah, is declared to be that
which was right in the eyes of the Lord, 2 Chr. 14.2-5. and those pious acts of
Hezekiah, and Josiah, for the suppressing false worship, and establishing true
Religion, had an high and signal commendation from God himself, 2 Kin. 18.3, 4,
5, 6. and chapter 23.1, 2,-25. And where there were defects in the purity of the
public worship, even this was charged as a blemish, in the government of the
Kings who then reigned, as upon Asa, Jehosaphat, Joash, Amaziah, and others, 1
Kin. 15.4. chapter 22.43. 2 Kin. 12.3. chapter 14.4. And from hence it appears,
according to what has been declared in our Church, Can. 1.1640.
that the care of Gods Church is so committed to Kings in the Scripture, that
they are commended when the Church keeps the right way, and taxed when it
runs amiss: and therefore her Government belongs in chief unto Kings; for
otherwise one man would be commended for another care, and taxed for another
negligence, which is not Gods way.

SECT. II.
The various Pleas, against Christian Kings having the same authority about
Religion, which was rightly exercised under the Old Testament, refuted.
extraordinary case, and by an extraordinary power and Commission, and
therefore must not be made a pattern for other times. Under the second I shall
consider such Pleas as would make a show of proof, that there is such a
difference between the Gospel state, and the Mosaical dispensation in this
particular, that thereupon Princes are not capable now, of the like
Sovereignty, which they then enjoyed.

2. With respect to the former head, first Bellarmine will have David, Bellarm.
de Romans Pont. l. 1. c. 7.
Solomon and Josiah, to have acted in matters of Religion, as Prophets, not as
Kings; and if this speak to the purpose, the like must be supposed concerning
all other Kings, They governed as Kings, not as Prophets, in things
Ecclesiastical.
who commanded about Religion. And yet the Scriptures expressly call these
orders, the commandment of the King, 2 Chr. 29.24. chapter 30.6. chapter 31.13. chapter
35.10, 16. and elsewhere; and sometimes, the commandment of the King, and his
Princes, 2 Chr. 29.30. chapter 30.12. Nor is there any pretense, for affixing the
prophetical office, unto all the Kings of Judah, who gave commands about
Religion, it being certain that neither Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah, nor
diverse others of them, were themselves Prophets, but did as occasion required,
consult others as the Prophets of God. De Concordia Sa. and Imp. l. 2. c. 4. n.
5.
And this is so far acknowledged by P. de Marca, that thereupon he justly
rejects this Plea as insufficient, though he confesses it to be usual.

3. They had no extraordinary Commission herein. V. Bishop Bilson of Christian
subj. Par. 2. p. 198.
But others say, the Kings of the Family of Israel might do what they did
warrantably concerning Religion, by a special command of God, made known by a
Prophet, and this might make their undertaking herein necessary. Now that
Prophets did advise, and direct in some of these cases is granted, but still
the authority which established such directions, by a public Sanction, was the
royal power. But if any pretend, that the Kings received their authority
herein, by an extraordinary commission from a Prophet, he ought to give proof
of this, which he can never do; but that there can be no place for any such
conjecture, will appear, because 1. It is not likely that Gods Prophets should
constantly require the Kings, to intermeddle in any thing, that was ordinarily
unsuitable for their office to undertake: and it is also injurious to the
wisdom of God to think, that he should make the care of Religion, the duty of
all the Kings of the stock of David, only by an extraordinary message to every
one of them. 2. It is manifest that many things concerning Religion, were well
undertaken by the Kings of Judah, without so much as the special direction of a
Prophet. Such were David's first intentions to build a temple, which God
approved, Hezekiahs order for the general Passover in the second month, which
is declared to be done, by the consultation of the King and his Princes, 2 Chr.
30.2. and Josiah's reformation was in a good measure effected, before he
advised with the Prophetess Huldah.

4. Cun. de Rep. Hebr. l. 1. c. 14. Marca de Conc. l. 2. c. 4. n. 4, 5.
But there is another Plea made use of by Cunaeus, and another learned man who
evidently follows him. They assert the right of Kings under the Old
Testament, to intermeddle in matters Ecclesiastical; and that they had then
such a supereminent authority, that according to Maimonides, even the High
Priest was to stand in the Kings presence, and that no other person (no not the
Priest) might sit within the court of the temple, save only the King. Their
authority not from any sacerdotal Unction. Ibid. c. 6. n. 6.
And all this they found upon the virtue of the holy Unction, or his being
anointed with the holy Oil; hence P. de Marca asserteth, that he acted
Privilegio Regii Sacerdotii, as having obtained by his Unction, the privilege
of a royal Priesthood, Cun. ibid.
and hereupon Cunaeus thinks, that David might wear the Priestly Ephod, and
thereby consult the Vrim and Thummim. But this also is a very weak pretense,
partly because the royal anointing, was only designed to be the anointing such
a person to be King, as is expressed, 1 Samuel 15.1. 2 Samuel 3.39. 1 Kin. 1.34.
and in many other places; and partly because such an anointed King had no right
to perform the Priestly actions, as is plain from the great guilt of Saul in
sacrificing. And much less could this give thim any Ecclesiastical, or
sacerdotal superiority, over the High Priest himself, since every successive
High Priest was to be anointed with this holy oil, whilst most of the Kings
even of the Family of David, were probably not at all anointed, as I shall
observe in another place; and whether that holy oil of the Tabernacle, Abarb.
de Unctione in Exodus 30. Schick. de Jur. Reg. c. 1. Theor. 4.
was made use of in the usual anointing of the King, though it be asserted by
the Jewish Writers, as Shickard has observed, may yet possibly admit of a
further enquity.

5. And I must further observe, Or any special law of Moses.
that there was not any particular law of God, under the Old Testament, as some
would pretend, which gave any special authority to their Kings in matters
Ecclesiastical, and therefore they proceeded only upon the general and common
right, which chief Governors of a Realm have, even concerning those things;
since in his office he undertakes, De Creatione Principis.
(...), the care and oversight of private, public and sacred things, as Philo
expresses it. Indeed the Israelites had particular laws, which inflicted the
punishment of death upon Idolatry, Witchcraft, blasphemy, and other such like
vices, Ex. 22.18, 20. Levit. 24.15, 16. Deuteronomy. 17.2-5. but it could no otherwise
belong to the King, to execute these laws, than as a judiciary authority in
these cases, Mr. Thorndike Right of the Church. chapter 1. p. 10.
was included in his general royal power. Had all matters of Religion been in
their own nature reserved, and exempted from the royal Government, it would
then have belonged, to the Jurisdiction of Ecclesiastical persons only, to have
executed those laws; especially since the punishment of death, was sometimes
inflicted by Prophets, 1 Samuel 15.33. 1 Kin. 18.40. 2 Kinse. 10, 12. And that
the death of a Malefactor, was sometimes the issue of the sentence of the
Priest, is intimated in Deuteronomy. 17.12. and seems also observed by Clemens
Romanus. Epist. ad Cor. p. 54.
And with an eye to the declining state of the Jewish Government, under the
Maccabees and downwards, when the chief execution of all laws, Joseph. cont.
Apion. l. 2.
was in the hands of the Priest, Josephus frames his description, of the
constitution of the Jewish Commonwealth, as committing the chief secular power
to the Priests, and making them both (...), and (...), the judges of all cases,
and the punishers of all offenders. But it is manifest, that whilst the royal
authority flourished, the laws against Witchcraft, Idolatry, and such like
vices, were put in execution thereby, 1 Samuel 28.9. 2 Kin. 23.24. 2 Chronicles. 34.4,
5.

6. And there is no particular constitution in all the law of Moses, which does
assert any singular supremacy (more than what is generally included in the
Regal authority) of the Kings of the Children of Israel, over their Priests,
and in the temple, and about the worship of God. Indeed Cunaeus does offer an
instance, of a particular positive law of Moses, Cun. ubi supra.
to this purpose, Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20. where God required, that the King should
write a copy of the law, and that this should be with him, and that he should
read therein, all the days of his life, that he might fear the Lord, to keep
all the words of this law, and these statutes to do them. But there is nothing
in this law, which makes the care of Religion, more the duty of the Hebrew
Kings than of the Christian; since these also, are to acquaint themselves with
the doctrines of Christianity, to fear God, and to do his will, but neither of
them might exercise that spiritual power, which belongs to the distinct
Officers of the Church. It may indeed be said, that Kings cannot rightly fear
and serve God, unless they make use of their authority to promote Religious
piety, even in all sorts of their subjects, and this was truly asserted by S.
Austin; Aug. Ep. 50.
but then this can be of no peculiar concernment, to the kings of the Old
Testament, but will equally extend it self to those who live under Christianity.

7. I shall now show, that whatsoever is pretended from the peculiar state of
the Gospel, Reverence to Princes more fully required in the Gospel, than in the
Law.
to debar Christian Kings from that authority, which certainly did belong to
the royal Government, under the Old Testament, is of no force. And this will
easily be admitted by them who consider, that the Precepts for honoring the
King, being subject to the higher Powers, and submitting our selves to the King
as supreme, are more plainly expressed, and universally enjoined, under the New
Testament, than ever they were under the Old. But that there is any direct
prohibition in the Gospel, against the sovereignty of the Royal power, in
matters of the Church, is not so much as pretended; and that the doctrine of
Christianity does assert this authority, shall be hereafter showed.

8. A learned man of our own Kingdom, who owneth the Sovereign power of Kings
in matters of Religion, Right of the Church. Chapter 1. p. 8. Epilogue. B. 1. chapter
19. and B. 3. Chapter 33.
and allows the consequence hereof in general, from the government of the
Jewish Church; does seem to deny that the same right in matters of Religion,
may be claimed by the Christian Kings, which was exercised by the Jewish. Now
that which is here demanded, is, that the general power of Ecclesiastical
supremacy, is under both dispensations the same, in enjoining the observation
of the divine laws, in establishing matters of expediency, for order sake, and
in punishing transgressors. The difference of Judaism and Christianity
considered, with respect to supremacy.
But as to the particular subject matter of this authority, which cannot
possibly be the same, in Judaisme and Christianity, there must of necessity
appear a difference, in the exercise of this supreme authority; many things
being allowable under the law, which are not so under the Gospel. But it is
here further pleaded, that the Kings under the Law, might be further interested
in Ecclesiastical affairs, than the Gospel will admit, because the Church and
state were not so much distinguished, under the legal Economy, as under the
Evangelical; the Mosaical law being the foundation and rule, both of the Jewish
Church, and of the political government. But in truth, the proper fixed Kingly
authority in the Family of Israel, was not so much established, as only allowed
by the Mosaical law; and though there was a true royal power in Moses, and in
the Judges, yet this was not fixed and determined to be the constant
Government, by a particular law. And the Priesthood under the law, was as fully
distinct from the civil power, as the Church government under the Gospel is;
neither of them deriving themselves from the civil, nor resolving themselves
into it. But in both these dispensations, as the Ecclesiastical government was
appointed by them, so was the civil also in general established; yet so that
the foundation which it has in the laws of nature, is antecedent unto both.
And if there be any difference, as to subjection of things and persons
Ecclesiastical unto Princes, it might seem plausible, which yet is not to be
insisted upon, that the Jewish Priesthood might the rather pretend exemption,
from the royal power, as being established before the fixed royal line.

9. Epil. B. 1. Chapter 20. Right of the Church. ubi supra.
It is also urged and must be granted, that the Christian Church is of a larger
extent, than the limits of any single temporal sovereign, whereas the Jewish
Church and State were one and the same body, except the case of some
Proselytes, such as Naaman was, among the Gentiles. And from hence it is to be
acknowledged, that by the determination of Catholic Councils, or by the
universal practice of Christians abroad, any particular Christian Kingdom, and
the Sovereign thereof, may be obliged to entertain and establish, some things
otherwise indifferent, in a compliance with these generally received usages,
and thereby with respect to the peace, unity, and honor of the Christian
Church. Of this nature are some things relating to Canonical ordinations, the
solemnizing of marriage, the observation of the Church festivals, and the rules
for communicating with other parts of the Christian Church. Indeed no such rule
as this could have any force in the Jewish Church, but yet this consideration
cannot hinder, either the extent or exercise of the Princes authority, in the
Christian Church, unless this power had consisted in a liberty to lay aside all
rules, in matters adiaphorous relating to Religion, besides his own pleasure.
Whereas it does consist in such a right, as cannot be restrained or annulled,
by any power upon earth, to establish by civil sanctions, what is useful about
Religion. And his being obliged in Conscience, to admit and embrace such
particular things, as conduce to the Unity or welfare of the Christian Church,
which is a duty every Christian owes unto God; is no more prejudicial to his
supremacy of Government in this very case, than a private man's being bound to
admit, what general custom has made a part of decency and civility, is
prejudicial to, or inconsistent with, his right and power of governing and
commanding his own actions.

10. Wherefore it remains, that the supremacy of Christian Princes,
notwithstanding these things objected, is the same in substance, with the
Supremacy of the Kings of Judah, in matters of Religion: but in some
particularities, there must be a difference in the way of its exercise. And
this may possibly be all that Mr Thorndike intended, who expressing a
difference in this matter, between the state of the law and the Gospel,
refers this sometimes Right of the Church. Chapter 1. p. 11.
to the consideration of the Churches Unity, or else Review. Chapter 1. p. 11.
as a stop to Erastus. Yet he plainly asserteth, from the consideration that
the Apocalypse foretells the conversion of the Empire to Christianity,
Review. p. 15.
that it cannot be doubted, that Christian powers attain the same right in
matters of Religion, which the Kings of Gods ancient people always had, by the
making Christianity the Religion of the State. And he also admits Right of the
Church. Chapter 1. p. 9, 10, 11. Review chapter 1. p. 13, 14.
the same power in matters Ecclesiastical, both in the Christian state and in
the Jewish, to flow from the nature of Sovereign power, and the necessary duty
of this power being employed to advance Religion.

11. Of the Consecration of Churches.
Another thing which may possibly deserve some consideration, is from the
general usage and practice of the Church, concerning the dedication and
consecration of Churches. Some have thought, that when Salomons Temple was
consecrated, the consecration thereof was mainly performed by Solomon himself,
who was the King: this is urged by the Leviathan, Leviath. Chapter 40. Hospin. de
Templ. l. 4. c. 2.
and some men of learning, seem to favor this notion, speaking of him, Ipse
dedicationis praecipuas obivit parts, that he himself discharged the chief
part of the dedication. But the general practice of the Christian Church, has
been (so far as any account thereof can be discovered) to have their Churches
dedicated, not by Princes undertaking to celebrate that solemnity, but by the
Bishops of the Church. C. 1. q. 2. c. placuit, and de Consecrat. did. 1. Leon.
Ep. 88. ad Germ. and Gal. Episcop. De Vit. Constable. c. 40, 43, 44.
And this is not only manifest from diverse Canons mentioned by Gratian, and
from the Epistles of Leo; but the practice of the Church herein is evident, in
the time of Constantine the Great. For there is a particular account given by
Eusebius, in the life of Constantine, of the dedication of a famous Church in
Jerusalem; to which he tells us diverse Bishops were assembled, and did bear
their parts in that solemnity. And the same author acquainteth us, that in his
reign, there were in diverse Cities, (...), Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 10. c. 3.
consecrations of those places of divine worship, which were then lately built,
and the meeting of Bishops to that end.

12. But that this seeming difficulty may be cleared, it may be observed that
there were three sort of things done, at the consecration of the temple at
Jerusalem. 1. Solomon whom God had chosen to build his House, when he had
finished it, yields up his right and presents it to God, and by Prayer
desires Gods acceptance, and that it might be useful to the designed end, and
the good of Israel. And thus much might be done by a private person, who
dedicated an offering unto God, though he was in no secular or sacerdotal
office; as we have the like example and practice in the Prayer those persons
were to make, who presented their first fruits, and the third years tith, Deuteronomy.
26.3-10, 12-15. and this might be more fitly done by Solomon, because he was an
inspired person. And Solomon also as King commanded a great festivity, and a
joyful solemnity to be then observed; Eus. de Vit. Constable. ubi sup.
and the like did Constantine at Jerusalem, at the time abovementioned. 2.
There was the acceptance of this temple, and taking possession thereof in Gods
name and for his service, and the setting it apart thereto, upon account of
Gods authority, by them who were his Officers in the Church; and this was then
to be done by the Priests, to whose office it did belong, to sanctify the most
holy things, 1 Chr. 23.13. And this was partly done, by their bringing in the
Ark, and other holy things into the temple, 2 Chr. 5.5, 7. and partly by the
solemn sacrifices which they offered, whereby the temple is said to be
dedicated, 1 Kin. 8.63. as the tabernacle was purified or dedicated, by the
blood of the Sacrifices, as both the Apostle, Heb. 9.21, 22, 23. and Josephus
do declare. 3. Jos. Ant. Jud. l. 3. c. 10.
Here was Gods owning this his possession, and his House and Temple, and this
was done by the glory of God filling the house, immediately upon the Ark being
brought into it; 1 Kin. 8.10, 11. and by the fire coming down from heaven, upon
the Sacrifices, 2 Chr. 7.1, 2, 3. as had been before done, at the dedication of
the tabernacle: and hence God declared, that he hallowed this house, 1 Kin.
9.3, 7. And all these things, which were not performed by Solomon, were the
chief parts of the dedication; and therefore this instance from Solomon, will
not prove Princes to have had any peculiar Ecclesiastical authority, in the
Jewish Church, above what they may enjoy in the Christian.

13. In the last place I shall consider the suggestion of Cardinal Bellarmine,
Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 29.
that the Church in the time of the Old Testament, might be under the temporal
Government, because it then was more external, and enjoyed temporal promises
chiefly, whereas it is otherwise under the New Testament. Now though it is hard
to discern, any strength or force, in this way of discoursing; especially
because all Religion as such, has a respect to God, and to things spiritual,
and also because Kings under the Old Testament were not Governors of the
promises, which God made to his Church for the future, but of its present
polity: yet I shall return hereto these considerations, which I suppose will be
sufficient. 1. That those things of the Gospel which are of a pure spiritual
nature, as the dispensing heavenly grace and pardon of sin, the taking men into
an inward relation unto God and Christ, and the bestowing on them eternal life,
so far as these things are considered separately and distinctly, from all
visible and external dispensations, are not claimed to be under the government
of any civil power, and this is all that his consideration can amount unto. 2.
That the persons admitted into the Christian Church, and the Officers thereof,
have still under the Gospel visible beings; and their actions of life, their
public service and profession, with several divine institutions, and other
things relating to the order of the Church, are still things external, and
therefore capable of being under the inspection of authority, which is managed
by men concerning things visible and external.

CHAP. III.
No Synedrial power among the Jews, was superior or equal to the Regal.
SECT. I.
The exorbitant power claimed to the Jewish Sanhedrim reflected on, with a
refutation of its pretended superiority over the King himself.
De J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 3. n. 20. Sch. de Jur. Reg. Hebr. c. 1. Theor. 2.
Even Grotius will not allow the Government over the House of Israel, to have
been perfectly Monarchical: and Schickard asserteth it to have been mixtly
Aristocratical, and these with diverse other persons, Dangerous and false
pretenses of the Synedrial power being chief.
assert the Royal Government of the Family of Jacob, to be under the Synedrial
authority. Now if what I shall say in opposition hereto, may seem overlong and
tedious to some Readers, I hope the usefulness thereof for vindicating royal
authority, and discovering usual and considerable mistakes, B. 1. C. 3.
will be a sufficient Apology. And although the rights of Christian Princes, do
not directly depend upon the political constitution of the Jews, or the Family
of Jacob, but are founded in the laws of nature, of nations, and of
Christianity: yet it is in general a great advantage and honor to the royal
government, that God himself established a pattern thereof, in the House of
David, as well as the authority of the civil power about matters of Religion,
may be hence also inferred. And both Romish Writers and others of an
Antimonarchical strain, Salm. Defen. Reg. c. 2. p. 49.
or as Salmasius calls them, Hildebrandinae and Enthusiasticae doctrinae
auctores; in managing their designs, have frequent recourse to this Plea of the
Jewish Synedrial power, against the right of Kings.

2. Annal. Eccles. an. 57. n. 36.
Thus Baronius declares, Apud Hebraeos Lex divinitus data monstravit, etc. The
law which God gave the Hebrews, did show, that the chief government was to be
in the hands of Priests, and although they at length began to have Kings, yet
(says he) even those Kings were subject to the High Priest, who as he pleased
was moderator in that great Council of 72. Elders, which was called the
Sanhedrin, whose office and charge it was to judge concerning the law,
concerning the King, and concerning a Prophet. In which words, besides other
mistakes, he asserteth as that which would best serve the interest of his
party, that the Sanhedrim was a Court governed by the High Priest, whereas
according to the constant description of the Jewish Writers, V. Seld. de Syne.
l. 2. c. 15. n. 14.
the High Priest was neither ordinarily president thereof, nor necessarily a
member of it, though at some times he might be both.

3. And for an instance of the latter sort of men, who are for popular
supremacy, Junius Brutus makes use of this argument, Synedrium
Hierosolymitanum, etc. Vindic. contra Tyran. Qu. 3. p. 96.
The Sanhedrim of Jerusalem, seems to have been of so great authority, that
they could judge the King, in like manner as the King could judge other
persons. And not long after he says, In this Kingdom there were Officers of
the Realm, rege superiores, I say (says he) in this Kingdom, which was
established and ordained, not by Plato, or Aristotle, but by God himself, the
supreme founder of all Monarchy.

4. And it is very manifest, The pretended power of the Sanhedrin.
that the greater part of the Jewish Rabbinical Writers, and from them diverse
Christians, some of them so judicious, that it is strange they should be so
much imposed upon, by Fables and Romances, do assert that the Sanhedrim, or
Senate of seventy one persons, had such a power over the Kings of Judah, as to
call them to account, and punish them. And they also assert, that according to
the original establishment, of the Jewish laws and polity, the chief causes of
moment, both of an Ecclesiastical and civil nature, were exempt from the Kings
jurisdiction, and reserved to the Synedrial cognizance. Grot. and Schick. ubi
supra.
To this purpose Grotius declares, aliqua judicia arbitror regibus adempta, I
think there were some cases of judgment reserved from the King, which remained
in the Sanhedrim of seventy men ( i. e. besides the Nasi or president)
Schickard goes farther, and says, sine senatus magni assensu, Rex in
gravioribus causis nihil poterat decernere; that the King could determine
nothing in the more weighty matters, without the assent of this great Senate.
And our Author de Synedriis, De Synedr. l. 3. c. 9. n. 1.
among other things, discourses de Judiciis adeo Synedrio magno propriis, ut
nec a Regibus aut impediri, aut ad tribunal suum vocari jure potuerunt; in
which words he fetters and confines the Kings power, but that of the Sanhedrim
is set at large.

5. Carpzov. in Schick. c. 2. p. 142.
But it may be a sufficient prejudice against these positions, that they have
no better a foundation, than a tradition delivered by some of the Jewish
Rabbis, This a fabulous tradition of the Rabbis.
against the evidence of whose testimony in this particular, there lie these
exceptions. 1. That none of those persons who assert this Synedrial power, were
contemporary with the flourishing of royal authority, before the captivity; but
all of them lived near or fully a thousand years, and many of them above
fifteen hundred years after that time, and therefore can give no testimony upon
their own knowledge; and writing one from another, with a zeal for all
traditions any of their wise men have delivered, the number of them who are
produced, can add nothing to their testimony. But both divine and humane
writers, who are of an ancienter date, do sufficiently contradict this
position, as I hope to make plain. He therefore who can believe, that the
Apostolical form of Church Government was by Lay Elders, because diverse of
late, but neither Scripture nor ancient Writers do assert it; and he who can
persuade himself, that our Savior made the Bishop of Rome, the Universal
Monarch of the whole World, and gave him a plenitude of all temporal and
spiritual power; because many Writers of that Communion do now assert this,
while what is inconsistent therewith was declared by Christ, his Apostles, and
the ancient Christian Church; such men have understandings of a fit fize and
suitable disposition, to receive these Rabbinical traditions, concerning the
Synedrial authority and Supremacy; which are also things fit for their purpose.

6. Gemar. Sanhed. Cocc. c. 2. Sect. 10.
Secondly, It is evident, that the Rabbis out of affection to their own
Nation, were forward to extol it, even beyond the bounds of truth, of which
that prodigious instance may be given in the Talmud, of the number of the
Horses for Salomons own Stables, which are there brought up to an hundred and
sixty millions, accounting a thousand thousand to a Million. Now the great
Sanhedrim was the chief Jewish consistory, for a considerable time, Sed. Olam
zut. in fin.
before the reign of Aristobulus, and under the Roman Government, and some
continuance thereof remained, toward five hundred years after the destruction
of Jerusalem, as their Chronicle informs us, which was till about the time of
some of those Rabbinical Writers. And it is very probable, that the pressures
and sufferings, which the Jews sustained under the Roman Emperors. or Kings,
might prejudice them against Monarchical Government.

7. Thirdly, There are other Rabbinical and Talmudical Writers of good note,
who will by no means be persuaded to embrace this tradition, which disparageth
the Royal power. Seld. de Syn. l. 2. c. 16. n. 4. p. 666. De Synedr. l. 3. c.
9. n. 3. Grot. de J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 3. n. 20.
To this purpose the words of the Jerusalem Gemara, and of R. Jeremias
mentioned in Dabarim Rabba, and others, are cited by Mr Seldom, and the
testimony of Barnachmoni by Grotius, who assert, that no mortal man has any
power of judging the King. And that the highest authority is in the King, who
stands in Gods place, is asserted by R. Abarbanel, Carpzov. in Schick. p.
165. Their pretended power over the person of the King refuted.
whose words are in Carpzov.

8. But because a due examination of these pretenses may be of good use, I
shall first particularly reflect upon that strange power, which these Writers
give to the Sanhedrim, over the person of the King. They deal with the royal
authority, as the Jews did with our Savior, who gave him the title of the King
of the Jews, but yet scourged him, and treated him with great indignity. For
these Writers do assert, that the King might be scourged by the Sanhedrim; only
by the great Sanhedrim at Jernsalem, says Schickard, De Jur. Reg. c. 2. Theor.
7.
and he acknowledges, that even this appeared to him, valde paradoxum, a thing
far from truth, and very unlikely, until his own apprehensions were molded
into a compliance with the Jewish Writers. But Mr Seldom adds, De Syn. l. 2.
c. 9. n. 5.
that according to the testimony of the Rabbis, he might be scourged by the
lesser Sanhedrim of twenty three, which was the Government of every particular
City. And among the 168. Cases punished by scourging, enumerated by Maimonides,
Ibid. c. 13. n. 8.
and mentioned from him by Seldom, the three last are; if the King multiply
Wives, if he multiply Horses, and if he multiply silver and gold. Now these
things are so strange in themselves, reducing the King to the same
circumstances, with every common and petty offender, that how this can consist
with the majesty and sovereignty of a Prince, is utterly unconceiveable: and he
who can entertain such dreams and fancies, must also persuade himself to
believe, against the plainest evidence, that David and those who sat upon his
throne, were not Kings and chief rulers in the Kingdom of Israel and Judah, but
were all of them subjects, under the common and ordinary government, and
authority of that Commonwealth.

9. Schickard de Jur. Reg. ubi sup.
And this absurd assertion, has put those Christian Writers who close with it,
upon unreasonable shifts, for the defense thereof. And for the reconciling this
with the dignity of a King, many of them make this their last refuge, that this
scourging amongst the Jews, Grot. de Jur. Bell. and pac. ubi sup.
was without any note of infamy or disgrace; and was voluntarily to be
submitted to by their Kings, as an act of penance, and not of force. But this
answer stands chargeable with a twofold miscarriage. 1. With a contradiction to
the design of them who urge it, and a giving up their cause: for if there be
nothing in it of disgrace, it cannot be inflicted as a censure, and the public
punishment of a fault; and if it be undertaken only of voluntary choice, and
not of force, then is it not the result of the sentence, of a superior
Synedrial authority. 2. This would also conclude, that many considerable
offenders, who were to be punished with scourging (as by the custom of the
Jews, according to the cases mentioned by Maimonides, Maimon. n. 134, 135, 156.
he that curses his neighbor in the name of Jehovah, he that is guilty of
perjury, and he that commits whoredom; and by the law of God the unfree woman
who played the whore, being betrothed, Lev. 19.20.) were free from all penalty
and disgrace, though the divine law, Deuteronomy. 25.3. peculiarly mentions this
punishment as infamous. Wherefore these traditions are so absurd, that Petitus
justly affirmed, Petit. Diatribe de Jure pr. c. 2.
istam (...) animo tantum conceperunt, nulli principes eo jure regnarunt; that
no King of Judah with this manacled authority, ever reigned any where else but
in the fancies and pens of these Jewish Writers, and their followers.

10. Now a position so strange in it self, and which puts men of learning upon
such difficult service, and hard shifts to bear it up, had need bring with it
very clear evidence, if it expect to be entertained. But in this case, Seld. de
Syn. l. 3. c. 9. n. 2.
Mr Seldom who is forward enough to embrace the notions of the Rabbis, after
he had represented what is usually said, was so far in doubt of the truth, that
he says, hac in re nihil omnino definimus. Schick. ubi sup.
And Schickard who largely asserteth this synedrial power, confesses that he
could not meet with any one instance, of its having ever been reduced to
practice. And those who have ventured, either at instances or arguments, have
greatly miscarried therein.

11. Two instances by some have been produced, only to show that Kings have
been cited before the Jewish Sanhedrim. The one of Herod the King, An. 31. n.
1^.
mentioned by Baronius: but it is strange to see, how pitifully he mistakes the
case, or else imposes upon his Reader. For it is plain from Josephus, whence
he has this story, that Herod was then no King of Judea, nor was he cited by
the Sanhedrim, but by Hyrcanus, Ant. Jud. l. 14. c. 17.
who was then King by the Roman authority. And it is much that the Cardinal
should not consider, that if Herod after he was King of Judea by the Roman
right, was under the Jurisdiction of the standing Jewish Synedrial authority,
the consequence must be, that the Jews then were Governors over the Romans and
their power, but were in no subjection to them; which, besides the credit of
History herein concerned, he who acknowledges Christ crucified, cannot admit.

12. Another instance is mentioned of Jannaeus the King, who is said to have
been cited by the Sanhedrim, upon account of a servant of his being charged
with murder. This instance in his second thoughts, Schick. append. in Carpzov.
p. 152, 153.
Schickard prefers to the former. Now if this had been true concerning
Jannaeus, it would be of no great moment, since he lived under the lapsed state
of the Jews, and had the name, but not the authority and dignity of a King. But
this story is manifestly fictitious, is styled by Salmasius nugae and fabulae
Rabbinicae, is not at all mentioned by Josephus, Defens. Reg. c. 2. p. 49.
or any good Historian, and also brings in the Angel Gabriel to bear a part in
it, by coming then into the Senate, and destroying all the assessors thereof.
And this story is taken out of the Gemara, where the whole Section is evidently
vain and frivolous, Gemar. in Sanhed. c. 2. Sect. 1.
as amongst other things may appear, from the way of its arguing in this
matter, which I shall presently take notice of. Besides this I shall add, that
so much as has any truth in this relation, is very probably a kind of fabulous
representation of the former instance of Herod, under different names and
circumstances. For both of them are said to be cited, upon occasion of some
persons being put to death, both the stories say, that upon their appearance
the whole Court, (whether properly the Sanhedrim, or Hyrcanus his Judges called
by Josephus (...)) spoke not a word against them, save only one bold man, and
that thereupon all the rest besides this man were after put to death. And this
man is called Sameas or Shammai, in the one story, and Simeon in the other,
which I conceive to be one and the same name in a different Dialect; Grot. in
Mat. 16.17. Drus. Praet. in Joh. 21.15. Hor. Hebr. in Joh. 11.1. and in Luke
16.20.
even as Johannes, Johanan and Jonah in likelihood are, the vulgar latin
expressing Jonas by Johannes, Joh. 21.15. And so are Lazarus and Eleazar, and
many others, whence the Ethiopick Version instead of Lazarus, constantly uses
Eleazar, Luke 16. and Joh. 11. and that they are one and the same name, has
been clearly evinced. To which I add, submitting these conjectures to the
judgments of others, that the name of Jannaeus or Jannas, might possibly be
made use of, in this Talmudical relation, from the signification of the word
(...) both in the Hebrew and Chaldee, for one injurious and oppressive.

13. How extreme vainly they argue in this particular, will appear from that
noted instance of the Talmud. Sanh. c. 2. Sect. 2.
The Mishneh had declared, that the King neither judges, nor is judged, which
it manifestly expresses concerning the Kings of the line of David; nor does it
intend to deny them the authority of judging, because the same Treatise
affirms, C. 7. Sect. 3.
capital punishments by the sword, to be inflicted by the King, but that they
did not usually in person sit in any Court or Consistory. Gemara ubi sup.
But the Gemara here, being a Comment which contradicts the Text, tells us
that this sentence, The King does not judge nor is judged, does not belong to
the Kings of the House of David, for they did both judge and were judged. And
the proof it produces that they were judged, is from Jer. 21.12. O house of
David, thus says the Lord, execute judgment in the morning, declaring
hereupon, that they could not judge, unless they could be summoned to receive
judgment from others. Which is such a ridiculous pretense of proof, against the
evidence of common sense, which would serve as well to prove Parents to be
subject to their Children, Masters to their servants, Schick. de Jur. Reg. c.
2. Th. 7. Seld. de Syn. l. 3. c. 9. n. 2.
and their great Sanhedrim to another Consistory, as to the purpose they
produce it. And yet this testimony and tradition of the Gemara, though very
irrational, is made use of very much, by them who depress the royal authority
among the Jews, and advance the Synedrial.

SECT. II.
The determination of many weighty cases claimed to the Sanhedrim, as exempt
from the royal power, examined and refuted.
1. The fautors of this Synedrial sovereignty, who would make the regal
authority to truckle under it, do under that polity, exempt the decision of the
most material cases of right, from the Kings Judicature. And they do also debar
him of all authority to undertake arbitrary wars, appoint inferior officers
and judges, or to have any interest in enacting laws and constitutions, Canin.
Disquis. in Loc. N. Test. c. 7.
which Caninius does roundly and plainly express, telling us, that the
Sanhedrim bella decernebant, -- resque omnes publicas administrabant. And so
there is neither civil nor military supreme authority, Ecclesiastical reserved
for the King.

2. But I shall undertake to prove, that the eminent power by many placed in
the Sanhedrim, by devesting the Jewish Kings thereof, was certainly not seated
in any such Synedrial power, in the flourishing times of the Jewish Monarchy,
or before the Captivity of Babylon; but was fixed in their Kings, both as to
cases of judiciary decision, and of authoritative consultation and
constitution. And if either the traditions of the Jewish Writers mentioned in
the former Section, or those which I shall now discourse of, had any good
foundation, I should readily then grant, the consequence hence urged by P. de
Marca to be true; De Conc. Sac. and Imp. l. 2. c. 5. n. ult. and Proleg. p. 25.
that they do not deserve well at the hands of Christian Princes, who would
measure their authority and dignity, from the exercise of royal power under the
times of the Old Testament.

3. Several judiciary cases claimed as peculiar to the Synedrial power, are
enumerated by our Author de Synedriis, De Syn. l. 3. c. 1. n. 1. Sanh. c. 1. n.
5.
out of which I shall single out those three chief Cases, which are in the
first place mentioned by the Talmud, concerning a Tribe, a false Prophet, and
the High Priest. And these I the rather fix upon, De Jur. B. and P. l. 1. c. 3.
because the learned Grotius made choice of these, as special instances of
cases, peculiarly belonging to that Court, and not subject to the King; says
he, quaedam cognitionum genera regi videntur non permissa, ut de tribu,
pontifice, and propheta. And according to the sense of Grotius, Seldom speaks
of these three cases, De Syn. I. 3. c. 9. n. 1.
that they are adeo Synedrio magno propria and peculiaria, ut ne regi quidem
ipsi permitterentur. And the first of these concerns things temporal of great
moment, and the other two cases Ecclesiastical.

4. The judgment of a tribe.
This judgment concerning a tribe, is by some declared to be, when the greater
part of a tribe, or the whole, becomes guilty of Apostasy or idolatry. Coch.
not. ad Sanh. c. 1. n. 21. Grot. de Imper. c. 11. n. 15. Seld. de Syn. l. 3. c.
4. n. 3, 4.
But Mr Seldom though he acknowledges this to be the sense of diverse Jewish
Writers, yet his opinion is, that all other cases whatsoever concerning a
tribe, were only determinable by this great Sanhedrim, which he thinks is not
to be doubted. And the consequence of this seems plain, that if the whole or
major part of any tribe, became factious or guilty of rebellion, as most of
them were both after Absalom, and after Sheba, the King had then no authority
to reduce them. But that these things are empty dreams, and wholly void of
truth, will be manifest from these following instances.

5. When the two tribes and half desired an inheritance on the other side
Jordan, they spoke of this to Moses, Eleazar, and the Princes of the
Congregation, Number. 32.2. but the power of determination was in Moses, who
commanded Eleazar and the Princes concerning them, v. 28. and he gave them that
land, v. 33. Jos. 14.3. and so also Josephus declares. Ant. Jud. l. 4. c. 7.
The dividing the land of Canaan amongst the other tribes, was of great concern
to the whole tribes, and was begun by Eleazar, Joshua, and the heads of the
Children of Israel, Jos. 14.1. but by the authority of Joshua, whom God
appointed to divide it, chapter 13.6, 7. and the main part of this division was
made, not by the Sanhedrim of seventy one, but by three men out of every tribe,
Jos. 18.4, 5. who acted by Joshua's command, v. 4, 8. and he cast lots for
their divisions, and is said to have divided the land, v. 10. and also in
Josephus. Antiq. l. 5. c. 1.
When the two tribes and half were suspected of apostasy, in building another
Altar, Phinehas and ten other Princes with him (and not any great Sanhedrim)
had the hearing of it, and did clear them, Jos. 22.13, 14, 30, 31, 32. In the
time of Rehoboam, when the tribes of Israel demanded greater liberty, than they
had had under Solomon, 1 Kin. 12.1, 3, 4. here was no set Sanhedrim, which must
determine concerning them, but the King himself was to resolve them, either
according to the counsel of the old men, or the young, as himself pleased, v.
6. -- 14. And in Hezekiahs time, when both the two tribes under the King of
Judah, and the ten tribes under the King of Israel, were fallen to idolatry,
Hezekiah by his royal authority reformed Judah, and in his piety persuaded
Israel; and in these cases was no appearance of a Synedrial power.

6. Of a Prophet. Cun. de Rep. Hebr. l. 1. c. 12. Seld. de Syn. l. 3. c. 6. n.
1.
The judgment of a false prophet, is frequently claimed as peculiar to the
Synedrial power, that is, according to Seldom, the judging him who shall speak
any thing in the name of a false God, or shall speak falsely in the name of the
true God. But had the trial of a true or false Prophet, been peculiar to them,
it is not so probable that Asa would have been obeyed, in committing the Seer
to Prison; this being then a case coram non judice, and against their laws, and
superior authority. Nor is it likely, that it would be made the matter of
great commendation of Hezekiah, that he put not Micab the Prophet to death, if
the limit of his royal power could not extend it self, to the case of a
Prophet, Jer. 26.18, 19. See also Jer. 26.21, 22, 23.

7. Gr. de J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 3. n. 20. and in Jer. 26. in Jer. 28. and in
Mat. 5.22.
Yet the learned Grotius and other Writers, think they have found some
evidence, for the exemption of a Prophet from the royal power, in the words of
Zedekiah to the Princes concerning Jeremy, Jer. 38.5. he is in your hands, for
the King is not he that can do any thing against you. But herein he follows the
steps of Brutus, J. Brut. Vind. qu. 3. p. 96, 97. Barclai. adv. Antimonarch. l.
4. c. 12.
whose great mistake was sufficiently detected by Barclay. And these words have
no other sense, than that Zedekiah in his present straits, must yield to this
their desire, as David was sometimes necessitated unto a compliance with the
Children of Zerviah, who he says were too strong for him. But we may wonder
that so judicious a man, should in this matter, overlook many plain
expressions, in that very Chapter, which beyond all contradiction evince the
supreme authority of King Zedekiah, in determining this very case of Jeremy, v.
4. The Princes said to the King, we be seech thee, let this man be put to
death. And when Zedekiah had yielded him into their hands, and they had cast
him into the dungeon, Ebedmelech makes his suit to the King for Jeremy, and the
King orders his being taken thence, v. 8, 9, 10. And the King swear to Jeremy,
v. 16. I will not put thee to death, nor will I give thee into the hands of
these men, that seek thy life. Bertr. de Rep. Jud. c. 11. Seld. de Syn. l. 3.
c. 6. n. 4. etc. 9. n. 1.
And yet this one mistaken expression above mentioned, against the scope of the
whole Chapter, was made use of also by Bertram, Seldom, and many English
Writers in our late sad times, for the abridging of the royal power.

8. The words of our Savior are also urged, Luke 13.33. It cannot be that a
Prophet perish out of Jerusalem. The sense of which words is, that Jerusalem
was so far degenerated, that he who came from God, and in his name, should no
where meet with so much opposition, enmity, and violence, as in that place,
where there ought to be the readiest acceptance. But that our Savior should
design, Drus. Praet. ad Luc. 13.33. Grot. de Imp. c. 11. n. 15.
as many Writers would infer, that no Prophet could be condemned to die, by any
but the Jewish Sanhedrim, would also have been contrary to the History of John's
being beheaded by Herod, and to what Jesus had frequently foretold of himself,
that he should be crucified; which was a kind of death never inflicted by the
Jewish law, but by the Roman.

9. Seld. de Syn. l. 3. c. 8. n. 1. Of the High Priest.
The judgment of the high priest, claimed as peculiar to the Sanhedrim, is by
some restrained to capital causes only. Yet the judgment concerning any of the
priesthood, whether there was any (...) or blemish, Middoth. c. 5. Sect. 3.
Joma. in Hor. Heb. in Mat. Chorogr. c. 31.
which rendered them unfit for their office, was also claimed to the great
Sanhedrim. But had this case truly been, as is pretended, exempt from the regal
power, the sentence of Saul against Ahimelech, and his Sons, 1 Samuel 22.13-18.
must have been accounted null and insignificant, being pronounced by one who
had no authority over him; whereas at that time Ahimelech freely acknowledges
his subjection to Saul, as I above observed. Nor can this Synedrial power
consist, with Salomons undertaking to depose Abiathar, or his declaring it as a
favor that he did not put him to death, 1 Kin. 2.26, 27.

10. And as to the admitting the priests to minister in their office, this
seems anciently to have belonged to the high Priests authority, from 1 Samuel
2.36. but upon account of moral defilements, and some other extraordinary
cases, there are instances of the Priests being rejected from their
ministration, by the authority of the Prince, and secular governor. And thus
it was ordered by Josiah. concerning them who had been Priests of the high
places, 2 Kin. 23.9. and by Nehemiah, concerning them who could not make out
their Genealogy, and right of succession, Neh. 7.65. From all this it is
manifest, that all these three cases have been misrepresented, and that it is a
bad description of the Kingdom of Judah, which places all these things,
without the limits of the Royal authority.

11. But there are also several other constitutions, and determinations of
authority, which by these Writers are appropriated to the Synedrial power; as
the making of arbitrary wars, the establishing and ordering inferior
judicatures, and the constituting laws. Of making War.
And to debar the King of all power in these matters, and reserve them as
peculiar to the Sanhedrin, is in effect to affirm, that neither the Royal Crown
and Scepter, nor the power of the Sword, did belong unto the King.

12. Sanh. c. 1. Sect. 5. Coch. ibid. n. 23. Buxt. Lex. Chapter in (...). Seld. de
Syn. l. 3. c. 12. n. 1, 2. Schick. de jur. Reg. H. b. c. 5. Theor. 17.
That the (...) arbitrary war, or War of choice, (whereby they understand all
War, besides what God commanded them against the seven Nations of Canaan) might
never be undertaken by the King, but only by the authority of the Sanhedrin, is
generally asserted by these Jewish Writers, and their followers. Insomuch that
Schickard, producing Maimonides to the same purpose, says, Rex arma finitimis
illaturus, necessario prius deliberabat cum magno senatu, citra cujus consensum
miles non exibat. Yet nothing can be more plain, than that the war against the
Ammonites, for the defense of Jabesh-Gilead, was particularly resolved upon by
Saul, upon his present hearing of the case, 1 Samuel 11.5, 6, 7, 12. to which
Josephus agrees. Ant. Jud. l. 6. c. 5, 6.
And the Wars against the Children of Ammon in David's time, whereby they were
destroyed, were by the determination of David, 2 Samuel 10.6, 7. chapter 11.1. And
lest any should surmise, that this great Court was in such Cases present with
the King, as the Soul is with the body, from which, though no man can see it,
all strength and life is derived; I shall add that famous instance of
Jehosaphat. When he was with the King of Israel, out of his Kingdom, he upon a
sudden resolved on, and undertook in League with Ahab, a voluntary War against
Syria, 1 Kin. 22.3, 4. and for his proceeding therein, desired no instructions
from any Council in Judea, nor from any other man under Heaven; but only
concerning the event he enquired of a Prophet of the Lord in Israel, v. 5.

13. He who would have any further instances in this matter, may have recourse
besides other cases, to the voluntary Wars of Amaziah against Joash, 2 Chr.
25.17, 18, 19, 20. and of Josiah against Pharaoh Nechoh, 2 Chr. 35.20, 21, 22.
Where as those Wars are related to be undertaken, by the choice of these two
Kings of Judah; so the Kings against whom they Warred, sent Embassies for
Peace, not to any Sanhedrim, but to them. To this I add, that if this notion
had any thing of truth in it, it might possibly be emproved far, toward the
justifying the rebellion of Absalom, Seld. de Syn. l. 2. c. 16. n. 5. Seld. de
Syn. l. 2. c. 15. n. 4. Schic. de Jur. R. c. 1. Th. 2.
against his own Father. For if the power of War was in this Court, it is
altogether unlikely, that David in his sudden flight from his Royal City,
should have them with him; but it is much more likely, if there was then any
such Court, it did remain with Absalom in Jerusalem, where only that Court
could regularly fit, according to the Jewish Canons; especially if that be
admitted for truth, Chapter Par. in Ps. 140. v. 10.
which is declared by the Chaldee Paraphrast, that Ahitophel the chief
Conspirator, was the head of the Sanhedrim.

14. Inferior Courts. Sanh. ubi sup. Seld. de Syn. l. 3. c. 1. n. 1. Quinq in
Chal. Par. in Thren. c. 5. v. 14.
The right of appointing inferior Courts of Judicature, among the Tribes of
Israel, is claimed also as peculiar to this Sanhedrim. And that the Judges of
inferior Courts must be made Rabbis, and receive imposition of hands from
this great Court, is declared by Quinquarboreus. But as we have undeniable
evidence, that in the military Government, diverse Captains and Generals were
appointed by David, and Benajah by Solomon; so also David established 2700.
Levites, to be rulers over the two Tribes and half, 1 Chr. 26.32. And as the
holy Scriptures gives us an account of the Officers, and Judges in his time,
over the other Tribes, Antiq. Jud. l. 7. c. 11.
Josephus informs us that six thousand of the Levites were made Judges by
David. And if Judges in the Land had not usually been established by the King,
there had been no color for that plausible pretense of Absalom, against his
Father, by telling the men of Israel their matters were good and right, but
there was no man deputed of the King to hear them, 2 Samuel 15.3. Nor can any
thing be more clear than that Jehosaphat set judges in the land throughout all
the Cities of Judah, City by City, 2 Chr. 19.5. and also a chief court in
Jerusalem, v. 8.-11. but that this was no such Sanhedrim, as the Rabbis
mention, I shall hereafter manifest. And that the ancient Jewish Writers, did
acknowledge it a right of the King, to appoint judges and judicatures, will
appear from Philo, Phil. de Creat. Princip.
who discoursing of a Prince, with a special respect to the Jewish Government,
directs him to write the Book of the Law with his own hand, and to read
therein, and also (...), to choose others who shall partake in the rule and
Government; that is as he expresses it, that the lesser causes he should
(...), commit them to inferior Rulers.

15. Of making Laws. Seld. de Syn. l. 3. c. 1. n. 1. Quinquarb. ubi sup. De
Syned. l. 2. c. 9. n. 7. Carpz. in Schickard. c. 1. Theor. 2. p. 15.
The authority of making any new Laws or Constitutions, is also pretended to be
peculiar to the Synedrial power. And consequently their Kings must be denied to
have any interest in the legislation, since these Rabbinical Writers do
generally affirm, that the King might have no place in the Sanhedrim, nor any
share in its authority, as has been observed among others by Seldom and
Carpzovius. But whereas the chief things reported to us, concerning the Reign
of the Kings of Judah, consist either in their care of Religion, or their
military achievements, we have an instance of a standing military law or
statute, for dividing the Spoil; which was established by David, 1 Samuel 30.24,
25. And I have in the former Chapter evidenced, their establishing Orders in
matters Ecclesiastical; such were the division made by David of the Priests and
Levites for their attendance on the service of God, Ant. l. 7. c. 11.
and others of like nature; and Josephus tells us that this division was
observed as long as the Temple and its worship stood. Josiah and Nehemiah,
concerning some of the Priests abovementioned.

SECT. III.
Of the antiquity of the Synedrial power among the Jews, with reflections upon
the pretenses for a distinct supreme Ecclesiastical Senate.
1. From what has been discoursed, it is sufficiently evident, that whatsoever
Courts of Judicature, or Officers there were in Judah, none of them under the
Jewish Monarchy, ever did vie for Sovereignty with it; but were in subjection
to it. There was no such authority, De Jur. Reg. c. 2. Th. 7.
as is challenged by Schickard to the Sanhedrin; who calls it Synedrium
magnum regiae majestatis compar; or by Grotius, Grot. in Mat. 5.22.
who in the reign of the Kings, owneth Senatus authoritatem regiae velut parem,
in which expressions is asserted its equal, or coordinate power with the Kings
which Seldom also allows. Seld. de Syn. l. 2. c. 16. n. 4. p 667.
Yet for giving further evidence to the truth of what I have above expressed, I
shall assert,

2. That this chief Synedrial Government among the Jews, The Original of the
great Sanhedrin was since the Captivity.
was of a later extract than the time of the captivity, and had its first
original, since the decay of the true Royal power. There was indeed all along
the Mosaical dispensation an High Priest, whom the Law of Moses obliged the
Judge or King, in arduous and weighty matters, (and in such only) to consult,
and by him to ask counsel of God. And they had also Elders and men of wisdom,
and with some of these the Laws of equity and prudence would direct the King to
advise. And thus much may not improbably be the sense of those words of
Josephus, proposing this Rule for the King; Joseph. Ant. l. 4. c. 8.
(...), not to act without the High Priest, and the consent of the Senators.
Yet Salmasius thinks that these words of Josephus, Defens. Regia. c. 2. p. 47.
are suitable only to those Princes, who ruled about the end of the Jewish
state; and unless they be taken in the sense. I have mentioned, they are
certainly no rule, either founded on the law, or agreeable to the government of
the House of David. And indeed Josephus who saw and felt the calamities, which
the Jews sustained under the Roman Kings, was no friend to Monarchy, and though
he be far from the Rabbinical strain, yet sometimes in this particular he
plainly misrepresenteth the laws of Moses, as is done in some expressions of
this very Chapter now mentioned.

3. The Israelites also had Courts of Judicature and Judges, in their several
Precincts, commanded by the law, as is necessary in every Kingdom and orderly
Government, Both in its supreme power.
and they had one chief court to receive appeals from the inferior, enjoined,
Deuteronomy. 17.8, 9, 10. But all these in the time of the Royal Government, and all
matters of justice whatsoever, were under the authority of the King, ordered by
him, and dependent upon him. Gemar. in Sanh. c. 2. Sect. 6.
Even the Talmud declares, that all that is contained in that Parashah of the
law, which treats concerning the King, is under the Government of the King;
which Parashah or Section begins, Deuteronomy. 16.18. and ends Deuteronomy. 21.10. and
so takes in this whole seventeenth Chapter. But we have much better evidence
hereof, both in what I have above observed, of the Kings power concerning
matters of judicature, and in that God charge upon the King, the care of
executing justice, Jer. 21.12. chapter 22.2, 3, 4, 15, 16. See also 2 Kin. 15.6.

4. But this Rabbinical Sanhedrim (whose name being of a Greek extraction from
(...), may somewhat intimate the time of its production) consisting only of
Rabbis or such students in the law, who received ordination, it is reasonably
concluded by Mr Thorndike, Of Religious Assembl. c. 3.
that it could not be such in the flourishing times of their Kingdom, when no
doubt Princes and noble persons enjoyed places of dignity and authority. And
precise number of judges.
And whereas these Rabbinical Courts of Judicature, consisted of three persons
only in lesser places, of twenty three in greater Cities, and the supreme Court
precisely of seventy one, it is highly probable, that this model so far as
respects the number, was not the ancient usage in Israel; there being no
account of any such Courts given, either by Josephus, or Philo. Ant. l. 4. c. 8.
Yea Josephus declares that which is sufficiently contrary hereto; that in
every City, the Government was to be managed by seven men, with two Levites,
which he mentions as the direction of Moses; but this is not reconcilable
with the Rabbinical notions, notwithstanding all the endeavors of some learned
men to that purpose. And when we read of a Court of ten Elders at Bethlehem,
Ruth 4.2. and of seventy seven Elders at Succoth, which was a City of the
Gadites, Jud. 8.14. it is manifest that in those times, they had not the same
number of Judges and Rulers, which the latter times did direct, but very
different, Perpetual Gov. of Chr. Church. chapter 4. p. 21.
as is from hence observed by Bishop Bilson.

5. I know it has been an opinion, commonly received without much examination,
that this great Court had its original in the Wilderness, when the seventy
Elders were taken unto Moses his assistance in the Government, Number. 11. which
Mr Seldom accounts a matter so clear, De Syn. l. 2. c. 4. n. 12.
that he receives it with nihil certius est. But he who shall consider, that
all the evidence that those 70. Elders were such a Sanhedrin, as I have above
discoursed of, does depend upon the tradition of a very distant age, and that
there is no certainty, that the 70. Elders mentioned in the Book of Numbers,
were one Court, and not Officers in distinct limits; as also that the History
of the Book of Judges, and of the time of Samuel, 1 Samuel 7.16.
who was himself chief Judge of Israel, and in his own person held his assizes
in Circuit, (twice in the year, as Josephus tells us) give sufficient evidence,
Ant. l. 6. c. 3.
that there was no such supreme Court in being all those times, which he judged
Israel, and that in the following times, the authority claimed to them, was
enjoyed by the Kings, as I have evinced; I say, he who considers all this, may
very well question, if not deny its so early original. And the Jewish
traditions concerning the continuance of this Court, Seld. de Syn. l. 2. c. 16.
n. 23. p. 661, etc.
and the series of succession of its presidents, has no show of probability.
They ordinarily account from Moses till the Kings of Israel, that the several
Judges of Israel, were the successive heads of the Sanhedrim; and yet there is
no mention of any such Court, in all the History of the Judges, and many things
therein show them to have judged Israel as single persons, or a kind of
Monarchs: and had there been such a settled great Court of Judicature with them,
that people had not been left upon the death of the Judge, in such confusion
and Anarchy, that every man did what was right in his own eyes. And the Jewish
Writers produce different Catalogues, of the (...) or President of the
Sanhedrin, Ibid. n. ^, 5.
which speaks them to be at great uncertainty concerning it. And many of them
will have David, and some other Kings to have been Presidents of this Court,
which is contrary to another of their own traditions abovementioned. But these
uncertain and groundless Fables, are rejected by diverse learned men; and even
Seldom himself acknowledges, Ibid. n. 6. p. 674.
that what the Jewish Writers deliver, is successio intuenti haud satis
commoda. And not only Petavius and Pererius, have disowned the Constitution of
this Samhedrim to be from Moses, but Carpzovius lately, Carpz. in Schickard. p.
11, p. 16. and passim.
and Conringius de Republica Hebraica, and Fipschmuthius de rege eligendo and
deponendo, as they are by him cited, will not allow it to precede the Captivity.

6. There is also another conceit, Of an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin. Bertr. de
Rep. Hebr. c. 11. L'emp. in Bertr. ibid. and in Middoth. c. 5. Sect. 3. Mos.
and Aar. l. 5. c. 1.
which has taken place with many, as Junius and Tremellius, in Deuteronomy. 17.
Bertram, and L'Empereur, our English Author of Jewish Antiquities, and others;
that God appointed two Synedrial Consistories among the Jews, the one civil,
the other Ecclesiastical. Now if all that is designed by this notion of a
distinct Ecclesiastical power, was no more than that the Priests as Gods
Officers, were by divine authority empowered to judge and determine, of what
related to the regular purity of the Temple worship, and of the Rules of
Ceremonial. cleanness and uncleanness, and such like things, still
acknowledging that they were subjects to the Royal Government, all this is to
be granted and asserted; and some intimations there are in the Jewish Writers,
of a Council or Consistory of Priests. V. Hor. Hebr. in Mat. 26.3.
But since the authority pleaded for, in the management of this notion, is a
proper supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastioal, so that both these pretended
Consistories, are styled by Bertram, summa and suprema judicia, Bertram. ibid.
this (which is also improved by some, in favor of the highest sort of
Presbyterian Consistories, and against the supremacy of the King, in matters of
the Church) is necessary to be rejected; concerning which it will be sufficient
to note two things.

7. First, That this has no foundation in the Jewish Writers, according to
whom it is not to be doubted, but that in the declining time of their state,
they had only one Great Sanhedrin, which took cognizance both of chief, civil,
and Ecclesiastical causes. And the asserting of two such properly distinct
Synedrial Courts, is justly exploded by Grotius, Gr. de Imp. c. 11. n. 15.
Seld. de Syn. l. 2. c. 4. n. 5. Hor. Hebr. in Mat. 26. v. 3.
Seldom, Dr Lightfoot, and others well acquainted with Jewish learning. And
what number soever they had of particular Consistories, the Royal power has
been sufficiently proved supreme, as well in causes Ecclesiastical as Civil.

8. Secondly, The pretended proofs from Scripture, upon which they who embrace
this conceit do build, are very weak. Some persons would find an evidence for a
divine appointment, of an Ecclesiastical Sanhedrin of 71. in Exodus 24.1. where
God said unto Moses, Jus divin. Regim. Eccl. Part. 2. chapter 12.
Come up thou and Aaron, and Nadab, and Abihu, and seventy of the Elders of
Israel, unto the Lord; and worship ye afar off. And yet here is nothing at all
mentioned concerning any Consistory, or power of Government; nor is it usual to
account seventy four persons to be but seventy one.

9. Others as L'empereur and Rutherford, L'emp. in Annot. in Bertr. and in
Comment. in Middoth. ubi supra. Rutherf. Div. Right of Chapter Gov. chapter 23. p. 505.
insist on Deuteronomy. 17.8. -- 12. where a Court of Appeals in difficult cases is
established, and the Law declares, If there arise a matter too hard for thee in
judgment, between blood and blood, between plea and plea, between stroke and
stroke, being matters of controversy between thy gates; then thou shall arise,
and go to the place which the Lord thy God shall choose. And thou shall come
unto the Priests, the Levites, and (which Particle some render or) unto the
Judge. Now all the force of argument from this place, for two distinct
Consistories, is, that here is mention both of the Priests, and of the Judge.
But this Text gives sufficient intimation, that here is only one chief Court
designed; and that with particular respect to matters of civil cognizance;
which might consist of Ecclesiastical or secular persons, or rather of both.
Ant. Jud. l. 4. c. 8.
Josephus tells us there were (...), in the same Assembly, the High Priest, the
Prophet, and the Company of Elders meeting together. And the Law of Moses did
also expressly require, concerning one and the same case, Deuteronomy. 19.16, 17. If a
false witness rise up against any man, to testify against him that which is
wrong, Then both the men between whom the controversy is, shall stand before
the Lord, before the Priests, and the Judges which shall be in those days, and
the Judges shall make diligent inquisition. And how the Priest might sometimes
be particularly concerned, in the enquiry about civil Cases, and matters of
trespass and injury, may be observed from 1 Kin. 8.31, 32.

10. Another place frequently alleged, for this Ecclesiastical Sanhedrim,
distinct from the civil, is the constitution of Jehosaphat, 2 Chr. 19.8.-11.
which is ordinarily called, the restoring the Synedrial Government. Grot. de
Imp. c. 11. n. 15. Joseph. Antiq. l. 9. c. 1.
But Grotius does with considerable probability deny, that two Courts were here
appointed, and Josephus whom he cited, seems to be of the same mind. And I
think it sufficient to add, that since two distinct Courts do not appear
enjoined by the Law of Moses, and since David and Jehosaphat did differently
model their Courts of Judicature, in compliance with the end and design of the
Law of Moses, 1 Chr. 26.29-32. 2 Chr. 19.8-11. it is not to be doubted, but
this modelling was performed, by their own prudence and Royal authority. But
that here was no such Sanhedrim erected, as is pretended, is the more manifest,
because I have given plain evidence, that both before and after Jehosophats
time, the power claimed at peculiar to them, was exercised by the King. Nor
could the act of Jehosophat give any Court an original sanction, as from the
Law of Moses, nor ought it to be imagined, that he invested them with any power
paramount to the Royal, by which they were constituted.

11. And now again I think it not unmeet to apologize for the length of this
discourse, concerning the Synedrial power, which is much larger than I could
have desired it to have been. And yet considering how great the mistakes of
very many Christian Writers are, in this particular, and to what ill purposes
this error has been by some abused, both for the subverting the Royal, and
Ecclesiastical Government; I thought it useful to add this Chapter in this
place, and to say so much therein, as would be sufficient with impartial men,
for the refuting overgrown mistakes. And this I have done the rather, P. de
Marc. Proleg. p. 23, 24, 25.
because one of the most ingenuous Romanists lately, though he mention other
Pleas, does insist on this as a chief one, against the admitting that Royal
Supremacy asserted in the Church of England, to be proved from the Authority of
Princes under the Old Testament, because, he tells us, the King then in all
difficult Cases, must depend on this great Sanhedrin. And this he there insists
upon with particular opposition to the Anglobritanni, or the positions
concerning the due authority of Princes, which are asserted in the Church of
England.

CHAP. IV.
Arguments for Royal Supremacy in Causes Ecclesiastical, from the nature of
Sovereignty, and the doctrine of Christianity: with an enquiry how far Princes
who are not of the Church, may claim and use this authority.
SECT. I.
The evidence hereof from the nature of Sovereign power.
civil Government, Princes as Gods Ministers must take care of his honor and
Religion.
we may in the first place reflect upon the original thereof. It is derived
from and appointed by God, who as Creator and Lord of all, has the highest
right to rule and govern the whole World. Hence the Apostle calls Government,
an Ordinance of God, and Rulers his Ministers, Romans 13.1, 2, 3. who are also
styled Children of the most high, Ps. 82.6. And that this is a divine
institution, was constantly acknowledged by the ancient Christians,
notwithstanding their persecution from the civil powers, as is manifest from
many expressions to that purpose, B. I. C. 4 Tertul. Apol. c. 36. and ad Scap.
c. 2. Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. (...).
of Tertullian. Dionysius Alexandrinus, and others, of which thing I shall
discourse more in another place. Wherefore Rulers ought to take care of the
service of God in the World: for if any servant be empowered to govern other
servants, in his Masters Family, and to oversee his affairs, can it be
supposed, that he ought only to keep these servants from abusing one another
and not to take care of the interest of his Master, who employs him, whether
his business be done or no, and whether they express due respect to him, or
vilify and despise him? And if a Prince appoints any inferior Governor, is
it not expected that this man in his place should take care, to maintain the
honor and sovereignty of his Prince, as well as the interests of particular
men?

2. This needful and reasonable.
And since it is manifest by the experience of the World, that the duties to
God are not duly performed by all men of their own accord, nor with the sole
help of the spiritual guides; and since the authority of the civil power has a
like influence, upon discountenancing or reclaiming offenders in matters of
Religion, and in common honesty; it cannot be less necessary that those whom
God intrusts with secular authority, should take care of his worship, honor,
and service, than of other things; unless it could be presumed that the
acknowledging and honoring humane authority, and being just, is more a duty to
man, and more his interest, than the acknowledging and honoring of God is. But
God being above all, and the common father of mankind, upon whom we all depend,
and unto whom we are most engaged, it justly seemed strangely unreasonable to
Philo the Jew, Phil. de Temul. p. 259. and de profug. p. 462.
that it should be thought needful that care be used, to secure the performance
of honor and duty, to other Parents and Governors, and that no such regard
should be had to God. And it was esteemed an high absurdity by S. Austin, S.
Augustine. conr. Gaud. Ep. l. 2. c. 11.
that offenses against men should be punished and corrected, but not those
against God. And this was so much the general sense of mankind, De Benef. l. 3.
c. 6.
that Seneca could aver, Violatarum religionum aliubi atque aliubi diversa
poena est, sed uhique aliqua; that there were different punishments in several
places, but every where some for them who violate Religion. And even our holy
Savior in his prophetic zeal, thought fit by a scourge, twice to drive out
them who polluted the temple, who would not undertake to divide inheritances,
or to pass a judicial sentence upon the Adulteress. And all Governors as they
have received greater accessions of honor from God, than others have, are
obliged thereby the more to honor him, and promote his service.

3. Religion of great use to the good of Mankind. De Charit. p. 717. De
Decalogo, page 751.
It being general acknowledged, that the secular authority is to take care,
that justice, honesty, peace and virtue be established and preserved in the
World, even from hence we may infer the necessity of its care about matters of
Religion; the exercise of which, is the best and surest principle, of all
honesty, justice and virtue. Religion as Philo observed, renders the men who
embrace it sober, just, and faithful, whilst the contrary spirit prevails in
them who reject piety, as the same Author observes. De Charit. Foid.
And he who considers, how mightily the Christian doctrine enjoineth
righteousness, meekness, peace, love, and all goodness; and how it enforces
the practice of all these by a lively sense of God, and a belief of his
dreadful threatenings, and excellent and glorious promises, must confess that
these practices and exercises are powerfully promoted, by the embracing and
establishing the true Christian Religion. Indeed there are many who profess,
but do not practice this holy Religion; but in them who embrace the true
principles thereof, as the primitive Christians generally did, its defenders
could with confidence appeal even unto their Enemies (as Tertullian and Origin
do) whether Christians were not hereby more free, Tert. ad Scapulam. c. 2.
Orig. cont. Celf. l. 3. p. 128, 129.
than other sorts of men were, from Sedition against Princes, from all acts of
wrong and injury against men, and profaneness and impiety against God.

4. And even they who persecuted Christianity. have acknowledged, that upon the
strictest enquiry, they discovered that men therein obliged themselves, by
sacred vows, not to the committing any kind of wickedness, but against it; ne
furta, Plin. Ep l. 10. Ep. 97.
ne latrocinia, ne adulteria committerent, ne fidem fallerent, etc. Indeed a
right principle of Religion is much more effectual, for the promoting honesty
and righteousness, than all outward penalities, as laying a powerful restraint,
upon all ways of unrighteousness, even when no eye of man can observe. Now can
it be thought reasonable, that the Rulers charge should be, to take care of
these ends now mentioned, and should be constituted of God to that purpose, and
yet should be obliged to have no care of those things, without which these ends
can never be secured? To assert this, would be to cast a high reflection, upon
the wisdom and Government of God.

5. We may also now compare the paternal and oeconomical Government, with the
Regal. These are so near of Kin, that it is not only acknowledged by
Protestants, but even by the Jews, as we may see in Philo, Ph. de Decal. p.
767. Catech. de Decal. Praecept. Royal Government and paternal compared.
and by Papists, as is declared in the Catechism according to the Decree of the
Council of Trent, that in the fifth commandment of the Decalogue, the Royal
Authority is included under the name of the paternal. Now the Governor of a
Family has such an authority, as extends it self to the things of Religion,
in that he is to take care of the welfare and good of his Family. For there is
great good included in the nature of Religion; which brings inward quiet,
peace, and satisfaction of mind, by subduing violent passions, and inordinate
appetites, and by eying Gods providence in all things, with submissiveness to
him, and dependence upon him; and it also brings very high advantages, as it is
the way to enjoy Gods blessing here, and eternal happiness hereafter, and
therefore there cannot be any exercise of a true Fatherly love, where it does
not dispose the person, to a care of so great a concernment as Religion is. And
accordingly the Apostle commands Parents, to bring up their Children, in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4. and God declared his great
approbation of Abraham, in that he would command his Children, and his Household
after him, and they would keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and judgment,
Genesis 18.19. or that they would so entertain the principles of true Religion,
that this should be a foundation of righteousness and well-doing.

6. And there are the same reasons, V. Sacr. Imp. ad Conc. Ephesians. in Tom. 1. Con.
Ephesians. c. 32.
to engage the Royal power to take care of Religion, because all civil powers
are to intend the good of their inferiors, according to the doctrine of S.
Paul, Romans 13.4. And the instances of David, Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, Josiah,
Constantine, Theodosius, and many other pious Kings and Emperors, do manifest,
that they are capable of procuring very great good to their Subjects, by their
pious care about the matters of Religion. And no doubt S. Austin might with
good reason be confident, Cont. Ep. Gaudent. l. 2. c. 17. and in Epist 50.
that the Laws of Christian Princes about Religion, had been the occasion of
bringing many to Salvation by Jesus Christ.

7. And the Royal Government is much of the same nature with the paternal,
enlarged in the extent thereof over several Families; but not restrained in the
nature of it, and in the most excellent and useful part of its authority; Gods
Ordinance hereby placing others in that authority, which Adam and Noah had,
Phil. de creat. princip. p. 727.
over their multiplied and enlarged Progeny. Hence Princes are fitly styled,
(...), the common Parents of Cities and Kingdoms, their political and civil
being having a dependence also upon them, who were called, Patres patriae.

8. And the consideration of the paternal power, will remove the objections,
which some men make use of, against the authority of Princes in matters of
Religion. For if Religion must be so far left free, as not to be commanded and
enjoined, by any humane civil power, then would Abraham's commanding his
Children and Household, have been blameable, he being in his Sphere a secular
Ruler, as well as a Prince is. Or if it be pretended, that grown men who are
come to years of understanding, and have undertaken the profession of true
Religion, ought to be so far left to their own choice as not to be under the
Government of any civil power, with respect to Religion; this also is refuted
by the instance of Abraham's commanding his Household, which was so large, V.
Salian. An. M. 2118. n. 13. and an. 2138.
that many years before this time of the destruction of Sodom when God gave
Abraham this commendation, he could arm three hundred and eighteen Soldiers of
his own Household, Genesis 14.14. and all his numerous Family had been Circumcised.
And since Abraham continued under the blessing of God, it is very probable that
his Family was further enlarged, before the time of this commendation of him.

9. To all this I shall add, that he who does soberly consider, what sad
disturbances and commotions in diverse Kingdoms have been the product of the
corruptions, and errors in the Christian Religion; both upon the account of the
Papal Usurpations, under the pretense of spiritual power, and by reason of the
disloyal positions, and tumultuous practices of other Sects, and their frequent
Rebellions; shall need no other argument to convince him, that the Princes
exercise of Government about the affairs of Religion, is greatly necessary for
the securing his own authority, the peace of his Kingdoms, and the property of
his subjects.

SECT. II.
The same established by the Christian Doctrine.
1. That the Gospel Doctrine never intended to destroy, or diminish the right
of secular powers, is granted by some of chief note amongst the Romanists,
Christus (says P. de Marca) cum Evangelium suum institueret, De Concord. in
proleg. p. 25.
regum dignitatem non laesit. And this is not only manifest, from the tendency
of those great Christian duties of humility, meekness, peace and righteousness;
but also from the many particular injunctions of subjection to Rulers, and from
our blessed Savior his commanding to give unto Caesar, the things that are
Caesar's. Christianity establishes Regal Supremacy.
And also in that the Christian Doctrine does peculiarly enjoin fidelity and
obedience, in all all inferior relations toward their superiors, that by the
practice of this duty, Christianity may be adorned and recommended in the
World, even to those who did oppose or reject it. Tit. 2.9, 10. 1 Pet. 2.12,
13, 14, 15. chapter 3.1, 2.

2. And with some prospect to Christianity, the Kings of the Earth are called
upon, to serve the Lord, Ps. 2.10, 11. and are foretold to be nursing Fathers,
Is. 49.23. undertaking Christianity, and being baptized into it, does require
them in their places, and by their interest and authority, to take care of the
honor of God, of his Church and Religion. And S. Austin well declares, Conr.
Cresc. l. 3. c. 51.
that Kings then serve God in their Kingdoms, when they therein command what
things are good, and prohibit evil; non solum quae pertinent ad humanam
societatem, verum etiam quae ad divinant Religionem, as well concerning
Religion as humane affairs.

3. And lest any should think, that the establishing the Kingdom of Christ
according to the Gospel Doctrine, should give any exemption to the subjects
thereof, from any part of that duty, which was incumbent upon them toward
other Kings and Governors; S. Peter speaking to Christians, under the Titles
of a chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, and a holy Nation, In Resp. ad
Bellarm. Apol. c. 3.
does yet (as Bishop Andrews observed) particularly enjoin upon these persons,
submission to the King as supreme, and to the Governors sent by him, 1 Pet.
2.9, 13, 14. And the business of the civil power is there declared to be so
general, as to be for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of them that
do well, and to the same purpose writes S. Paul, Romans 13.3, 4. So that he who
would exclude matters Ecclesiastical, or concerns of Religion from their
government and care, under the New Testament, must undertake to assert, that
the performances of Religion contain nothing in them of well doing, and that
the neglecting, contemning, or opposing it, is no part of evil doing: which are
such blasphemous assertions, as no man can embrace, unless he be sunk into
Atheism, and so really owneth no Religion at all. Aug. Epist. 160.
And S. Aug. from Romans 13.2. infers, that he who contemns the Emperor
commanding for truth, brings judgment upon himself.

4. 1 Timothy 2.12.
And when the Apostle requires, that Prayers be made for Kings, and all in
authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and
honesty, (which includes both Righteousness and Sobriety) he thereby
expresses the right administration of Government to be advantageous to these
ends. Now as it is manifest that Rulers should not only not oppose Peace, but
establish it; and not only not prostitute honesty and sobriety, but defend and
enjoin the practice of them; so the Apostle mentions godliness, as that which
they should advance equally, and in like manner with peace and honesty. Nor can
we suppose that the Christian Prayers were only designed, that Kings and Rulers
with respect to these particulars mentioned, should do no hurt: but since Gods
Ordinance of Government is a useful institution, that Christian Prayer which
suiteth the Christian doctrine, can desire no less, than that this institution
should attain its end, and become every way effectual for the doing good. And
many Christian Princes have signally advanced, both the doctrine and practice
of Godliness and Religion. Ecclesiastical persons subject to Princes.


5. And that Ecclesiastical persons as well as others, are included under the
duty of yielding obedience, and subjection to this authority, does appear from
that general Precept, Romans 13.1. Let every soul be subject to the higher
powers. Where as the expression is universal and unlimited, so the Comments of
S. Chrysostom, Theodoret, In Loc.
Theophylact, and Oecumenius, S. Bernard. Ep. ad Senonens. Archiep. Est. in
loc. Gr. de Valent. Tom. 4. Disp. 9. qu. 5. punct. 4. Bell. de Rom Pont. l. 2.
c. 29.
do plainly declare all Ecclesiastical persons and Officers, of what degree
soever, even Apostles and Evangelists, to be concerned therein. But this sense
of these words, though urged also by S. Bernard, is not embraced by the present
Romish Writers: but their exceptions made use of to elude this testimony, are
of no great force. For while they tell us, that these words do as much (if not
more) require subjection to the Ecclesiastical power, as to the temporal, those
who thus interpret, are by S. Aug. censured, Aug. cont. Ep. Parm. l. 1. c. 7.
to be sane imperitissimi. And that the Apostle does directly discourse here,
of obedience to the civil and temporal Rulers, appears evidently from his
mentioning their bearing the sword, v. 4. and receiving tribute, v. 6.

6. And the pretense, that this command does only oblige them who are properly
subjects, but not those Ecclesiastical persons, who are pretended not to be
subject, but superior to the secular power, does proceed upon such a Notion,
which was wholly unknown to the ancient times of Christianity. For it was then
usual to hear such expressions as these, Tertul. ad Scap. c. 2.
Colimus Imperatorem ut hominem a Deo secundum, and solo Deo minorem: we
reverence the Emperor as being next to God, and inferior to none besides him.
Hom. 2. ad Antioch.
And S. Chrysostom owned Theodosius as the head over all men upon Earth, i. e.
in his Dominions. And according to this perverse Exposition, there is no more
evidence from the Apostles doctrine, concerning any Christians in general being
subject to Princes, than concerning Ecclesiastical Officers; because his
doctrine must then be owned only to declare, that those who are in subjection
ought to be subject, but not to determine whether any Christians were to be
esteemed subjects to the Pagan Rulers or no.

7. But though the Apostles were ready to declare all needful truth, even
before Princes and Consistories, we never find them when they were accused
before Magistrates, to plead against their power of judicature, or that they
had no authority over them; but they defended themselves and their doctrine
before them. And when S. Paul declared, Act. 25.10, 11. S. Paul's appeal
considered.
I stand at Caesar's Judgment Seat, where I ought to be judged: if I be an
offender, or have committed any thing worthy of death, I refuse not to die, -- I
appeal unto Caesar: he does thereby acknowledge the Emperor to have such a
power over him, who was a great Ecclesiastical Officer, as to take cognizance
of his acting, whether he did any thing worthy of death, or of civil punishment.

8. But against this instance, Bellarmine who in his Controversies did yield,
De Romans Pont. l. 2. c. 29.
that the Apostle did appeal to Caesar, as to his superior in civil causes,
afterward retracts this and declares, that the clergy being Ministers of the
King of Kings, are exempt de jure from the power, not only of Christian, but of
Pagan Kings; and therefore asserteth that S. Paul appealed unto Caesar, In
Libr. Recognit.
not as to his superior, but as to one who was superior to the President of
Judea, and to the Jews.

9. But such shifts are, first, contrary to the sense of the ancient Church,
concerning this case; as may be observed from the words of Athanasius, who
being accused before Constantius, tells him; if I had been accused before any
other, Athan. Apol. ad Constant.
(...), I would have appealed unto your piety, even as the Apostle did appeal
unto Caesar, -- but from thee to whom should I appeal, but to the father of
him, who said, I am the truth; which words declare this appeal to be as to a
superior, and the highest on Earth, who is only under God. Secondly, this
perverteth the Apostles sense, and contradicts his words, who declared in his
appealing, where he ought to be judged, if he had done any thing worthy of
death; which is a plain acknowledgment of superiority over him.

10. Thirdly, Besides, that all appeals are owned by Civilians and Canonists,
as an application from an inferior judge, to a superior judge: this
particular liberty of appealing to the Roman Emperor, was a privilege granted
only to them who were free Citizens of Rome: and the Apostle could not claim
this, but by owning himself a Citizen of Rome, and therefore a subject to the
chief Governor thereof. For this appeal was founded upon that Roman law, which
condemned that inferior Judge as deeply criminal, who should punish any
Citizen of Rome thus appealing. To this purpose, Jul. Paul. Sentent. l. 5. Tit.
28. n. 1.
Julius Paulus says, Lege Julia de vi publica damnatur, qui aliqua potestate
praeditus, civem Romanum, antea ad populum, nunc ad Imperatorem appellantem,
necarit, necarive jusserit, torserit, verberaverit, condemnaverit, in vincula
publica duci jusserit. And accordingly upon this appeal, S. Paul declared, that
no man (no not Festus himself, the President of Judea, who otherwise was
enclinable to have done it) might deliver him to the Jews, Act. 25.11.

SECT. III.
What authority such Princes have in matters Ecclesiastical, who are not
members of the Church.
1. It may be said, that what is declared by S. Peter, and by S. Paul to the
Romans, and also his appeal, did immediately respect Heathen Governors; and
therefore if these places will prove any thing, of the Princes power in matters
Ecclesiastical, they must fix it in Pagan Princes, as well as in Christian.
Div. right of Chapter Gov. chapter 26.
And this is the principal thing objected against the argument from S. Paul's
appeal, by Mr. Rutherford; who tells us, that this would own the Great Turk. to
be Supreme Governor of the Church.

2. And it must be confessed, that it is a very sad and heavy calamity to the
Church when those sovereign powers who are not of the true Religion, will
intermeddle in the affairs of the Church, without the fear of God, and due
respect to the Rules of Religion. Such was the case of the Jewish Church. under
the Roman power, which undertook to dispose of the High Priesthood in Jewry,
against both the letter of the law, and the design of it. But no Governors
whosoever they be, whether of the Church, or Strangers from it, have any right
to do such things, no more than Jeroboam had, to set up the worship of the ten
Tribes of Israel, contrary to the Law; or than the Arian Emperors had, to
oppose the Deity of the Son of God. against the Gospel. But though it be very
desirable, that all parts of the Christian Church should be under Christian
and pious Princes, yet where other powers do take care, Christian Rules,
Spalat. Ostensio. Error. Fr. Suar. c. 3. n. 23.
as the Archbishop of Spalato tells us was done in that part of his Province,
which was under the Turk; this so far as it is regularly performed, is an
advantage to the Christian Religion, and no blameable exercise of their
authority.

3. I think it a very plain and clear truth, All Sovereign powers ought to
profess and promote true Religion.
that Kings and Princes are invested with an authority, to govern in matters of
Religion, not as originally arising from their Christianity, but from their
general right of Dominion and Sovereignty. Nor will there be any difficulty in
this assertion, if we consider that this power of governing about Religion,
encludeth only a right of establishing by their authority, what is truly
unblameable, orderly, useful and necessary, with respect to Religion, and of
enquiring into the practices of their subjects thereupon, in order to
approbation or punishment; but gives no authority against truth or goodness.

4. And though some persons by popular expressions declaim against this
position, De Minist. angl. l. 3. c. 4.
yet the substance of it has been yielded by men of various persuasions. Mr
Mason in his defense of the Ministry of England asserteth, That they who are
Heathens, have the same office and authority of the higher power, that the
Christian Magistrate has, but want the right exercise of it in matters
Ecclesiastical. Our English Presbyterians have asserted, that Heathen
Magistrates may be nursing Fathers, Jas div. Reg. Eccl. c. 9. S. 1.
may protect the Church and Religion, and order many things in a ploitical way
about Religion, may not extirpate or persecute the Church, may help her in
reforming, and may not hinder her. Spalatens. ubi sup.
And Spalatensis asserteth, that the power of the Prince, in the external
things of the Church, is so necessarily connected by divine, natural, and
positive right, with the Royal power, ut infidelis etiam princeps tali, si
velit and sciat, legitime uti possit potestate; that even an infidel Prince may
use that power, if he understand his duty, and be willing to perform it. And
this assertion is approved even by Didoclavius (or Mr Caldwood, Altar. Dam. c.
1. fin.
Didoclavius being the Anagram of Caldivodius) one of the most eager of the
Scottish Presbyterians. And Rivet very rightly averreth, In Decal. ad quint.
praec.
In infideli principe non est defectus potestatis, sed voluntatis tantum; that
an infidel Prince does not want authority, but will and inclination to advance
the true Religion.

5. Surely it is past doubt, that where ever true Religion and Christianity is
declared, and manifested in the World, it is the duty of all men to receive and
embrace it, because as they are Gods Creatures, they ought to obey and honor
him, and submit to his Laws and believe his Revelations; and thereupon every
supreme Magistrate ought to advance the name of Christ, and the true doctrine
and Religion. And if a Pagan Prince upon understanding the truth, shall use his
authority for its advancement, this power is justly exercised in such Causes
Ecclesiastical. I presume no Christian will deny, that Nebuchadnezzar did well
in making a strict Law, Dan. 3.29.
that none should speak amiss against the God of Israel, and Darius also in
making a Decree, that men tremble and fear before the God of Daniel, Dan. 6.26.
and Cyrus, Darius, and Artaxerxes, in giving order for the rebuilding the
temple at Jerusalem, restoring its Vessels, and furnishing it with Sacrifices,
and executing judgment on the opposers hereof; with respect to which thing,
good Ezra blessed God, who had put such a thing into the heart of Artaxerxes.
And that other Princes in like circumstances, should follow the steps of
Nebuchadnezzar, Darius, and the King of Niniveh, who proclaimed a strict fast,
and commanded his people to cry mightily unto God, Aug. Ep. 50. Tertul. Apol.
c. 5.
is justly asserted by S. Aug. in his Epistle to Bonifacius.

6. Nor are those Heathen Emperors to be censured, who acted any thing on the
behalf of Christian Religion, as Tiberius threatened them, who at their peril
should accuse Christians, for their Religion; and other public rescripts there
were, of Adrianus, Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 4.9. Antoninus ibid. c. (...). Aurelius,
Tertul. Ap. c. 5. and Galienus, Eus. Hist. l. 7. c. (...). which were in the
favor of Christians. And it is a known and famous case concerning Paulus
Samosatenus, who for Heresy, was deposed by the Christian Bishops, in the
Council of Antioch, and Domnus appointed to succeed him. Eus. Hist. l. 7. c. 24.
But Paulus refusing to leave his possession, the Orthodox Christians appeal to
Aurelianus, a Pagan Emperor, who referring the case to be heard by the Bishops
of Italy, and about Rome; ordered the Church to be given to him, for whom they
should determine, and by his authority was Paulus ejected; and neither his
interposing, nor their appeal unto him, has been ever thought culpable, nor
yet Paulus his being dispossessed, Constantine before his baptism exercised
authority in things Ecclesiastical.
(...), by the secular power.

7. But above all others, the acting of Constantine the Great, before the time
of his Baptism, seems very considerable, to evidence what power has been
exercised in things Ecclesiastical with the general approbation of Christians,
by one not yet admitted into the Christian Church. Of which I shall give some
particular instances, to which more may be added, beginning with what has
relation to the peace and concord of the Church, Africa in a short time gave
birth to the Schism of Donatus and of Meletius, and the Heresy of Arius. The
Donatists separated themselves from the Church, upon some exceptions they made
against the Ordination of Caecilianus, and being condemned by the African
Catholic Bishops, they apply themselves to Constantine the Emperor. Opt.
cont. Parm. l. 1.
But he being not versed in things of that nature, as Optatus tells us, did not
(or as S. Austin several times says, Aug. Ep. 162. and 166.
durst not) undertake the judging of the case himself, but by his authority, he
appointed Melchiades then Bishop of Rome, with three Bishops of Gallia, to
judge thereof, Eus. Hist. l. 10. c. 5.
and they by virtue of his delegation examined the case, and adjudged it
against the Donatists.

8. But they being still unquiet, and this hearing being ineffectual, for
procuring the peace of the Church, he orders this to be further examined by the
Council of Arles, which he summoned, and enjoins the parties concerned to
attend that Council, Eus. ubi sup.
as his own Letters in Eusebius do declare. Bar. An. 314. n. 53.
And Baronius who fixes the Baptism of Constantine ten years after this
Council, yet asserteth him to have been present in it; which by the way is
sufficient to discover how little the presence of Constantine in the Council of
Nice, can prove him to have been then baptized, as Baronius would thence infer;
who was not there to give suffrage or vote, for the deciding questions of
faith, but to observe their proceedings and preserve unity; and where indeed
even Heathen Philosophers were sometimes present, An. 125. n. 45.
which Baronius himself admits. And after all this, the Donatists being
condemned at Arles, but still dissatisfied and turbulent, though Constantine
was unwilling to have judged a Canonical case, concerning Bishops, in his own
person, yet at last he undertook the hearing the Case of Caecilianus himself,
and justified him. And the accusations the Donatists brought against Felix, who
was one of them who ordained Cecilian, Aug. Ep. 166.
was by the Emperors command and appointment, heard by Helianus, who declared
him innocent.

9. Touching Arianism, and the dispute concerning the time of the observation
of Easter, Constantine endeavored to compose and end them, Socr. Hist. l. 1.
c. 4, 5. Soz. l. 1. c. 15. Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 2. c. 62.
by sending Hosius Bishop of Corduba, both to Alexandria, and into the East, or
toward Asia to that purpose. And after this by his Authority, he called that
famous Council of Nice, to decide these Controversies; of which I shall add
more in the next Chapter. And when they had determined these things, and the
Case of the Meletians and others, Constantine enjoined the burning of all the
Books of Arius, Socr. l. 1. c. 6.
and upon pain of death required every Copy of them to be given up, and not to
be concealed. But afterward being deceived by Arius and his Accomplices, he was
very favorable unto him. And many other things passed under his cognizance,
relating to Arius, and his Confederates and Opposers.

10. He also published his Edicts against the Donatists, Novatians,
Valentinians, Cod. lib. 1. Tit. 5. leg. 1. Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 62, 63.
Sozom. l. 2. c. 30.
Marcionists and other Sects, forbidding their Assemblies, either private or
public, and commanding their ordinary meeting places to be pulled down, or
taken from them. And Eusebius observes, de Vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 37. and l. 4.
c. 27. how for the procuring the peace of the Church, he frequently assembled
Councils, and confirmed their Canons and Constitutions.

11. And when he summoned the Council of Tire, he expressed such words of
authority as these, recorded by Eusebius, and from him admitted by Baronius.
If, says he, any one shall, as I suppose they will not, Eus. de Vit. Constable. l.
4. c. 42. Bar. an. 334. n. 8, 9.
withst and our mandate, (...), and will not be present, there shall forthwith
be sent one by us, who shall by the royal authority eject, (or banish) him,
(...), and shall let him know, that it does not become him to resist the
appointments of the Emperor, which are published for the defense of the truth.
And Athanasius otherwise unwilling, Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 20, 21, 22.
as Socrates informs us, did come to that Council, for fear of the Emperors
displeasure. But when the proceedings of that Council against him, were very
injurious and irregular, for which the Emperor afterward sharply reproved
them, Athanasius himself a man of a great and courageous spirit, and no way
inclinable to any unworthy compliances, earnestly desired to have his case
heard, and examined by the Emperor himself, who though at first unwilling, did
undertake to hear it.

12. He also promulged diverse laws, for the advancement of Christianity and
piety; by them prohibiting idolatrous sacrifices, Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 2. c.
44. and lib. 4. c. 23. and taking care for the erecting Christian Churches,
ibid. l. 2. c. 44, 45. Socr. l. 1. c. 12. and enjoining the reverent
observation both of the Lords day, and of other fasting and festival days of
the Christian Church, Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 18, 23. And all these things
were looked upon by the Christians of that age, as no acts of an intruding and
usurping power, but were attended with great approbation and acclamations: and
the pious Bishops were ready and forward to examine cases according to his
order, for the Churches peace, or to meet in Councils, according to his
appointment. But where the Emperor through mistake did go beyond his bounds,
the pious and Catholic Bishops were then careful, to preserve the true
Catholic rules of Order and Unity, as appeared in that notable instance, when
he commanded Arius to be received into Communion, of which hereafter.

13. Indeed Constantine did all this time believe, and own the doctrine of
Christianity; Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 61.
but was not till toward the end of his life solemnly admitted into the number
of the Catechumens, when he first received imposition of hands, according to
the discipline of the Church. And therefore when he owned himself to be
constituted of God, (...), Ib. c. 24.
he meant thereby that he had the oversight and government, and was to take
care of those persons who were without the Church. Ib. l. 1. c. 37.
And the like general sense of the word (...) must be admitted, where Eusebius
declares, that Constantine behaved himself toward the Church of God, as one
who was (...), a general Governor thereof. But whilst he was yet unbaptized,
being not a perfect member of the visible Church, it would be very incongruous
to assert, that he could derive his authority in causes Ecclesiastical, from
his relation to that Church, whereof he was but a Candidate. And no authority
of Government in the Christian Church, can be conveyed by Christianity,
antecedently to the Baptismal admission.

SECT. IV.
An enquiry into the time of the Baptism of Constantine the Great, with respect
to the fuller clearing this matter.
1. But because much of this depends upon the right fixing the time of
Constantines Baptism, it will be no digression to take a true account thereof,
which our later Romish Writers do much misrepresent. Eusebius, the Chronicon of
S. Hierome, De Vit. Constable. l. 4. c. 61, 62.
and diverse ancient Writers of good credit, inform us, that he received his
Baptism at Nicomedia, Socr. l. 2. c. ult.
but a very short time before his death (and Constantius also his Son was
baptized at the end of his life and reign). But Baronius, Binius, Durantus,
Bar. an. 324. n. 29. etc. Bin. in Vit. Silv. Pol. de Bapt. Constant. Durant. de
Rit. l. 1. c. 19. n. 8.
and before them Cardinal Poole, in a particular Tract, and many other Popish
Writers, out of respect to the Romish See, will have his Baptism to be
administered diverse years before, at Rome by Silvester; some of them boldly
charging Eusebius, with a design of forgery and falsehood in this relation.

2. But he who shall consider, Constantine not baptized at Rome by Silvester.
how much Eusebius conversed with Constantine himself, and how remarkable a
thing his baptism must needs be, after the continued series of Pagan Emperors,
and also how many particularities are expressed by Eusebius, both concerning
words and actions of Constantine, at that time and place, which had relation to
his baptism; will think it unlikely that his account should be an imposture.
Socr. l. 1. c. (...).
And he who shall further observe that Nicomedia was no obscure place, but a
populous City, in which was an Imperial Palace, where Constantine sometimes
resided, and there died; and that all this was related to be done, in a time of
so much remark, as then was the fifty days from Easter to Whitsontide, and when
many Bishops were called thither, to be present at this solemn action; if all
this was as Baronius and Binius pretend, a designed forgery of Eusebius, there
was great want of cunning in the contrivement. And he must be a man arrived at
a strange height both of impudence and folly, who would attempt the obtruding
such a cheat upon the World, which could not but be generally contradicted in
that age. I suppose that no man of common sense can persuade himself, that if
he would undertake to write, that our late gracious Sovereign, King Charles the
First, was put to death at Dublin, or Edinburgh, in 1660. (which is a parallel
to what these men fancy of Eusebius) that ever he should be believed.

3. And yet it is much more incredible, that if this had been such a palpable
imposture, that both Socrates, Socr. l. 1. c. 26. Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c.
32. Soz. l. 2. c. 32. Evagr. Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 41.
Theodoret, Sozomen, Evagrius, and diverse other Historians since them, should
agree with Eusebius herein, and that none of these, nor any other genuine
ancient Writer, should make discovery of his error, who yet mention many
things concerning Constantine, not expressed in Eusebius. And besides what
might be learned by general fame, and particular writings, Socr. l. 1. c. 7.
Socrates had himself opportunity of receiving intelligence, concerning diverse
things done in Constantines reign, from some persons of good credit, who lived
till his time, and one who was present in the Council of Nice.

4. Besides this, S. Ambrose, Ambr. in fun. Theod.
who lived at the end of that Age, and in Italy not far from Rome, where
Constantine is pretended to have been baptized, about thirteen years before his
death; gives a plain testimony, that his baptism was at the end and close of
his life. For speaking of Constantine, he says, Cui baptismi gratia in ultimis
constituto, omnia peccata dimisit; which expressions have puzzled Baronius, nor
can they be referred, as he and Binius would have them, to any time of sickness
but his last.

5. And that Synod held at Ariminum in Italy, in the reign of Constantius,
consisting of the Western Bishops, which held the Faith of Nice, declared their
resolution in their Synodical Epistle to Constantius, which is extant in
Athanasius, Socrates, Athan. de Synod. Socr. l. 2: c. (...). Theod. l. 2. c. 19.
Sozomen and Theodoret, not to innovate any thing in that Faith, which
Constantine with all accurateness and strictness of examination did publish,
(...), whose memory deserved to be famous after his death, Soz. l. 4. c. 17.
and who after his baptism (to wit, into this faith) was taken from among men,
and went into peace. Ubi supra.
But Baronius and Binius to avoid this testimony, undertake to correct this
Epistle, and instead of Constantine read Constans, pretending that it is so
read in Athanasius; to which, because this testimony is considerable, I shall
return two things. 1. That it is indeed true, that the latin translation of
Athanasius, has Constans, but the Greek in Athanasius reads it Constantine;
and it is very unreasonable, that the original Greek of four several Authors,
should be corrected, only from the different reading of one latin translation
of much later date, and possibly altered with design. 2. That the words
mentioned in that Epistle, cannot be applied to any other Emperor, but only to
Constantine the Great, of whom they were discoursing. Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 1.
c. 6.
In his time and much under his care, the faith of Nice was published and
promulged, which is often expressed by (...), and he himself declared, concerning
his care about it at Nice, (...), and then (...), which words of his, the Synod
at Ariminum did probably allude unto.

6. Now against all this great evidence, they who oppose it, do not produce the
authority of any one ancient genuine Catholic Writer. But they bring forth
such spurious stuff, as the acts of Silvester, and Liberius, which are
manifestly fabulous: insomuch that Baronius acknowledges, An. 315. n. 12, 13,
14, 17.
iis complura veritati manifest adversantia inesse, perspicuo demonstratur,
with other words of like severe censure. They also urge a pretended Preface, to
a Council at Rome under Silvester, which speaks of Constantine being baptized
by Silvester. But they have not these words, from any Copy of such a Council it
self, but from a Writing of an uncertain Author, entitled, Epilogus brevis,
etc. of which Binius confesses, Not. in Conc. Romans 2. sub Silvest.
hujus Epilogi initium de mendacio suspectum redditur; that the beginning of
this writing is under a suspicion of being false. They also have recourse unto
Zosimus, a Greek Historian; but from him the produce nothing, of the baptism of
Constantine, but he tells a manifestly false and slanderous story, of the
occasion of Constantines first resolution of embracing Christianity; and both
the acts of Silvester, and the words of the Preface abovementioned do incline
to the same thing. But Zosimus being a bitter Enemy to Christianity, is
declared by Baronius, when he writes concerning things of the Christian
Religion, An. 306. n. 18. and an. 313. n. 15. and passim.
to be an evident depraver of truth, manifestus proditor veritatis, and in
Constantinum iniquissimus, with other expressions of like nature. And the
pretense that the Font is yet to be seen at Rome, in which Constantine was
baptized, being against such great evidence, deserves no more assent, than the
most fabulous stories, concerning such religious relics, as do serve only to
impose upon the credulous vulgar.

7. But that argument which they seem to be most earnest in is, that if
Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia, where Eusebius a chief Ringleader of the
Arians was then Bishop, this would cast an high aspersion upon that good
Emperor, who must, say they, then be concluded to dye in the Arian, and not in
the Catholic Communion Now it might be sufficient to say, that by this same
argument, they might as well prove all the Nicene Council, to be Arians, as
this good Emperor; since they sat, and no doubt received the Communion at
Nice, where Theognis was Bishop; who was the constant Companion and Confederate
with Eusebius, in managing the Arian designs. But I shall further add two
things. 1. That it might be possible, that his baptism was not received from
the hands of this Eusebius, De Vit. Cons. l. 4. c. 61, 62.
Eusebius Pamphilius declaring, that there were diverse Bishops at that time
called to Nicomedia, and Gelasius who was a famous Bishop of Palestine in that
Century, declaring, that he was not baptized by an Arian, but by one who
embraced the Catholic faith, as his words in Photius, cited by Scaliger, do
plainly express. Scalig. in Eusebius. Chron. p. 251.
2. That if it should be admitted, that he was baptized by this Eusebius, as is
indeed expressed in the Chronicon of S. Hierome, and in the (...), published by
Scaliger, with the Chronicon of Eusebius; yet this will by no means charge him
with Arianisme. For 1. This Eusebius of Nicomedia, had then subscribed the
faith of Nice; and though he and Theognis were once deposed by that Council,
yet upon their professed submission to the faith thereof, they were again
restored and received, as S. Hierome acquaints us: Hier. adv. Lucif.
and the form of their submission is extant in Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 10.
and Sozom. l. 2. c. 15. And though this submission of his, was as Theodoret
tells us, Theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 19.
out of an ill design, this is no way to be imputed to the Emperor. 2. The
faith of the Council of Nice was then publicly established, and the Fathers at
Ariminum abovementioned, do sufficiently intimate his being baptized into it.
3. He then appeared a manifest friend, to the Catholic Bishops, who held to
the Council of Nice, in that at the time of his death at Nicomedia, he designed
to recall Athanasius from his banishment, though Eusebius of Nicomedia persuaded
the contrary, Theod. ibid. c. 32. Athan. Apol. 2. ex lit. Constable. filii.
as Theodoret (with whom Athanasius himself agrees) does acquaint us. 4.
Nicomedia was not the place he intended for his Baptism, but Jordan; but his
sickness of which he died surprising him here, left him no liberty to choose
any other place.

8. I shall now only add, that according to this evidence, all the actions of
Constantine, expressed in the former Section, were performed before his
baptism. But if any shall embrace the contrary opinion, which I reject as false
and groundless, many of those actions will still be previous thereto. And
therefore this Princes authority and duty, to take care of things
Ecclesiastical, was not the effect of his undertaking Christianity, but was
contained in the general authority of his imperial Sovereignty. Yet I doubt not
but this fiction of Constantines being baptized at Rome, and the other of his
Donation, are two Twins, being both of them the spurious and illegitimate
offspring, of a luxuriant fancy, impregnated by a Romancing Incubus. And the
large form of his Donation, not that in Balsamon, but in Binius, Bin. Tom. 1.
p. 296.
expresses the Baptism of Constantine by Silvester. But this Donation is now
justly rejected as a manifest forgery, by their own learnedest Writers, as
Morinus, and P. de Marca, De Concord. l. 3. c. 12. n. 3, 5.
the latter of which supposes some of the Popes themselves, about the eighth
Century, to be accessory to the framing and obtruding this imposture.

CHAP. V.
B.I.C.5.
An Account of the sense of the ancient Christian Church, concerning the
authority of Emperors and Princes in matters of Religion.
SECT. 1.
Of the general exercise of this Supremacy; and of its being allowed by the
Fathers of the first General Council of Nice.
1. IT is acknowledged, that the truths either of Christian doctrine, or of
natural reason, do not principally depend upon the consent of men. It is not to
be decided by the voice of the World, whether the only true God, and he alone,
ought to be worshipped; nor did it depend upon the vote of the Jewish
Priesthood or Sanhedrim, whether Jesus was the true Messiah. And upon this
account, the Gentile Deities were deservedly derided by Tertullian, sertul. Ap.
cap. 5.
who had no other title thereto, than by the vote of the Senate; nisi homini
placuerit Deus non erit.

2. But yet none can be expected, doctrines, and duties of Christianity than
those who have been the professors, and practisers of that Religion, in the
purer times thereof. And therefore there is such a just respect and reverence
due to the primitive Christian Church, and the assistance of the divine grace
which guided and influenced it, that that which was generally received therein,
has thereby a very great and considerable testimony of its being a truth,
especially where there are also other great arguments, and evidences to evince
the same. And in such things, it may well be allowed, Dr. Hammond of Heresy.
Sect. 14.
according to Dr Hammond, among the pie credibilia, that a truly general
Council shall not err. And even those persons who have no due regard, either to
antiquity, or the authority of the Christian guides, will manifest their great
pride, if they will reject and contradict the general sense of the Church,
unless it be upon very clear and manifest evidence to the contrary. But such
who pretend, as the Romish Church does, a reverence and high veneration for
Tradition, are thereby the more concerned not to disclaim what has been
ordinarily and plainly delivered, in the ancient Church.

3. Now to give an account of the sense of the particular Fathers in this
place, would be a more long and tedious work than would be needful. And indeed
the minds of many of them may sufficiently be discerned, by their plain
expressions mentioned in several parts of this discourse. Nor will I insist
upon those commonly observed, and very expressive sayings, concerning Supremacy
in general; as that of Tertullian (Imperatores) in Dei solius potestate sunt,
Apol. c. 30. and 33. cont. Parm. l. 3.
a quo sunt secundi, post quem primi; and majestatem Caesaris Deo soli
subjicio; and that of Optatus, super Imperatorem non esse nisi Deum qui fecit
Imperatorem, which very plainly assert, that the Emperor was under none, but
only God himself. But I shall apply my self to such things, as will enclude the
more general, and public acknowledgment of the Christian Church: and shall
then answer what may be objected in this particular.

4. The actual exercise of Government in the ancient Christian Realms, is
somewhat considerable to this purpose. That the Christian Emperors did
exercise authority in matters Ecclesiastical, is manifest from the
Ecclesiastical Constitutions of the Roman Emperors, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, etc.
which are yet to be seen in the Codex and the Novellae Justiniani. Wherein
among other things, there are laws establishing the Catholic faith, and the
doctrine of the Holy Trinity, Novel. 6. and 123. and passim.
so as not to allow any to contend against it; as also concerning the manner of
Ordinations, Excommunications, and Absolutions; and the duty of the Clergy.
even of Bishops, Archbishops, and Patriarchs. And in these and other
particulars, the Nomocanon of Photius does designedly show, Phot. Nomoc. Tit.
1. etc.
how the Imperial law does provide for various Cases, concerning which the
Canons of the Church also had taken care.

5. The Laws of like nature are also yet extant, of the Kings of France, Kings
anciently governed in things Ecclesiastical.
and other Realms abroad. And in our own Kingdom the Ecclesiastical laws of
Ina, Alfred, Edgar, Canutus, and Edward the Confessor, may be seen in Sir H.
Spelman. Spelm. Conc. Vol. 1.
The Laws made and executed by Christian Emperors against Arians, Nestorians,
Manichees, and others guilty of Heresy or Schism, were very many; and the
proceedings by the Imperial law against the Donatists was in diverse places
defended by S. Austin. And that all the godly Emperors of old, Aug. Ep.
50.162, 164, 166. De correct. Donatist. and passim.
even from the beginning of the Emperors professing Christianity, did take
such care of the Church; that the affairs thereof, and the matters of Religion,
were very much ordered by their authority, Socr. Procem. l. 5. Hist. Eccl.
is plainly declared by Socrates. And this is a thing so manifest to all who
look into the History and Records of those Times, that it is as needless to go
about to prove this, as it would be to prove them to have been Christian
Emperors.

6. But that which will give the most evident Declaration of the sense of the
Christian Church, is the considering how this authority of Christian Princes,
has been acknowledged and complied with by Councils, and by those especially,
which were the first general or Ecumenical Councils. For whilst the opinion
of some particular fathers, may possibly be thought not sufficient, to give a
satisfactory account, of the general sense of the Christian Church in those
days; and whereas the proof produced from the Imperial laws, and the constant
exercise of the Emperors authority in affairs of Religion, may possibly fall
under a suspicion of undue encroachment or may be pretended by some, to be
executed by an authority dependent upon, and derived from some Ecclesiastical
Officers; no such exceptions can lie against the concurrent testimony and
acknowledgment of the chief general Councils, in the flourishing times of
Christianity. And I suppose that no man will deny, that the assembling of
Ecumenical Councils, and the matters therein transacted, were properly things
Ecclesiastical.

7. And here I shall begin with the first Council of Nice, This Supremacy owned
by the Council of Nice.
concerning whicn I shall need to say the less, because many things mentioned
in the third Section of the foregoing Chapter, do sufficiently manifest the
Supremacy, exercised by Constantine, the first Christian Emperor, in whose
Reign that Council sat. That this general Council was called by the Command of
Constantine the Emperor is expressly declared by Eusebius, with whom Socrates,
Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 3. c. 6.
Theodoret and other ancient Historians do agree. But the later Romish Writers
would persuade the World, that it was assembled by the authority of the Romish
Bishop. Bin. in Not. in Cone. Nicen. Not. a.
So Binius, Authoritate Silvestri Romani Pontificis, and By the authority of
Silvester Bishop of Rome, this holy Synod was summoned, and was gathered
together by the consent, help, and Counsel of Constan tine the Emperor. And
Baronius likewise declares, that no man may doubt, Baron. an. 325. n. 13.
but that the authority of Silvester was in this case interposed. But in truth
they produce nothing, that can justly be accounted any evidence hereof.

8. But that it may appear past all doubt, by whose authority this Council was
convened, we have a twofold testimony beyond all exception. Constantine
himself, who was able to give an account of his own actions, in his Epistle to
the Church of Alexandria, Socr. Hist. l. 1. c. 6.
which is extant in Socrates, declares that it was he who called this Council.
Ibid.
And the Synodical Epistle, which was written by the Council of Nice to
Alexandria, which may be seen in Socrates and Theodoret, Theod. Hist. l. r. c.
9.
does attest the same; and therein the Fathers of Nice themselves, who could
not but know who summoned that Council, declare that it was gathered together,
by the grace of God, and by the Religious Emperor Constantine, (...), who
called us together out of diverse Provinces and Cities.

9. That the most eminent Bishops, from the several quarters of the Empire, did
with much readiness, repair to this Council, according to the Emperors command,
is particularly attested by Eusebius, Eusebius. ubi sup. c. 6, 7.
and other Historians. Yet it is not to be doubted, that if they had received
summons and command from a person, whom they knew to be inferior and not
superior to them, as a Presbyter or Deacon, they would never have yielded
general obedience to him, but would have rebuked and repressed his insolence;
and therefore this their obedience to the Emperor, was an acknowledgment of
his authority and supremacy. And this is the more remarkable, because these
Nicene Bishops were persons of the highest worth and esteem, of any in the
Christian Church, which appears from the general fame, and deserved honor,
which this Council has obtained, in all succeeding ages unto this day.

10. And the chief occasion of calling the Council, was by reason of the evil
opinions of Arius, and the difference about the day for observing Easter; which
things the Emperor considering, Socr. Hist. l. 1. c. 6. gr.
though this the only effectual way for the redressing them, and thereupon
directed this Council, particularly to consult about them, which was
accordingly done. And whilst this Council was sitting, the Emperor who was
present with them, used very great care and diligence, Eus. de Vit. Constable. l.
3. cap. 12, 13.
for the suppressing unnecessary occasions of discord and quarrel, and for the
promoting the desired concord thereof.

11. And when this Council was ended, Constantine enjoined the observation of
what was established thereby, to take place in all, even in the most remote
Provinces of his Empire. Eus. ib. c. 18.
He also gave his Imperial Sanction, to the Decrees of this Council, confirming
them by his Imperial Seal, Eus. ibid. c. 22.
which Eusebius expresses, (...). And both the Nicene Creed and its Canons are
confirmed in the Civil Law, in the Codex and Authentica.

SECT. II.
This Supremacy owned in the second General Council at Constantinople, and the
third at Ephesus.
1. That the second general Council at Constantinople, was summoned by the
Emperor (viz. Theodosius) is declared, both by Socrates and Sozomen. Socr. l.
5. c. 8. Soz. l. 7. c. 7. The Council of Constantinople.
But Baronius, though he had a little before cited the express testimony of
Socrates, against his assertion, would have us believe, that it was called by
the authority of Damasus, and produces some small appearances of argument for
the proof thereof; Bar. an. 381. n. 19, 20.
and tells us, there is an ancient Manuscript in the Vatican, and some other
Libraries, which declares so much. Bin. Not. in Conc. Constable. not. f.
And Binius making use of the same Plea, is so earnest and fierce, that he
says, Nemo nisi pertinax haereticus, asseveret hoc Concilium ab Imp. indictum
fuisse, Let no man unless he be an obstinate Heretic, assert that this Council
was summoned by the Emperor.

2. Yet all this is a plain instance, whereby we may clearly see, how little
credit is to be given to the specious pretense of Vatican Manuscripts, or to
the confident assertions of such Writers, or their little forced Arguments. For
there is only one Epistle of this General Council, Epist. Synod. ad Theod. in
Bin. and Bar. an. 381. n. 37.
produced both by Binius and Baronius in Latin; and in this Epistle themselves
declare again and again, unto Theodosius the Emperor, that they were convened
by his authority. They tell him in one of their expressions, Mandato tuae
pietatis Constantinopoli convenimus, and in another, Literis quibus nos
convocasti, Ecclesiam honor prosecutus es. So that they assembled by the
Letters and Mandate of the Emperor, which they accounted an honor to the
Church, who were no obstinate Heretics.

3. And indeed though the calling of General Councils, be now with some
eagerness claimed, by many of the Romish Writers, as a prerogative of the Pope;
yet the late Archbishop of Paris has acknowledged, De Concord. l. 6. c. 28. n.
12.
that the first who pretended any right hereunto, was Pope Nicholas about the
year 865. And he has sufficiently evidenced, as others also have done, that
those Decretal Epistles, which are said to be of a more early date, Ibid. l. 3.
c. 5.
and express any such authority to be in the Pope, are certainly spurious and
supposititious.

4. And in this second Council, it is manifest, that during part of their
Session, the Emperor Theodosius was present in the Council, Theod. Hist.
Eccles. l. 5. c. 9.
as is affirmed in a Synodical Epistle, from Constantinople to Damasus, written
by many of the same Fathers, at another Council, the year following, which is
to be seen in Theodoret. And the choice of the Bishop of Constantinople, which
was part of the business that Council was to undertake, Sozom. Hist. Eccl. l.
7. c. 8.
was there determined by the Emperor himself, who requiring the Bishops
present, to give him a Catalogue of such persons, as they thought fit to
nominate, he reserved to himself the election of one out of this number, and
fixed upon the name of Nectarius, who was the last in that Catalogue, who
thereupon was made Bishop of Constantinople.

5. When this Council was ending, in their Synodal Epistle to the Emperor, Ep.
Synodal, ubi supra.
they give him an account of what they have done, sent him a Copy thereof, and
pray him that by his Letters, he would confirm the Decrees of that Council, and
that by his commands they may be of force, ratum esse jubeas, confirmesque
concilii decretum: and that he would strengthen the things which they had
decreed and concluded, by his sentence and seal. Socr. l. 5. c. 8. Sozom. l. 7.
c. 9.
And after this in confirmation of the determinations of this Council, the
Emperor added his suffrage and consent to what they had done, (...). And he
also established a law, that all the Christian Churches should be committed to
them only, who confess the same divine nature, of the Father, the Son, and the
Holy Ghost.

6. That the third General Council of Ephesus, The Council of Ephesus.
was summoned by the authority of the Emperor, Theodosius the younger, is
attested both by Socrates, and Evagrius. Socr. l. 7. c. 33. Evagr. l. 1. c. 3.
And though they who espouse the interest of the Romish Bishop, do here
likewise plead for its being convened by his authority; there are so many
Synodical Epistles of this Council, taken notice of both by Binius and
Baronius, wherein they assert themselves to be assembled by the command of the
Emperor, that he that has either honesty or a face, may well be ashamed to
assert the contrary. And indeed touching the calling this Council, and the
exercising of the Imperial supremacy concerning it, I shall not need to take
notice of any thing further, than what is related, and asserted for truth by
Baronius and Binius.

7. They write themselves to be met together by the Emperors Authority, Act.
Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 4. c. 17. Edit. Peit.
in their Epistle to the Clergy of Constantinople, and in their Encyclick
Epistle, and in their Epistle to the Emperor. And in their Epistle to
Coelestine then Bishop of Rome, they tell him (not that they were convened by
his authority, but) that they were met together, according to the will of our
Savior, and the Sanction of the most pious Emperors (viz. Theodosius the
Second, and Valentinian) at the day of Pentecost. And they go on to tell him
that this was the day, which the Decree of the Emperor, by which they were
called together, did fix for their first Session, with several other
expressions to the same sense. Baron. an. 431. n. 10.
And Coelestine himself, in an Epistle to Theodosius, which Baronius has
published, tells the Emperor, that he did afford his presence by those
Deputies he sent, huic Synodo quam esse jussistis, to this Synod which you have
commanded to be held.

8. And the Emperor first sent Candidianus a Count, and afterward others, to
be present in this Synod, not that he should give any vote in matters of faith,
but to take care of the peaceable and orderly proceeding of the Synod. Baron.
ib. n. 45, 46.
And also to provide, that no other business should be propounded, till those
things chiefly designed were determined. And also that he should not suffer any
persons of that Council, who were summoned thither by the Emperor, to depart
thence, till the Council had finished what was before them: all which things
are manifest, from the letter of the Emperor himself to this purpose, directed
to the Council it self.

9. And when Candidianus did misrepresent the actings and proceedings of the
Synod unto the Emperor; thereupon not only Nestorius who was deposed by this
Council, but even Cyrillus also who was Patriarch of Alexandria, Ibid. n. 128,
129.
and President of this Ecumenical Council, and Memnon Bishop of Ephesus, and a
man of principal note and reputation in that Council, were by the Emperors,
authority, through misinformation, committed to prison. The Emperor also
declared against their management of what was before them, and tells them with
sharpness, Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 3. c. 17.
Our Majesty cannot esteem such things as valid and lawful, yea it does Decree,
that all such things which in a disorderly manner have hitherto been acted,
shall be accounted as void and altogether null.

10. In this case the Council did not exclaim, or contend against the Emperors
authority, as having nothing to do over Bishops, or members of a general
Council, or their proceedings therein; Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 4. c. 10. Baron. an.
431. n. 147. etc.
but they apply themselves to the Emperor, to entreat him to take a true and
just account of what they had acted. And according to the Emperors command,
they send delegates or Deputies to Constantinople, to acquaint him with the
true state of things; and thereby they gave him full satisfaction. And after
they had finished their decisions, Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 4. c. 8. and 14.
they make their application to the Emperor, that he would undertake to
confirm them, and give his consent unto them, ut vim suam integre obtineant,
that they might be of full force.

SECT. III.
Of the same being acknowledged in the Council of Chalcedon, and some others.
The fourth General Council was called, The Council of Chalcedon.
upon occasion of the spreading of the Heresy of Eutyches. When this Heresy
began to be propagated, Leo then Bishop of Rome, Leo. Ep. 9.
addressed himself to Theodosius the second then Emperor, by way of
Supplication, that he would command a general Council to be called in Italy.
But the Emperor fixed upon Ephesus for the place of a general Council, Leo
there; Baron. an. 449. n. 23. Praeamb. Epist. in Synod. Chalc. Leo. Epist. 12,
13.17.
and the Imperial Edict, whereby he summoned this Ephesin Council, is extant.
But Leo in two Epistles to Theodosius, and one to Pulcheria the Empress,
excuses his personal absence, partly from the shortness of the time of his
notice, and chiefly from the necessity of his not being so far from his own
Church, in a time of such public danger (from the Hunns). And he declares,
that he had sent those Deputies, who should supply his presence there; which he
tells the Emperor he did, as an expression of obedience to his command, ut
Clementiae vestrae statutis aliquatenus pareatur.

2. But when this Ephesine Council was packed, by the interest of the faction
of Dioscorus, and managed in favor of Eutyches, and their decisions were
contrary to the truth of the Christian doctrine; Leo both singly, and with a
Roman Synod, Leon. Epist. 24, 25.
writes to Theodosius, that he would command all things to be in the same
state they were in before this decision, until a more general Council could be
called. And he desires by way of Petition to the Emperor, that that Council
might be called in Italy; Epist. 23. and 33.
and renews this his supplication, both directly to the Emperor Theodosius,
and by the Clergy of Constantinople to whom he writes, that they would use
their interest with the Emperor to this purpose.

3. But Theodosius dying in the mean time, and Marcianus succeeding in the
Eastern part of the Empire, Leo still continued his desire, that the place for
a general Council might be appointed in Italy, Lcon. Ep. 49, and 50.
but that it might be at present deferred, because of the great calamities,
which some parts of the Empire sustained, by the incursions of the Hunns. But
the Emperor would not admit of any longer delay, and thought fit to fix upon a
place remote from Italy, for the Council to meet, by his Imperial Summons: or
as Victor, the African Bishop, Victor, Tunun. in Chron.
expresses it, imperiali authoritate denunciavit. And Leo, so soon as the
Emperors pleasure herein was signified to him, appointed his Legates, to
supply his presence in that Council.

4. And this fourth Ecumenical Council of Chalcedon, was first appointed to
meet at Nice, Evagr. Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 2.
as is observed by Evagrius, and the same thing is expressly contained in the
Edict, by which the Emperor did convene them, Praeamb. Epist. in Syn. Chalc.
which is yet extant, wherein also Marcianus declares his resolution, of being
present with them at Nice, at the time appointed for their assembling. Baron.
451.9.
But when the troubles of the Empire hindered the Emperor from removing so far
from Constantinople, Bar. ibid. n. 31.
the Bishops who were convened at Nice at the time appointed waited several
days for the Emperors coming, and after Letters dispatched unto him, the seat
of this Council was by his Order removed to Chalcedon, a City nearer to
Constantinople, where Marcianus was present with them. V. Praeamb. Epist. ubi
sup.
And he wrote two several Letters to them, requiring them to make this removal,
which they accordingly obeyed.

5. And that this Council of Chalcedon did assemble and sit by virtue of this
Imperial summons and authority, Conc. Chalced, Action. 1. etc.
is declared by themselves diverse times, in almost every action of that
Council. And in the time of its Session, the Imperial supremacy was so much
acknowledged, that there were ordinarily present in the Council, some eminent
persons of secular authority, who were to have an inspection into, and to take
care about the orderly proceedings thereof, not intermedling to vote in matters
of faith. These are often mentioned in the several actions of that Council, by
the honorable title of Gloriosissimi judices. and amplissimus Senatus, and
their names and offices in the Empire are expressed in the beginning of that
Council. Action. I.
And they sometimes proposed questions to be discussed, or a method for their
proceedings, and sometimes declared their sense of things. But this I suppose
was only done here (as the like also in the third general Council) to provide a
remedy, against the inconveniences which might happen from the Bishops of the
adverse parties, being prone without cause to complain of the proceedings of
the Catholic Bishops; and to design crossness and opposition against them: and
unless such an extraordinary case may plead for it, this inspection of such
secular persons, cannot be regular or expedient.

6. Evagr. l. 2. c. 18.
In this Council those of the party of Dioscorus and Eutyches, whom this
Council rejected, Leon. Ep. 69.
were censured with the approbation of the Emperor. And Leo in an Epistle to
Marcianus, after the end of this Council, acknowledged, that it was he chiefly
who effected the extirpation of heresy thereby, vestro praecipue opere est
effectum etc. Evagr. l. 2. c. 4. Ibid. c. 18.
The restoring them who were censured by Dioscorus and his party was also done
with the Emperors consent. And at the Emperors desire were the Canons of that
Council made, (...).

7. Conc. Chalc. Action. 3.
And after this Council was ended, both Valentinian and Marcian jointly, Sacra
Marcian. in fin. Conc. Chalc.
and again Marcian singly, publish their Imperial Edict, for the establishing
the faith and doctrine, which was declared in this Council, and signifying to
all their subjects, that whosoever shall oppose this their decree, shall not
remain in any Ecclesiastical preferment; and if he be of the Militia he shall
be cashiered, with other penalties for other persons.

8. And whereas after the death of Marcianus, the Eutychian party favored by
Anatolius of Constantinople, desired to make new stirs, and projected in their
thoughts, to have a new Council called, that these matters might be again
canvased and debated; Leo still Bishop of Rome, Leon. Ep. 73, 74, 75.
makes his supplication to the Emperor Leo, entreating him not to suffer any
new disquisition of that truth, concerning the humanity of our Savior, which
had been so fully determined in the Council of Chalcedon.

9. Some of these matters relating to this Council I have the more particularly
mentioned, because they not only show the supreme authority of the Emperor,
about matters Ecclesiastical, to have been owned and complied with by a general
Council; but even by that Council, whose number of Bishops did almost equal the
number of all the three former general Councils joined together. And also
because this does show the same to have been sufficiently acknowledged, by the
then Romish Bishop, even by Leo, who was a man of great courage, boldness and
activeness, and far enough from being charged with any pusillanimity, and
lowness of spirit.

10. And besides other things, there is observable from this short account,
concerning these Councils, What power the four first general Councils gave to
Princes in Ecclesiastical cases.
1. That all the Fathers of these several general Councils, acknowledged the
authority of the Emperors to take care of the Church and Religion, and to
command Bishops with respect thereto; in that they readily obeyed their
commands, in meeting together at the time and place appointed by the Imperial
authority, to consider of matters of Faith and Religion. 2. That they
acknowledged that these Councils when met, were in the first and chief place to
discuss those matters of faith or order, for which they were summoned by the
Emperor, appears from them all. And that at the time of their assembling,
they showed so great respect to the Emperor, that in expectation of his
presence, they deferred the opening the Council, till they heard from him; and
in obedience to his pleasure, and by his authority, the Seat of the General
Council was removed from one place to another, is particularly evident in the
fourth Council.

11. Thirdly, That they thought themselves obliged, when they should be
required so to do, to give an account of the manner of their proceedings, in
these general Councils, unto the Emperor. And that though they were in
Council, and about matters Ecclesiastical, they were still subject to the
Emperors laws, and his coercive authority, as is manifest from the third
general Council. 4 That they though matters Ecclesiastical and the decisions of
the Church, a fit subject to receive the civil Sanction, and establishment of
the secular power. And that they esteemed such a Sanction to be of great
moment, to add weight to their Constitutions, does appear from them all; and
particularly from the second and third general Councils.

12. I omit all large discourse of other Councils, which might easily be
performed, and many things also in these Councils which might be worthy
observation. But whosoever will read the (...) of the sixth General Council, to
the Emperor Justinian, and their first Canon, Conc. Trull. can. 1.
will discern them to have the same reverence for their Prince, which these
former Councils had. And amongst Provincial Councils, Conc. Mogunt. an. 813. in
praef. ad Imp.
that of Mentz did acknowledge Charles the Great, to be verae Religionis
Rector, and Defensor Sanctae Dei Ecclesiae, and Sanctae Ecclesiae Rector. And
the Council of Merida in Spain, Conc. Emer. in Praefat. In fin. Conc.
Ecclesiastica disponere, to order matters Ecclesiastical, but also that he
did, sapientia divinitus concessa, regere Ecclesiastica, govern matters
Ecclesiastical.

SECT. IV.
Some Objections concerning the Case of Arius, and Arianism, considered.
1. There are some things which have the appearance of arguments, to prove that
the ancient Christian Bishops did not own the Supremacy of Princes, in matters
Ecclesiastical. And the reflecting upon these may be of good use, to give us a
right understanding of that Supremacy, which has been acknowledged in the
Christian Church. To which purpose, I shall here consider two Objections
concerning the Arian Controversies.

2. The Case of Arius.
Obj. 1. When Constantine the Emperor, upon the Oath and subscription of
Arius, to the Faith asserted in the Council of Nice, Athanasius, Socr. Hist. l.
1. c. 26, 27. gr. Athanas. in Apol. Sec.
with Menaces annexed, that he should receive Arius again unto the Church of
Alexandria, Athanasius refused to do this, notwithstanding these Precepts of
the Emperor. And the Catholic Bishops justified him, and refused communion
with them who took part with Arius, which seems to disown the supreme
Government of the Emperor, in Causes Ecclesiastical.

3. Ans. First, The exercise of the Keys is not to be guided by the pleasure of
a Prince as its rule.
That the sentence of Excommunication and Absolution being a proper exercise of
the power of the Keys, the Ecclesiastical Officers are the immediate and
peculiar Judges in these Cases. And if any person shall assert, that they are
always obliged in these things, to do whatsoever the Emperor should give them
in command, though he himself should be imposed upon by the sleight of others,
or otherwise be mistaken; this would tend to disown the subject of this
enquiry, concerning the Emperors power, or to deny that there are such Causes
or matters Ecclesiastical, that the Rules of Religion and Christianity ought to
be the guide and measure of them.

4. Secondly, The Case of Arius had been largely heard and adjudged, by the
highest Ecclesiastical audience of a General Council, by the Emperors command,
where he was anathematized, and condemned of Heresy, and notwithstanding some
appearance of repentance, Hieron. adv. Lucifer. Baron. an. 327. n. 3.
as S. Hierome declares, was sentenced no more to come to Alexandria; that is,
as Baronius rightly explaineth it, not to be received in his former place in
that Church. Now it was not in the power of any single Bishop whomsoever, to
rescind the judgment, or reverse the sentence of a General Council, or indeed
to take a new cognizance, of what had been thereby determined. And to
acknowledge the Emperor to have a power of immediate judging, and determining
concerning the censures of the Church, especially if against the Sentence of a
General Council, cannot be consistent with the Ecclesiastical authority, and
the power of the Keys, committed to the Ecclesiastical Officers, and in the
most eminent and highest manner resident in Ecumenical Councils. And therefore
Athanasius could not obey that command of the Emperor, procured by the
subtilty of Eusebius of Nicomedia and his party, without an exorbitant usurping
and invading an authority, which was superior to him, and undermining the
unity of the Catholic Church, Weights and measures, Chapter 6.
as is observed by Mr Thorndike in justification of Athanasius.

5. And a Case much of like nature with this, was considered in the third
general Council of Ephesus, who rejected them from their Communion, who in a
separate Conventicle from the General Council, undertook to censure Cyril of
Alexandria, who presided in that Council, and Memnon of Ephesus, and were also
fautors of Nestorius. Concerning these Bishops, that Council gave this
instruction to their delegates, whom they sent to the Emperor; that if he
should insist upon these persons being restored to their Communion, they
declare that so much as can be, is to be done, to express obedience to the
Emperor; Act. Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 4. c. 19.
Sanctioni Augusti pro viribus obediendum este; and that if these persons shall
join with the Council in rejecting the Heresy of Nestorius, and deposing him;
and submitting themselves, shall heartily embrace Unity with them, they may be
admitted again to their Communion. But if these delegate Bishops in this Case,
should admit them upon any other terms than these, which the Council it self
upon considering and debating the Case had determined, they are there told,
Arianisme and all false doctrine to be rejected, though favored by Princes.
that they themselves would incur the censure of the Council.

6. Obj. 2. Athanasius in the time of Constantius, S. Basil of Valens, and S.
Ambrose of Valentinian the younger, and diverse Catholic Bishops under the
Arian Emperors, put in their exceptions against the Emperors judging in
matters of Faith, as not being a competent judge in that Case; nor would they
be therein determined by him. And when Constantius had banished many Catholic
Bishops, for withstanding Arianisme, and used severe punishments toward
others, and threatened Hosius Bishop of Corduba, Athanas. ad solitar. vit.
agentes.
who drew up the form of the Nicene Creed, he in an Epistle to Constantius,
advises him, (...), do not put they self upon things Ecclesiastical, nor do
thou give commands to us concerning such things, but rather learn these things
from us; God has put into thy hand the Kingdom, he has committed unto us the
things of the Church. And when S. Ambrose was commanded in the Emperors name,
Ambr. Ep. 33. ad Marcellinam.
to yield up the possession of his Church to be delivered to the Arians, he
refused so to do, in a matter of Gods right, declaring ea quae divina sunt
Imperatoris potestati non esse subjecta, that those things which are Gods, are
not in subjection to the Emperor.

7. Ans. First, Since the Christian profession is a taking up the Cross, all
those who embrace it, must undertake to hold fast the truth of the Christian
faith, though this should be against the command and will of any Prince or
Ruler whosoever, and must be followers of him, who before Pontius Pilate
witnessed a good confession. Martyr. Polycarpi. Tertul. Apol. c. 27.
This was the practice of the Apostles, of S. Polycarp and diverse Christian
Martyrs, to profess the Christian doctrine, when they were commanded to disown
or abjure it. And as they must hold fast Christianity, notwithstanding the
Prohibitions or threats of Diocletian or Julian, so must they keep close to the
Catholic doctrine, notwithstanding the command of any Arian Emperor to the
contrary. And it is no more a derogation from the Royal authority, to say that
it has no right to command, against truth or duty in Religion; than to declare
that it has no right to command, against honesty or chastity in the
Commonwealth. The Princes Supremacy in these matters is under God and Christ,
to establish what is according to the Rules of our Religion, and the good of
Mankind, The deciding questions of faith and guiding in it, more proper to
Bishops thanings.
but can have no authority to oppose or undermine the doctrines of our Savior.

8. Secondly, That as this Case has respect to the truth of the Christian
doctrine, it is certain, that not the Emperor, but these Catholic Bishops
themselves, were the most proper and fit judges in this matter of faith;
especially having the evidence of Scripture, the consent of the ancient
Apostolical men, and the confirmation of the Synod of Nice. The deciding and
determining matters of faith, peculiarly and chiefly belongs to the Pastors
of the Church, and is a matter for their judgment, In Athanas. ubi sup.
cognizance and discussion. By them, as Hosius said above, even Princes are to
be taught, and should receive the doctrines of Religion. But the Christian
Bishops are not to receive any thing, as a doctrine of Christianity, from the
Command of any Prince in the World; but herein they and all other Christians,
must be guided only by what was delivered by Christ, and his Apostles; for the
knowledge of which, the consent of the Catholic Church, does in many things
give very great light.

9. How much honor and respect in this particular, the ancient Emperors did
give to the office and judgment of the Bishops of the Church, we may understand
from Theodosius the Second. Act. Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 1. c. 32.
When he sent a secular person to be present by his authority at the Ephesine
Council, he particularly declared, that for him to have any thing to do, in
their Synodical decisions of the Questions of faith, would be a nefarious
thing. And it is truly observed by Baronius, Baron. an. 325. n. 73.
that Constantine and other Christian Emperors, who were themselves present in
ancient Councils, did not interpose in giving votes or suffrages, in decisions
of faith, or inflicting of censures, as concurring to the spiritual effect; but
only did consent to, and ratify these determinations of the Councils, by their
secular authority. And these things, which are under the proper and peculiar
administration and cognizance of Ecclesiastical Officers, are sometimes in a
restrained sense styled Ecclesiastical things, which as such, all secular
powers are prohibited to intermeddle with. And in this sense, with particular
respect to matters of says, as falling under Ecclesiastical decision, not only
Hosius above, disallowed Constantius his undertaking things Ecclesiastical, who
yet himself obeyed the summons of Constantine to appear in the Council of Nice,
and some others; and was employed by him in many things relating to the Church:
Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 1. c. 32.
But also Theodosius abovementioned, declares it unlawful for any but Bishops,
negotiis Ecclesiasticis sese immiscere; to intermeddle in Ecclesiastical
business. But that the Phrase of things Ecclesiastical, is there understood
only in the restrained sense now mentioned, is manifest; because in that very
rescript of Theodosius to the Ephesine Council, he commits this authority to
the Count he sent thither, to take care of the orderly and peaceable
proceedings of the Council, and to hinder any person whomsoever from departing
from the Synod, or any other Ecclesiastical cause from being discussed, till
those for which they were called were determined. And in the same Epistle also,
the emperor declares, that as he had a care concerning the Commonwealth, so
his chief care was concerning such things, as pertained to Piety and Religion.
So that the Princes power and authority about things Ecclesiastical, as that
Phrase is taken in a large sense, for things relating to the Church and
Religion, was not in that rescript denied.

10. V. Ambr. in Auxent. and ad Marcellin. theod. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 13.
And touching the Case of Ambrose, It had certainly been a thing unaccountable,
and unwarrantable for him, by any act of his own, to have delivered up the
possession of his Church. Since this had encluded (what Theodoret says he
thought himself obliged to refuse) his own consent, to give up his people to
the conduct of the Arians. And indeed the interest of God, and his Church and
his truth, were superior to the will and command of the Emperor, or any man
upon Earth; and it was fit that S. Ambrose should acquaint the Emperor with
this, observe his duty to God, S. Ambrose must not neglect his, still behaving
himself to his Prince as becomes a good subject. But when any Catholic
Bishops, by the Edict of Arian Emperors, were commanded into banishment, they
not only obeyed, of which there are numerous examples; but though it a
Christian duty to submit themselves, with a patient and peaceable temper of
mind, which was very remarkable in the carriage of Eusebius Samosatensis, under
Valens the Emperor, which was much commended by Theodoret. Theod. Hist. Eccl.
l. 4. c. 13.


SECT. V.
Other objections from the Fathers, concerning the eminency of Ecclesiastical
Officers and their authority.
It is further objected, that diverse ancient catholic Writers, even before the
Aspiring height of the Romish Bishop, have used such expressions, as speak
their preferring the authority of the Ecclesiastical power to the secular, and
their esteeming it to be the more eminent. To this purpose some passages are
produced by Baronius, Baron. an. 57. n. 31, 32.
from Ignatius, Sulpitius, in the life of S. Martin, Gr. Nazianzene, S.
Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom.

2. What is cited as from Ignatius, directs first to honor God, and then the
Bishop, and after him (...) (as the common Greek Copies read it) the King. But
it is sufficient to observe, that all this is only an addition of the
Interpolator of Ignatius, V. Ign. Ep. ad Smyrn.
and is not any part of his genuine Epistles; as is evident from the Latin
Edition of Bishop Usher, and the Greek of Vossius; neither of which have any
thing of this nature in them. And yet though this addition might be made, as
Bishop Usher conjectureth, Usser. dissert. de Ing. c. 6.
about the sixth Century, it was designed to suit the age of Ignatius; and that
which the foregoing words intimate, to be the intended sense, may well be
allowed: That Christians were bound, to have an higher regard to the directions
and instructions of Christianity, and the conduct of their Bishops, and
spiritual guides in the Christian Religion, than to the commands even of Kings
or Emperors, who were opposers of that holy Religion, and Enemies to the truth.

3. But from Sulpitius in the life of S. Martin he urges, that S. Martin being
entertained at the table of Maximus the Emperor, Of S. Martin and Maximus.
Sulp. in vit. Martini. c. 23.
one of the Kings attendants brought him a Cup, which the King commands him to
give to the Bishop (S. Martin then Bishop of Turenne) desiring that he might
receive the Cup from his hands. But S. Martin when he had drunk, gives the Cup
to his Presbyter, who was with him; thinking that neither the King, nor any
other who were with him, ought to be preferred before him. And Baronius
declares he would have done the same, had he been only a Deacon, whom he had
with him.

4. But this story as it is here related, shows much of the Spirit of Baronius
toward Kings, who would not it seems allow them, being of the laity, to have
so much honor and respect showed unto them, as must be given to a Deacon. And
if the spirit of S. Martin was such, as the Cardinal in this particular does
represent it, it would need an Apology, if the Case would bear it, or indeed it
would rather deserve a censure.

5. But the truth is, that Maximus was a Rebel, and an Usurper, who had then
wickedly murdered Gratian the Emperor, and invaded the Territories of
Valentinian; and for this cause S. Martin though often requested, for a long
time refused to come to his Table, and avoided all converse with him, more than
any other Bishop in those parts did, and did also foretell the ruin of Maximus,
Sulp. ibid. Baron. an. 386. n. 20, 21. Marcel. Com. Chron. in init. Socr. l. 5.
c. 14.
as Sulpitius relates, and Baronius elsewhere takes notice of. And
Marcellinus in his Chronicon, and also Socrates, Theodoret and Sozomen in their
Histories, diverse times when they speak of him, give him the style of Maximus
the Tyrant. And Symmachus a Roman Senator, was found guilty of Treason by
Theodosius, for publishing an Oration, as an Encomium or Panegyric upon
Maximus.

6. Ambr. Ep. 27.
When S. Ambrose was sent as an Ambassador from Valentinian to Maximus, he not
only refused the salutation of a kiss from him, but withdrew himself from those
Bishops, who communicated with him. An. 383. n. 19, 20. Rab. Maur. lib. de
Rever. c. 3.
Yea Baronius himself mentions his Government as being a tyranny; and Rabanus
Maurus takes special notice of this Maximus, as being a person, who did not
escape the divine judgment, when he had insolently exalted himself against, and
cruelly murdered his own Lord and Master. And if S. Martin being once brought
to his Table, would not upon this account drink to him, or to any other with
him, who were partakers, or might be presumed favorers of his insurrection;
this spoke him a zealous friend to justice, and the right of Princes, and one
who earnestly detested Usurpation and Rebellion.

7. The places produced from Nazianzen, Naz. orat. 17. Ambr. de dign. Sacerdot.
c. 2.
S. Ambrose, and S. Chrysostom, do express the Ecclesiastical authority, to
have an higher excellency than the temporal; which Gr. Nazianz. declares, by
comparing his Episcopal dignity, with the prefect of his City, but the other
two by preferring the Ecclesiastical authority, in some Excellencies, to the
Royal. And indeed there are very great Excellencies do attend the
Ecclesiastical Ministry, even in some respects above those which belong unto
the secular; and it becomes every good Christian, who has a value for the
Gospel Grace, highly to esteem this Ministry: but its worth and excellency does
not at all prove its superiority of Government, in the state of the World.

8. The Ecclesiastical Ministry has such excellencies as these; The excellency
of the Christian Ministry.
That the persons toward whom it is exercised, are not only men, or members of
an humane Society; but are advanced to be Christians, or persons admitted into
the body of Christ's Church; and that the constitution of this Ministry was
established, by the dispensation of that admirable grace and love of God, which
was manifested to the World by our Lord and Savior; and that the design of it
has more immediate respect to the souls of men, and their salvation; as also
that heavenly and spiritual mysteries, and blessings are dispensed thereby. And
some of these things are those to which S. Chrysostom had peculiar respect,
Chrysostom. in Esai. Hom. 4. and 5.
as his words do particularly declare.

9. Excellency, and supremacy of Government are different things.
But that such excellencies attending this ministration, does not place the
Ecclesiastical Officers, above the condition of being subjects to Princes, may
appear, by proposing a like way of arguing in another case. Every truly pious
man does rightly govern his own heart and life, and thereby is not only a man
and a visible Christian, but is a true and real Christian, and member of
Christ, whose practice is according to his profession. And his chief care is
about such excellent things, as the divine life, and the salvation of his Soul,
which he attaineth effectually; and this man does receive the grace of the
Gospel, to the highest and most advantageous purposes; and is not only
dignified with the honorable titles of a King, a Priest, and a Son of God, but
does receive those great benefits, which are included under these high
expressions. And these are spiritual excellencies of a more sublime nature,
than the bare enjoying either civil or Ecclesiastical Offices.

10. But if every good man because of these excellencies, which attend his
state, should be concluded to have a greater dignity of authority, and
Government in the World, invested in him, than is in Kings and Princes, and
that therefore he is not, nor ought not to be subject unto them; then must the
Christian Religion not only bring confusion into the World, but also make void
its own Precepts of obedience, subjection, and humility, and must also make men
and the World the worse, by taking them off, from performing the duties of
their relations.

11. And that neither S. Chrysostom, nor S. Ambrose, ever intended by such
expressions as are abovementioned, to discharge the Clergy from the
obligations to obedience, and humble reverence to Kings and Emperors, is
manifest, Chrysostom. in Romans 13.
from S. Chrysostomes declaring, that even Apostles, Evangelists, and all
persons whosoever, ought to be subject to the civil power; and from the dutiful
behavior of S. Ambrose to Valentinian, of which I shall give some account in
the following Book.

SECT. VI.
The Canons of the Church, concerning the exemption of the causes of the
Clergy, from secular cognizance, considered; with some other things, which have
some affinity therewith, from Mat. 18.17. and 1 Cor. 6.
1. There are diverse ancient Canons, which require the causes which concern the
Clergy, especially among themselves, to be examined by the Bishop, or the
Bishops of the Province, or if it be needful, by a greater Synod, but not to be
brought before the Courts of the secular power. Some such Canons are referred
to by Photius, Phot. Nomoc. Tit. 9. c. 1. c. 11. qu. 1. Barcl. de Pot. Pap. c.
32. Conc. Agath. c. 23. Conc. Matisc. 1. c. 5. Conc. Antioch. c. 11, 12.
and others are produced by Gratian, and diverse of them are enquired into by
Barclay. To this purpose tend some Canons of the Second and fourth General
Councils, and others of the Provincial Councils, both in Africa, Asia, and
Europe. But it may be presumed, that these Canons of the Church would not have
thus determined, unless the Church had judged such cases and persons, not to be
under the Supremacy and Government of the secular authority. And which may seem
to add strength to this Objection, even the civil law it self gives some
allowance to these proceedings.

2. And it may be further added, Secular causes were anciently determined in
the Ecclesiastical Judicatures. Mat. 18.17.
that when our Savior established his Church, there is some appearance, of his
giving the whole body or Society of Christians, a kind of immunity, from the
supremacy of the secular power, in that in Cases of trespass and injury, which
are civil matters, he directs the proceeding concerning them to be brought
before the Church. 1 Cor. 6. 1, etc.
And S. Paul enjoins Christians, not to go to law before the civil Pagan
Judicatures; which things carry an appearance, of a diminution of the secular
Supremacy, toward the members of the Christian Church. And the usual Trials of
the civil causes of Christians by Ecclesiastical Judges, both before and after
the Empire was Christian, is manifest, not only from the Apostolical
Constitutions, Chapter 1. Sect. 4. Gr. Nys. in Vit. Gr. Thaum. Aug. Cons. l. 6. c.
3. Amb. Ep. ad Marcellum. Ep. 24.
and S. Aug. which I above produced; but also from what Gregory Nyssen
relates, concerning Gregorius Thaumaturgus Bishop of Neocesarea, and from the
practice of S. Ambrose, an account of which we have, both from S. Austin, and
from himself.

3. But for answer hereunto, and for a right understanding of all this, I shall
think it sufficient to observe three things.

Obs. 1. That those rules were established out of a true Christian and
peaceable design, This sometime by peaceable arbitration.
and to prevent scandal, and thereupon had no ill aspect upon secular
authority. If a father of a numerous Progeny, or a Master of a great Family,
consulting the honor, reputation, and peace of his Family, enjoin them that
they shall have no open contests with one another; but if any differences
arise, they shall end them amongst themselves, or else bring them unto him; all
this is no disowning the supremacy of a superior government. And when S. Paul
to the like purpose, enjoined Christians in general, not to go to law before
the Pagan Judicatures; Aquinas truly observes, Aquin. in 1 Cor. 6.
that this was consistent with the subjection of Christians to Kings and
Governors; since the Religion of Christians did not allow them to refuse to
appear before Pagan Magistrates, when summoned, or to submit to teir decision
of right and justice; but only required, that they should not voluntarily choose
this way of determination. But it is against no duty of subjection, to make a
private end of all, or any matters of difference and complaint, whether it be
for the love of peace, or the honor of Religion.

4. Grot. in 1 Cor. 6.
And Grotius not only observes, how heinous a thing the Jews accounted it,
that the Gentiles should take notice of quarrels amongst them, which they would
make use of to the disparagement of their Religion; but he also recommends,
even under the Christian Government and Sovereignty, the ordinary composing of
differences by friendly Arbitrators. Nor is it any infringement of supremacy,
where such Rules are observed, concerning those special members of the
Christian Church, the whole body of the clergy. And the Ecclesiastical Canons
which were to this purpose, were accounted by the third Council of Carthage,
Conc. Carth. 3. Can. 9.
to be of like nature with the directions of S. Paul to the Corinthians, as
respecting such Cases, where they were at liberty, ad eligendos judices, to
make choice of such as should judge their Case. But because there is sufficient
evidence, that such matters were not always determined by private Arbitrators,
but were oft-times decided, by a judicial or consistorial sentence, there
appears a necessity of adding a further answer. Wherefore,

5. Obs. 2. Those judicial proceedings were by the permission of their
Sovereign.
That all those judicial proceedings, to which this objection does refer, were
undertaken by virtue of a special grant, or act of grace and favor, from the
supreme temporal power, and therefore in no derogation from it, but by the
consent and authority thereof. Of this I shall give sufficient proof, with
respect to all the particulars mentioned.

6. For First, When our Savior gave that Precept, Mat. 18 the Nation of the
Jews were indeed under the Romish power, Ant. Jud. l. 14. c. 17. and l. 16. c.
10.
but yet they had a liberty to determine matters in Consistories of their own.
The truth of this is evident from the History of the New Testament, and
Josephus acquaints us, that there were diverse Imperial rescripts, in the time
of Julius Caesar, and soon after his death, which empowered them to live after
their own laws, both in Judea and in other parts of the Empire. Now the Jewish
Government and their Customs about that time, allowed the different Sects among
them, to decide such matters of difference, as arose among themselves, De Bell.
Jud. l. 2. c. 12. gr.
according to the Rules of their own discipline, as is manifest, from what
Josephus relates to this purpose, concerning the discipline and judicial
decisions of the Essens, which as Grotius well observes, Grot. in Mat. 18.
is sufficient to give allowance to the like proceedings, amongst the
Christians.

7. Secondly, A little before the time when the Apostle wrote his first Epistle
to the Corinthians, besides those abovementioned, there was among others
published that memorable Edict of Claudius, Ant. Jud. l. 19. c. 4.
whereby he gave liberty to the Jews all over his Empire, that none forbidding
them, they might observe (...), and (...), their own proper laws, and the
caustoms of their Country. V. Seld de Syn. l. 2. c. 5. n. 1.
Now it was one of their known Rules in that age and time, that wheresoever any
considerable number of them should reside, they should have a lesser Sanhedrim.
And this rule their Rabbis accounted obligatory, Ibid. cap. 7. n. 5. and 9. De
Syn. l. 1. c. 8. p. 224. etc.
as Mr Seldom shows, not only in Judea, but in what place soever they should
inhabit, for the determining of matters not criminal.

8. And in another place, he gives sufficient proof, that in those times the
Christians were comprehended under the name of the Jews: and it is truly
observed by Pamelius, that Judaica superstitio, Pam. in tertul. Apol. n. ^4.
was the phrase which Verus and Antoninus used, when they intended to grant
privileges to them of the Christian Religion. And this was because
Christianity was first planted in Judea, and entertained and propagated, by
those who were of the Jewish Nation; and its followers acknowledged and owned
the law and the Prophets. Indeed it must be presumed, that in the time of open
persecution of Christianity, this license of savor was withdrawn, and in that
Case, the Christians did either lay aside all contentions among themselves, and
reduced the peaceable rules of their Religion into a general practice; or else
they voluntarily yielded to the arbitrament of other Christians.

9. Canons about the immunity of the Clergy, were established by the favor of
Princes.
Thirdly, Those Canons of the Church, which asserted any privileges or
immunities in the Clergy, from the temporal Judicatories, were established by
the Emperors consent, who gave his confirmation unto themm, and therefore
encluded no derogation from his power. Those things which are contained nder
the name of decretal Epistles, V. Gratian. ubi supra.
of ancient Bishops of Rome, Conc. constable. c. ^. Conc. Chalc. c. 9.
before Constantine, concerning the freedom of the Clergy from the secular
power, are of so very bad credit, as not to deserve any consideration. That the
four first General Councils, in which are some Canons relating to this matter,
were called and confirmed by the Emperor, has been proved. And that
Provincial Councils were called by the same authority, has been observed, by
instancing in very many of them, by the Archbishop of Spalato, Spalatens. de
Repub. Eccl. l. 6. c 5. Grot. de Imp. Sum. potest. c. 7. n. 3.
and by Grotius. And if there was any Canon of this nature, which was not
confirmed by Imperial authority, or the substance of it contained in a
preceding Imperial Law or Grant, it was not brought into practice.

10. And it is further observable, that most of these Canons did but provide
for the well and orderly managing those privileges, which the Imperial law had
before granted to the Church. For before the genuine Canons of any Councils
concerning this matter, the Imperial law had already established the substance
of those privileges in the Clergy, as will appear manifest to them who will
compare these Canons, with the Edicts of privilege, granted by Constantine,
Constantius, De Episc. and Presbyt.
and other succeeding Emperors, which may be seen in the Code of Theodosius.

11. And for the Judicatures of Christian Bishops, who therein tried civil
causes, under the time of christian Emperors; no man in reason can think, but
this must be done by favor, and a delegated authority. And it is manifest from
the Imperial law, that this was a privilege granted unto them, out of respect
to the honor of Christianity: God. l. 1. Tit. 4. l. 7, 8. Nov. 83. and 123.
it being therein enacted, that whatsoever persons shall please by their own
consent, to have their Cases tried and adjudged by the Bishop, they shall have
liberty so to do.

12. Obs. 3. That the Canons were never intended, to disclaim the Supremacy of
Princes over the Clergy, is manifest, because in them is allowed the
application to the secular authority, against such bishops, as will not submit
to the determination of the Ecclesiastical. This was done by a Carthaginian
Synod, Conc. Carth. gr. c. 53. Conc. Trull. c. 2.
against Cresconius a Bishop of that Province, as is manifest from the Greek
Copy of the African Code; which was the Copy confirmed in the sixth general
Council. And this particular Case is approved in the Comments of the Greek
Scholiasts, and is also referred unto in the Nomocanon of Photius, Nomocan.
Tit. 9. c. 8.
as giving direction when one Bishop may prosecute another, before a secular
ruler. And it may be further observed, that the Canons from the 37th to the
61st of that Greek Code, were taken out of the third Council of Carthage (this
fifty third Canon, to which this action is there annexed, or according to
Justellus his code, the forty eighth, is the thirty eighth Canon of that
Council) wherein a particular Canon, for the privilege of the Clergy was
established. And the Canons prohibited applications to the secular power
against any of the Clergy, almost in the same manner as they forbad the
application to a general Council against a Bishop, Conc. constant. c. 6.
which was condemned, unless the other methods by the Bishops of the Province
should prove ineffectual.

CHAP. VI.
Of the renouncing all Foreign Jurisdiction and Authority; and particularly the
Supreme Power of the Bishop of Rome.
SECT. I.
The latter part of the Oath of Supremacy considered.
Sovereignty of Princes; wherein I must chiefly consider the claims of Foreign
Jurisdiction, Foreign Jurisdiction disclaimed.
which are rejected and disowned in the Oath of Supremacy. In which Oath it is
declared, that no Foreign Prince, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or ought to
have, any Jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, Preeminence or Authority,
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm, and therefore all such
Authority is disclaimed and renounced.

2. But thereby it is not intended, that no Foreign Bishop, Priest or Deacon,
shall be owned in this Realm, to have that preeminence of Order, in the
Catholic Church, The just au^^^ty of Church Officers asserted.
unto which they have been duly received; nor that their power of order, for
the performing Ecclesiastical Offices, is invalid and null, if they come into
this Realm. But this is no power of Government and Jurisdiction, within this
Kingdom by a Foreign Authority; which is herein rejected. Neither is it hereby
meant, that if the Ecclesiastical Governors of any Foreign Church, do within
their Jurisdiction, duly admit any person into the Church or do, clave non
errante, excommunicate or absolve any, that the Christians in this Realm have
no obligation upon them, from the authority of such proceedings, to embrace or
avoid Ecclesiastical Society with such persons. For thiswould be contrary to
the Article of our Church, which asserteth, Article 33.
that that person which is rightly cut off from the Unity of the Church and
Excommunicate, ought to be taken of the whole multitude of the faithful, as an
Heathen and Publican, until he be openly reconciled by penance, and received
into the Church, by a Judge that has authority thereunto. Can. Apost. 12.
Conc. antioch. c. 6.
And the ancient Canons of the Church did determine, that he who was
excommunicated by his own Bishop, might not be received by another.

3. But the obligation which in this Case lies upon us, and all the members of
the Catholic Church, is not from any Jurisdiction or Superiority, which we
acknowledge any such Foreign Officers of the Church to have over us; because
this obligation equally lies upon all Catholic Bishops, Metropolitans and
Patriarchs, as well as upon ordinary and private Christians. And it would bring
in an unaccountable confusion to assert, that every Bishop under the Patriarch
of Alexandria, should have a superiority over all the Bishops and Patriarchs,
of the Roman, Constantinopolitan, and other free Churches throughout the World,
not excepting the Alexandrian it self; and at the same time to assert that
every Bishop in any of these other Churches, has upon the same account
superiority over him, and all other Bishops and Churches. But this duty is
incumbent upon us, from the nature of our Christianity and Christian Unity. For
Christ having made his Church to be one Body, who ever undertakes Christianity,
is thereby obliged to own Communion with this Church, and all the regular
Members thereof, and to disown Communion with those who are rightly cut off
therefrom: and he having appointed Officers in his Church, has accordin gto
their Offices, given them authority to exercise the power of the Keys in his
name, in the Churches committed to them. And hereupon Synesius Bishop of
Ptolemais, having excommunicated Andronicus and others, Svness. Epist. 58.
by virtue of his Sentence pronounced against them, did require the Churches
all over the Earth, that they should not receive them into Communion.

4. But this Oath tending according to the design of that Statute, by which it
was established, to restore to the Crown its ancient Jurisdiction; that
authority which ischiefly rejected thereby, is such as invaded or opposed the
Royalty of the King; and particularly that which claims any supreme
cognizance of Ecclesiastical affairs, as if they were not under the care of the
temporal power, or that pretends to any other authority above, or against the
just rights of the Crown. And suh is the arrogance of the Sea of Rome, which
assumes to it self a claim of supreme authority in matters Ecclesiastical, and
even in temporal also; which many of its followers defend as belonging thereto,
upon account of its spiritual authority. Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 6.
Thus Bellarmine declares, that if the management of temporal affairs,
appears prejudicial to spiritual ends, potestas spiritualis potest and debet
coercere temporalem; the spiritual power may and ought to restrain the
temporal, by all ways and means, which shall seem needful to that purpose. And
Boethius Epo. tells us, Quaestion. Heroicar. l. 2. c. 5. n. 105.
that the Roman bishop virtute potestatis mere spiritualis, by virtue of his
mere spiritual power, does sometimes deprive had Kings of their Kingdoms. But
the falsehood and injustice of this claim will be discovered, by detecting the
fraud and vanity of the Pleas, made use of to support the Popish power, of
which in the following Sections.

5. But a learned man has given intimation of some suspicion, Weights and
Meas. Chapter 20. Of a general Council.
that by these words of this Oath of Supremacy, the authority of a general
Council of the Western Churches, may seem to be disclaimed. And it must be
granted, that the determination of a truly regular general Council, either of
all the Western Churches or of the whole; especially if it should establish a
due reformation of the corrupt part of the Church, and a right order and unity
throughout Christendom, would be obligatory upon us, not only from the real
goodness of the design, but from the authority of the Council, or the
obligation that lies on the members, or several parts of the Christian Church,
to be guided by the directions and rules, established by the united consent and
authority of the Pastors Yet 1. since such a Council neither is in being, nor
in any likelihood thereof, that which is not, has no Authority or
Jurisdiction. 2. This Church and Realm being a considerable branch of the
Catholic Church, the authority of such a Council, or of the Christian Church
therei, is no more foreign to us, who ought to bear a part therein, than the
soul is to a chief member of the body, or than the laws of nature, and rules of
civility may be esteemed foreign things, which have as considerable residence
here as any where else. 3. The Oath it self is so expressed, as if it purposely
designed not to exclude the authority of a General Council, which properly is
neither a Prince, a Person, a State, or Potentate. 4. As this Oath disowneth
all foreign authority encroaching upon the Crown; so if any Council how general
soever, should abridge or violate the Royal Authority, all faithful subjects
are so far bound, by the authority of God, to disclaim it. 5. Though the
determinations of a Council be never so excellent, if any Princes by their laws
reject or prohibit them, as the Arian Princes dealt with the Council of Nice,
Christians in such places are bound to embrace them, upon no other terms, than
they do their common Christianity; that is, in bearing the Cross, and
undergoing unavoidable penalties, and thereby acknowledging the right, and due
extent of the authority of the civil power.

6. The last part in the Oath of Supremacy, The Oath of Supremacy engages a
defense of privileges and authorities united to the Crown.
engages Allegiance to the King his Heirs and Successors; and also a defense
of all Jurisdictions, privileges, preeminencies and authorities, granted and
belonging to the King, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm. Now the only appearing difficulty here, is concerning the last clause;
for if when the great encroachments of the Pope were discarded, some thing
might be overdone, 27 H. 8. 28. 37 H. 8.4. 1 Ed. 6.14.
in annexing things to the Crown (as in fixing in the Crown those great
Revenues given to Religious uses, when in many places there then was, and yet
is wanting a competent provision for the support of the Ministry) it may be
enquired, how good men and good subjects, may and ought to defend these things.
And it will be sufficient to observe, that the defense here undertaken, is that
of a subject toward his Sovereign. And all subjects of the Realm are, as such,
obliged both with respect to the duties of obedience and peace, in their
capacities to oppose all persons who would injuriously violate what is enjoyed
by the Crown, and established by the law, since such persons may justly be
suspected of designs to subvert the Government, and undermine the public
welfare; and do act disorderly and against authority.

7. And some thing which at first view may seem an abatement of the authority
of the church, is rather such a way of regulating the exercise of its power, as
under Religious Princes is for the Churches advantage. Of this nature I
conceive that constitution, 25 H. 8.19.
that no new Canons shall be enacted, promulged, or executed, without the Royal
assent and license, to enact, promulge, and execute the same. For hereby the
Clergy give such security to the King, against all jealousy of renewed
Ecclesiastical usurpations, that thereupon the Church may under the Kings
favor, and with assurance of greater safety and protection, practice upon its
established constitutions; which are so good, that we have great cause to bless
God for them. And hereupon it may also be hoped, that what shall be further
needful, may be superadded by the Royal License, and become more effectual to
its end, by the confirmation of that authority.

8. But because what I have now discoursed, depends upon a fair, How the
words of public acknowledgments must be interpreted.
but natural and genuine interpretation of these words of the Oath of
Supremacy, it may be further enquired, how we may safely and prudently
interpret the forms of public acknowledgments, where the bare Grammatical
construction may be possibly capable of different senses. Grot. de J. B. and P.
l. 2. c. 13. n. 3, 5, etc. 16. n. 12. and l. 3. c. 1. n. 19. Sanders. de oblig.
Juram. Pral. 2. n. 8.
Now though a forced laxe seen, by an evasion to avoid the design of the law or
constitution, be justly, and must necessarily be rejected; yet a rigid
interpretation to strain the words, and force them to an harsh and unlawful
sense, (as is too often done by discontented persons) is also to be discarded,
where there is another construction or meaning of which the words by natural
interpretation are capable, which is agreeable to truth and justice, and
secures the intention of our Superiors. For besides that Christian charity and
equity will incline to this sense, the politic rules of Government will
require Governors, to draw up public acknowledgments in such phrases, that
they cannot by a fair construction, naturally admit a lower sense than is
designed. For otherwise such forms of words would be useless, and not attain
their end: and this consideration alone is sufficient to vindicate and acquit
the form of words, in this Oath of supremacy, from such censures as have
inconsiderately dropped from the Pen of a learned person.

9. But those general words of this Oath of supremacy, Qu. Eliz. Inj. 1. Can.
1. 1603.
and the Canonical subscription, and words of like general force in the Queens
Injunctions, and our Canons, whereby all foreign Jurisdiction and obedience
thereto is renounced; have manifestly a more particular respect to the Bishop
and Church of Rome. For the design of that Statute, which enjoins the
disclaiming all foreign Jurisdiction by Oath, 1 Eliz. 1. Article 37.
is to restore that Jurisdiction to the Crown, which had been usurped by the
Pope; and our Articles do assert, that the Bishop of Rome has no Jurisdiction
in this Realm of England; and the Injunctions of King Edward did also declare,
K. Edw. Inj. 1.
that no manner of obedience and subjection, within these Realms and Dominions,
is due to him. And the truth of this I shall undertake to manifest, after I
have first given some account of the claim he makes.

SECT. II.
The high claims of Papal Supremacy declared.
supreme Government of Princes, there is an high and imperious demand made, of
an Universal Monarchy, for the Romish Bishop; and of an exemption from the
secular Government, fot all Ecclesiastical things and persons. And this is
pleaded for and defended by diverse of their Writers.

2. Various assertions of Romish Writers concerning the Popes Supremacy. Earcl.
de potest. Papae, c. 3. and adversus Monarchomach. l. 4. c. 4. and l. 5. c. 8.
Yet among those who embrace the Romish Communion, there have been and are
considerable persons, who have maintained, that the Pope as Pope, and by divine
right has no temporal power, and in temporal things has no authority over
Kings. And yet even these men acknowledge the Bishop of Rome, as Christ's Vicar,
and the Universal and supreme Pastor, to be endowed with a spiritual power and
Empire, over all Christian Kings and Monarchs. But some of them do expressly
grant to Princes, an authority in causes Ecclesiastical, so far as is necessary
for the preservation of the temporal Republic.

3. This opinion was not only embraced by Joh. Major, Jacobus Almain, and some
others more anciently, but is also at large declared and defended by Barclay de
potestate Papae, Blackwel in his Examination, Barnes in his Catholico-Romanus
Pacisicus, and diverse others. But this assertion is not only distastful to the
Romish Court, but even Bellarmine accounted it to be rather an Heresy than an
opinion. De Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 1.


4. Many others there are, who deny the Pope to have any direct temporal power,
but yet grant him as much as he can desire, nder the terms of indirecte, and in
ordine ad spiritualia. For since by this phrase is meant, in order to the
advancement, or preservation of the Sea and interest of the Romish church, and
those of its Communion; these persons grant as much indirectly, as any other do
directly: even as if any person should aver, that Alexander had no direct right
to any other Kingdoms or Countries, but in order to the advancement of his
Crown, or enlargement of his Government, his claim was valid; these give him as
large a title, as any other persons can do. This method does Eellarmine in his
Controversies embrace, with many others whom he mentions, and he calls this the
common opinion; in explaining of which, he gives the Pope this ample and
extensive power, that he has in order to spiritual good, Bell. ibid.
the supreme authority of disposing of the temporal things of all Christians
Yea he asserts, that he can depose Kings, and transfer Kingdoms, not as an
ordinary judge, but as a supreme spiritual Prince: and that he cannot
ordinarily either establish temporal laws, or make them void as Pope; but that
he can do this if the Kings themselves will not do it, in ordine ad salutem
animarum.

5. Yet because he who talked at this rate, spoke with some reserves, and
seeming limitations of expression rather than of sense; and chiefly because by
considerable argument, against the Popes direct temporal power, he had indeed
taken away the direct support for this indirect power, we are informed by
Barclay, Barcl. de Potest. Pap. c. 13. p. 101. etc. 40. p. 329.
that Sixtus the fifth had a design, and almost accomplished it, by a public
censure to abolish all Bellarmines Controversies, because in this particular he
did not comply far enough with his ambition. Acts and Monum. Co. 8. n. 8.
And it has been observed, both by Blackwell, and Bishop Mountague, that
Carerius in his Book de Potestate Romans Pontificis, making it his drift to
refute Bellanmine and his notion, yet inscribes it, adversus politicos, and
nostri temporis haereticos.

6. But there are many Canonists, and others, of whom Baronius was one, who
asserted the Pope to have a supreme universal temporal power, by divine right,
over all the World, and tam jurisdictionis quam proprietatis, M. Becan. de
Justit. and Jure, c. 3. q. 7. Blackw. Exam. n. 20.
as Becanus expresses their sense. Many who maintain this opinion, are
mentioned by Bellarmine, and others by Blackwell, who observes that both
Rodericus Sancius and Carerius do call this the common opinion of Divines.

7. Universal temporal supremacy challenged by the Court of Rome.
But however any private persons of the Romish Communion, may think in their
studies, or dispute in their Writings, the public claim of the Court of Rome
has been for an universal direct temporal power, ^^atina in Greg. 7. Baron.
as is fully evident from these among other instances. When Gregory the seventh
undertook to transfer the Imperial Crown from Henry the fourth to Rodolphus, he
founds the right of his disposal thereof upon the gift of Christ to S. Peter,
and his pretended Successors at Rome, saying, Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diadema
Rodolpho.

8. Extr. Coml. l. 1. Tit. 8. c. 1. Unam Sanctam. Mart. Polon. an. 1301.
The Constitution of Boniface the Eighth, asserted both the spiritual and
Temporal power to belong to S. Peter, and the Church, with respect to which
Martinus Polonus declared, se dominum spiritualem and temporalem in universo
mundo asserebat. And in his Oration, in confirming Albertus to be King of the
Romans, lately published by Baluzius; Baluz. in Addit. ad Marc. de Conc. l. 2.
c. 3.
he affirmed, that as the Moon has no light, but what it receives from the
Sun; so there is no earthly power which has any thing, but what it deriveth
from the Ecclesiastical power; and all powers, says he, are from Christ, and
from us as the Vicar of Christ. And he there declares, that Christ has given
his Vicar that power, that he has the right of constituting an Emperor, and
of translating the Empire, with much more to that purpose. And his high
contests with Philip the French King, upon the like claim, were very notorious,
which occasioned the earnest Declaration of the Estates of France against him.

9. And in that large Rescript of Alexander the Sixth, to Ferdinand and
Isabella, 7. Decretal. l. 1. Tit. 9. C. ^.
King and Queen of Castile and Arragon, and to their Heirs and Successors. for
ever; he undertakes to give to them all the American land unpossessed of any
other Christian Prince, and all Islands, and all parts of the Continent, which
either already are, or hereafter shall be discovered, as things which were
granted to him in S. Peter, and in his power to dispose, authoritate
omnipotentis Dei, ac vicariatus Jesu Christi; upon account of the authority of
God, and the Vicarship of Christ; with other such like words. And when
Bellarmine in his Books de Romano Pontifice, had given such a sense of this
grant, as if it signified no more, than to empower them to send Preachers
thither, and to protect converted Christians, and to do such like Offices; In
lib. Recognit.
he afterward found reason to retract what he had there said, and acknowledged
that when he wrote that, he had not seen that rescript it self; but only
followed the opinion of Cajetan, and some others.

10. The Bull also of Pius Quintus against Queen Elizabeth declares, that
Christ had constituted him a Prince, over all Nations, and over all Kingdoms.
And the Bull of Sixtus the Fifth, against Henry the third of France, asserteth
him to have obtained a supreme power, delivered to him by divine institution,
over all Kings and Princes of the whole Earth, and over all people, Nations and
Countries. But these usurpations upon Royal Authority, were so distastful to a
considerable part of the Romish Communion, De Benef. l. 1. c. 4.
that Duarenus with respect to his own age, tells us, that he thinks there is
no sober and learned man, who can approve thereof.

II. And the proud and stately behavior, and deportment of this Bishop, The
Popes behavior toward Princes.
toward Emperors and Kings, when they are admitted into his presence, is
suitable hereunto, which by their own Ceremonialist we have thus described.
Saer. Cerem. l. 3. Sect. 1. c. 2.
Romanus Pontifex nemini omnino mortalium reverentiam facit, etc. The Roman
Bishop does no reverence to any mortal man, either by rising up openly, or by
bowing his head, or by uncovering it; but after the Roman Emperor, or other
great Kings, have kissed his foot, and his hand as he sits, he does a little
rise toward them to receive them to kiss his mouth. And again, Omnes mortales,
etc. Ibid. c. 3.
All mortal men of whatsoever dignity and pre-eminence they be, when they first
come into the Popes presence, must thrice at distant spaces, bow their knee
before him, and must kiss his feet.

12. I forbear to mention, what our Histories manifest, of the haughty,
insolent, and imperious carriage of the Pope, toward our English Kings,
especially King Henry the Second, and King John. But that proud and arrogant
speech, of Gratian the Popes Legate, to Henry the Second, Nos de tali curia
sumus, quae consuevit imperare Imperatoribus and regibus; we belong to that
Court, whose custom it is to command (or rule over) Emperors and Kings, was so
hugely pleasing to Baronius, Baron. an. 1196. n. 11.
that he thought fit to record it in great letters, and in the margent to note,
Gratiani responsio digna legato, that it was such an answer of Gratian, as was
fit for the Popes Legate to make. And what Luciferian insolency appeared in
that Speech of Innocent the Fourth, concerning Henry the Third, Nonne Rex
Anglorum vasallus noster est, Mat. Paris. an. 1253.
and ut plus dicam mancipium? Is not the King of England our Vasal, and that I
may say more our slave? And that this was no unusual style at Rome, appears
from ancient Records in the Tower, Pryns Addit. to History of K. John, f. 18.
and f. 28.
which declare the Pope both in his Council at Rome, and in his Letter to the
Barons and Commonalty of England, to have called King John his Vasal.

13. And waving many other things, I shall only add, that immediately before
the framing the Oath of Supremacy, Queen elizabeth coming to the Crown,
signified her Inauguration to Paul the Fourth then Pope, by Edward Carne, who
was then at Rome, as an Ambassador from Queen Mary: Hist. Conc. Trident. l. 5.
p. 333, 334. an. 1558.
the Pope proudly returns his answer, That the Kingdom of England was a see of
the Apostolical See, and that it was intolerable boldness in her, to assume the
name of Queen, or the Government of the Kingdom, without his approbation; and
therefore he propounded to her, to renounce her pretended right to this Realm,
and to leave it to his dispose. From these things it may appear, what great
cause there was, for this Crown to take care, that all the subjects thereof,
who are in any chief places of trust and employment, do disown such foreign
claims, which would undermine the very foundations of Regal Authority. And the
mere recital of such things as these, are such palpable evidences of impudent
arrogance, despising Dominions, and opposing the humble, meek, and peaceable
design of the Christian Religion, and even the principles of humane reason and
polity; that this alone may be sufficient with all understanding and good men,
to raise in them an abhorrence of, and indignation against such intolerable
ambition.

SECT. III.
Such claims can have no foundation from the Fathers, and have none in the
direct expressions of Scripture, which they allege.
1. Every rational man might well expect, that so vast a claim, both of
Ecclesiastical and temporal power, ought to be supported with some very
considerable evidence, which in this case can be no other, but a manifest
divine constitution. For since the very being of the Church of God, depends
upon his founding it, and the very being of its Officers, upon Gods appointing
them; there can be no other ground for any Ecclesiastical Officer, to claim
upon a Christian account, a supremacy of rule over the World, unless he can
produce the institution of God to this purpose.

2. Some reflections on the sense of the ancient Church concerning this
Supremacy.
And therefore it would be needless, as it might also be tedious, to examine
those expressions of the Fathers, wherein they spoke with respect and honor to
the Sea of Rome: for such expressions if they had been never so plain, could
not found any original divine right. And it would be no difficulty, if it had
been needful, to evidence by examining them, Supremacy, which is challenged.

3. But instead of this, I shall observe, that the greatest Authority of the
Christian Church, has sufficiently disclaimed all such Supreme Universal
Authority, and Government of the Romish Church. For that famous Canon of the
Council of Nice, Conc. Nic. Can. 6.
does plainly give the same power and authority, to the Bishops of Alexandria
and Antioch, and the other Eparchies, or chief Dioceses, within their limits,
which it gives to the Bishop of Rome, and makes them stand on even ground with
one another; which could not be done, if the authority of the one was in
subjection to the other, and the authority of the other without subjection to
any. The second General Council also determined to the same purpose: Conc.
Constable. c. 2, 3.
the sense of which is explained and confirmed in the Council of Chalcedon, in
a genuine Canon received into the Code of the Universal Church, but disgusted
by the Roman Church. Which Canon does assert the privilege and authority of
the Romish Church, Conc. Chalc. c. 28.
to have had its original from the Constitution of the Fathers, out of respect
to the Imperial City: and therefore they upon the same account give to
Constantinople, which was the Seat of the Eastern Empire, a right of (...)
equal privileges and dignity of See with that of Rome, and to be next to it in
order. Conc. in Trul. c. 36.
The same also is established in the sixth general Council.

4. But since there is an high pretense to a divine right, according to the
doctrine of Christ, generally made by the Romanists, for the Universal Supreme
Spiritual Power of the Pope; and by many of them for the temporal also; these
pretensions must be discussed and examined. And though the latter be the more
extravagant and exhorbitant, yet they being both false, and some of the same
Foundations being made use of, to support them both, I shall consider them
together. Now it is highly improbable, that he whose doctrine establishes the
temporal power as Gods ordinance, and requires subjection from all persons to
the same; should wholly divest Kings of their Supremacy, and appoint their
authority to be altogether under the disposal of another, to wit, the Bishop of
Rome. But my design being to defend the Royal Supremacy, and not only to oppose
the Roman, I shall assert, that no Officers of the Christian Church ever were,
or are invested with any such superiority over Princes, and if none, then not
they at Rome.

5. Some testimonies of Scripture, What Scriptures the Popes themselves have
used for their universal supreme claim. Extrav. Com. l. 1. Tit. 8. c. 1. Unam
Sanctam.
produced for the asserting a general Supremacy of the Pope, both temporal and
spiritual, are so extremely fond and frivolous, that I should account it a
piece of vanity to take notice of them, had they not been urged by the Popes
themselves, who challenge a title to infallibility. Such is that of Boniface
the Eighth, proving that S. Peter and the Church had the power of the temporal
Sword, because our Savior said to him, Put up thy Sword into the sheath,
therein using these words, thy Sword? and that when the Disciples said to our
Lord, here are two Swords, he answered it is enough, Luke 22.18. non nimis
esse, sed satis; and also urging those words of the Apostle, The spiritual man
judges all things. Surely such instances as these, and diverse of like nature,
give evidence enough, that God never designed the whole Christian Church should
be so sottish, and void of all understanding, as to be guided by the dictates
of such men as infallible.

6. Bonif. 8. ibid. Joh. 22. in Extrav. c. Super gentes.
Some of the Popes have also made use of those words of Jeremy, Jer. 1.10. I
have set thee this day over the Nations, and over the Kingdoms, to root out,
and to pull down; and to build, and to plant. But 1. What authority can these
words give to the Pope, when they respect not the time of Christianity, nor
speak of any ordinary authority in the Jewish Church, Innoc. 3. in Decretal. l.
1. Tit. 33. c. 6.
in which Jeremy was no High Priest? but they only express a prophetical
Commission to him an inspired man, to declare the pleasure of God from his
mouth, concerning the Kingdoms of the World, as is manifest from v. 5, and 9.
2. How strangely different was the spirit and temper of Jeremy toward Kings,
from that of the Roman Bishop, notwithstandiug this his Commission? When he
speaks of the disposal of many Kingdoms, into Nebuchadnezzars hands; he uses
not the Roman style, as coveying the title unto him himself, but speaks on
this manner; Thus says the Lord, I have made the earth, -- and I have given
all these lands into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 27.4, 5, 6. And when he
spoke to Zedekiah, he treated him not as his Vasal, but his words are, Jer.
27.20. O my Lord the King, Let my supplication, I pray thee, be accepted before
thee. So far was that mournful Prophet, from being the Universal Monarch of the
World.

7. Other arguments from Scripture examined.
But the arguments most insisted on by the Romish Writers are more plausible,
though insufficient, and unconcluding. For S. Peter's singular supremacy, they
produce Mat. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and on this rock I will build my Church.
Ans. 1. That S. Hilary, the Commentaries in S. Ambrose, Gr Nyssen, Cyrillus
Alexandrinus, S. Aug. and Chrysostom understand this rock of the faith of S.
Peter's Confession, Barrad. de Conc. Evang. Tom. 2. l. 10. c. 23. Chamier. Tom.
2. Pans. l. 11. c. 3, 4.
is acknowledged by Barradius the Jesuit; besides others observed in Chamier to
the same purpose, as the Liturgy of S. James, Basil of Seleucia, Theodoret and
Epiphanius. And diverse Fathers are in the same place noted to understand this
rock of Christ himself: which sense is favored much from Is. 28.16. 1 Pet.
2.4, 7. Ans. 2. As the Church of God is often resembled to a building, and called
the house of God, S. Peter according to the expression of diverse Catholic
Writers, V. Dr Hammonds Annot. on Mat. 10. b.
may be herein owned to be (...) (which word ordinarily signifies a Rock or a
Stone) a prime stone of the foundation, united to Christ the chief
Cornerstone: and so were also the rest of the Apostles, Ephesians. 2.20. Rev. 21.14.
But to assert him to be the rock distinct from the whole building, and which
bears the whole, together with the foundation it self, would be to exclude
him from being any member of Christ's Church, and to own him as supporting
Christ himself, who is called the foundation, and the chief Cornerstone. And
though S. Peter had a kind of priority of order, yet all the Apostles had the
same office, and were with him equally partakers both of honor and of power;
or in S. Cyprians Phrase, Cyp. de Unit. Eccl.
they were pari consortio praediti and honoris and potestatis. This place
therefore gives S. Peter a spiritual eminency in the Church, but with the rest
of the Apostles: but it nothing at all concerns any temporal power in him,
nor any exclusion of Princes from supreme Government.

8. It is also pleaded, that Christ Mat. 16.19. promised S. Peter, the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and said, Whatsoever thou shall bind on Earth, shall be
bound in Heaven, etc. Ans. 1. The Keys being an Emblem of Authority, this Text
does treat of a very high and great spiritual power, of receiving men into the
Church of Christ, and the several ranks and orders thereof, and unto the
participation of Christian privileges, and of excluding from all these, and
governing the Church. Cyp. Ep. 27. and 73. Aug. in Joh. Tract. 50.
But this power as the ancient Church did acknowledge, the other Apostles did
also enjoy, and were actually possessed of, as appears Mat. 18.18. Jo. 20.21,
22, 23. Ans. 2. How vastly different is this power from the temporal Dominion
over the Kingdoms of the World, of which there is not any world here spoken by
our Lord? And surely any man who considers the doctrine and lives of the
Apostles, cannot imagine that every one, or any one of them, was intended and
designed of God to be the Sovereign Potentate, and grand Emperor of the World.
It is therefore a just complaint against the Romish party, that ex clavibus
cudunt enses, Conf. Helvet. c. 14.
lanceas, sceptra and coronas; out of the Keys they forge Swords and Spears,
Scepters and Crowns, and usurp temporal Dominion, equal with, or superior unto
Kings, notwithstanding that our Savior expressly rejected from his Apostles,
such Dominion as the Kings of the Gentiles exercised. Mat. 20.25, 26.

9. But Pasce oves meas, Feed my sheep, Jo. 21.16. is a place chiefly insisted
upon. And if no more was hence inferred, than a spiritual and Apostolical
authority in S. Peter, this is readily granted and asserted, and the other
Apostles enjoyed the like. But Bellarmine will have (...), Bellarm. de Romans
Pont. l. 1. c. 14, 15, 16. Layman. Theolog. Moral. l. 1. Tr. 4. c. 6.
to be a Charter of Sovereignty, and to enclude governing and commanding as a
King does. And he and others also infer the extent of S. Peter's power, over all
Apostles and Kings, because they are Christ's Sheep. To which I Ans. 1. Not S.
Peter only, but all Bishops and Elders, are commanded (...), to feed, or have a
Pastoral care over the Flock. Ambr. de dign. Sacerd. c. 2. Ignat. Ep. ad
Philad. and ad Romans Eus. Hist. Ecc. l. 8. c. 25.
Act. 20.28. 1 Pet. 5.2. And among all Ecclesiastical Writers, beginning from
Ignatius and downwards, the Bishops and chief Officers of the Church, have been
acknowledged to be Pastors. Now if this Office of Pastor, does not necessarily
enclude a Sovereign or supreme Government, then no such can be asserted to s.
Peter, or his pretended Successor, from this Text: if it does, then must this
be ascribed to every Bishop, which will necessarily overthrow the Popes
Universal claim. Ans. 2. Government over the Sheep of Christ, is also too
narrow a compass for an Universal Monarchy.

10. Ans. 3. (...) being a Metaphor from Shepherds, is thence sometimes used,
for to take care and feed, and at other times for to rule and govern, and often
for both. Now though the Officers of Christ have a pastor al authority over his
Flock: yet these words, Joh. 21.15, 16, 17. were principally directed to S.
Peter, as supposing in him this authority, and requiring his duty of care and
feeding and not as conveying to him a peculiar authority and Dominion: because
this is enjoined upon him as an evidence of his love to Christ; and because
among the three Precepts, to take care of the Sheep of Christ and his Lambs,
two of them are there expressed by (...), which must be understood only of
feeding. Ans. 4. Civil Governors also are to be as Shepherds over their Flock,
with particular respect to rule and Government. The Government of God is
sometimes expressed by his being the Shepherd of Israel: and a Prince, whom
Homer styles, the Pastor of the people, (...), is by Philo and other Writers,
often mentioned by a like name. Phil. de Agricult. and de Joseph. and quod omnis
probus liber.
And a civil pastoral power over all their people, is yielded to them, Number.
27.17. Is. 44.28. which is expressed in the Septuagint, by (...), 2 Samuel 5.2.
Chapter 7.7. Ps. 78.71, 72. But every one must use their power according to their
office: Ecclesiastical Officers are to use the spiritual authority, but
temporal Sovereignty is reserved to Princes. Ans. 5. The pastoral office of the
guides of the Church, does extend it self even to Kings, with respect to the
conduct of their Souls, but yet this does not exempt them from being under the
Regal Sovereignty. A Prince may be ruled by a Physician concerning his health,
or be led by a guide at Land, or a Pilot at Sea, and not lose his Sovereignty
over these Subjects. And the Kings of the House of David, were the chief Rulers
over the Realm, though the Priests were to offer Sacrifice for Prince and
People, to direct them in Religion, and to judge in case of Leprosy, and such
like.

SECT. IV.
Other arguments for the pretenses of Papal Authority, answered and refuted.
1. Annal. Ecclesian. 57. n. 28, 29, 30.
The support which Baronius affords, for the Popes Supremacy, is that Christ
himself is a Priest, after the order of Melchisedek, being both King and
Priest, according to the Apostle, Heb. 7. and that from him the regal and
sacerdotal authority, are together conferred upon his Church, first upon the
Apostles, and then upon their Successors: which he further undertakes to prove,
because our Savior declared to his Disciples, Jo. 20. As my father sent me, so
send I you; and did establish in his Church a Royal Priesthood, 1 Pet. 2. Ibid.
n. 31, 32.
And though the Cardinal will not allow, that this authority in the Church,
does make void the political power; yet he does assert, that this Regal
Ecclesiastical Authority, must be superior thereunto. The Priesthood of
Melchisedek.


2. But concerning the Melchisedekian Priesthood, supremacy of power, to be
conjunct with the Priesthood, does destroy the peculiarity of power challenged
by the Bishop of Rome, for thence it must be inferred, that they who equally
partake of Priesthood with the Bishop of Rome, must have an equal supreme
authority with him. 2. That one thing which the Apostle did most especially
insist on, concerning the Priesthood of Melchisedek, is, that the Priest or
High Priest of that Order, must not derive or receive his Priesthood from any
Predecessor, nor leave it to any Successor, but must abide a Priest for ever,
through that whole dispensation, under which he is Priest, Heb. 7.3, 8, 16, 17,
21, 23, 24, 28. And therefore the Melchisedekian Priesthood is no more
transferred from Christ, to any other person in the Church, then his proper
mediatory office is. Beyerl. de Episc. Romans
And they who say, that this Priesthood of Christ, cannot indeed be enjoyed by
any as successor to him, but only as his Vicar, do not so avoid the force of
this argument: For it remains certain, that no such pretended Vicar can partake
of this Priesthood, because in him it must be received from a Predecessor (
viz. in that Vicarship, and Priesthood) and be left to a Successor, which is so
highly contrary to the nature of this Priesthood.

3. Of the Apostolical Mission.
When Christ sent his Apostles as his father sent him: 1. These words enclude a
fullness of Ecclesiastical and spiritual authority, or the power of the Keys,
which was given to all the Apostles. 2. But they do not make the Apostles
equal, in dignity or dominion, with Christ himself; in being Savior and head
of the Church; or Lord over, and Judge of the quick and the dead. 3. Even
Christ himself when he was upon Earth, being as man under the law, was not only
obliged to practice the duties of the first table, and the other Commandments
of the second table, but even to the observance of the fifth Commandment als.

4. And the Office of the Ministry.
And those persons who in general defense of Ecclesiastical Supremacy urge that
they who are Officers of Christ, and furnished with his authority, ought not to
be in subjection to secular rulers, but superior to them, to whom Christ's
authority is superior; may consider, 1. That Parents and Husbands have
authority from God, and from Christ, and yet are under Kings and Princes. 2.
The superiority of any Officer of Christ, must not be measured by the height of
Sovereignty, which Christ himself has; which would make the servant, even
every Deacon equal with his Lord (and by the like pretense, every petty
Constable must have equal authority with the King) but by the constitution of
his office, and the power thereby conveyed to him. For neither God in governing
the World, nor Christ in governing the Church, ever gave to any other an
authority equal to what he possesses. 3. Christ came not to overturn the
Government of God his father in the World, which has established the supreme
temporal power: yea his mediatory Kingdom and administration, is in subjection
to the Father, and our Saviors Doctrine yields that authority to Princes,
that it earnestly presses a general and necessary subjection, for Conscience
sake, to their Government.

5. And as to what Baronius urges, The Royal Priesthood.
from the Royal Priesthood, mentioned by S. Peter, 1 Pet. 2.9. it may be
observed, 1. That that expression has not respect to a peculiar sacerdotal
office in the Church, but to the dignity of the Christian Church in general; as
is manifest from the place it self, Salian. an. 2544. n. 347. Estius in loc.
and acknowledged by their own Writers. 2. If this Text did express any
peculiar power in Ecclesiastical Officers, it must have particular respect to
those Eastern Churches, to whom that Epistle was written, 1 Pet. 1.1. and 3. It
is well observed by Bishop Andrews, that even that Royal Priesthood, v. 9. is
commanded to be subject to every ordinance of man, Chapter 4. S. 2. n. 3.
and to the King as supreme, v. 13. as I above observed.

6. And while some say, Of the Plea of expediency for the Churches good.
it is expedient for the Churches good, that the Ecclesiastical Authority
should be superior to the temporal; otherwise its welfare and good is not
sufficiently provided for: this Plea might appear more plausible, 1. If there
could be no ignorance, heresy, pride, or ill designs in any who have the title
of chief Officers in the Church: which no man can believe, who reads the Lives
of the Popes, written by their own Authors. 2. If Kings and Princes must never
be expected to be nursing Fathers to the Church, and to take care of it. 3. If
the great design of Christianity was to take care, that Christians must never
follow their Savior in bearing the Cross; and that this Religion did not aim
at the promoting true faith and holiness, meekness and peace, but at outward
splendour, dominion and power in the World, according to that notion the Jews
had of a Messiah. And this is not only a weak, but a presumptuous way of
reasoning, to control and affront the Gospel of Christ, and to dare to tell
him, how he ought to have established his Kingdom, to other purposes than he
has done.

7. And after all this, S. Peter's Authority not peculiar to Rome.
there is nothing more unreasonable, than for the Church of Rome, to monopolize
unto its self alone, that authority which was committed to S. Peter, and the
other Apostles. For it is not at all to be doubted, but the Apostles committed
a chief presidential and Governing authority, in their several limits, to other
Churches besides the Roman. Basil. Ep. 55. Cyp. Epist. 69. Firmil. in. Cyp. Ep.
75.
The ancient Fathers frequently express the Bishops of the Christian Church in
general, to be the Apostles Successors. S. Cyprian and Firmilian assert, all
Bishops to succeed the Apostles, even ordinatione vicaria, as placed in their
stead, and possessed of that power, which was from them fixed in the Church.
Hier. ad Marcellam. Aug. in Ps. 44.
Amongst us, says S. Hierome, the Bishops do hold the place of the Apostles:
and for, or instead of the Apostles are appointed Bishops, says S. Austin.
Tertullian declares, that to his time Cathedrae Apostolorum the Cathedral Sees
placed by the Apostles themselves, did still continue their presidency. in the
Apostolical Churches: of which he mentions many by name, and Rome as one of
them.

8. And as there is no evidence that S. Peter, who also presided at Antioch,
left all his authority peculiarly to Rome: so there is sufficient evidence that
S. Peter. who was commanded to feed the Sheep of Christ, did yield this
authority to the Elders or Bishops of Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia and
Bithynia, that they should (...), feed the flock of God which was among them, 1
Pet. 5.2. And hereby he either committed that pastoral authority, which he
received from Christ, unto the Bishops of those free Churches, of the Ephesine,
Thracian and Pontick Dioceses, to whom he wrote, and which afterward were
placed under the Patriarch of Constantinople: or at least he acknowledged this
authority in them. And therefore so far as concerns a divine right, these
Eastern Churches in the Territories of Constantinople, have fully as fair a
Plea hereby, for deriving a pastoral authority from S. Peter, or having it
particularly confirmed by him, as they at Rome ever had.

9. But with respect to England, This Realm not feudatory. Bellarm. in Apol.
pro Resp. ad Jac. Reg. c. 3. in Respons. ad Bell. Ap. c. 3.
diverse Romish Writers allege, that it became feudatory to the Sea of Rome, by
King John's resigning his Crown, to Pandulphus the Popes Legate: to which thing
objected and misrepresented by Bellarmine, diverse things are returned in Answer
by Bishop Andrews. But waving such particular answers as might be given, I
shall choose to observe in General, that this Case is the same, as if any
seditious persons or Usurpers, should by fraud or force, reduce the King to
straits and difficulties; and should then by like methods gain a promise from
him, that he should be under their government, and shall order the affairs of
his Realm in compliance with them, and subjection to them. Now all such acts
are utterly void and wholly unobligatory, because 1. No just right of Supremacy
or any part of Royalty, can be gained by possession upon an unjust title,
against the right owner upon a sure title: this being a parallel Case to a
Thief, being possessed of an honest man's goods. Addit. to Hen. 3. an. 10. f.
70. An. 10 Ed. 1. p. 279. An. 12 Ed. 1. p. 318. An. 17 Ed. 1. p. 391. etc.
And therefore though some Kings of England, as Hen. 3. and Edw. 1. did, until
they could without danger free themselves, pay to the Pope an annuus census of
a thousand marks, as appears from the Records of the Tower published by Mr
Pryn; yet this is only an evidence of the oppressive injuries, which this Crown
sustained, by the intolerable exactions of the Pope. 2. No Sovereign King,
(unless by voluntary relinquishing his whole authority to the next Heir) can
transfer his Royal Supremacy to any other person whomsoever: partly because the
divine constitution having placed Supremacy, in the chief secular Governors,
God expects from them a due care, of managing of this power, for the good of
his people, and for the advancing his own service and glory: nor can any act of
theirs, make the duty which God still requires from them, to become void; no
more than a Father or Husband can discharge themselves, from the duties of
those Relations, while the Relations themselves continue. Partly also because
the constitutions of the Realm, oblige all the subjects thereof, to maintain
the Royalties of the Crown; and to perform Faith and true Allegiance, not only
to the King in being but also to his Heirs and Successors. And partly because
it is a great and special privilege of a free born people, that they cannot
according to the condition of slaves have the chief and principal Dominion over
them, translated from one to another, according to the pleasure of any person
whomsoever, though it be their own natural Prince: which is both his and their
great security and advantage.

CHAP. VII.
The Romish Bishop has no right to any Patriarchal Authority, over the Church
of England.
SECT. I.
The whole Christian Church was never under the Patriarchal Sees.
Patriarch, Of Patriarchal Authority.
was not in the beginning of the Church, fixed as peculiar to the Bishops of
those Churches, which for many Ages have been so called. This style was not often
used in the first Centuries, and when it grew into use, was yielded to other
famous Bishops, by Socrates, Socr. Hist. l. 5. c. 8.
who did not preside in any of those Churches, which have been commonly
accounted Patriarchal. And this title also in an inferior degree, was of late
by Duarenus allowed to the Bishop of Aquileia, Canterbury, and others. Duaren.
de Benef. l. 1. c. 9.
The Bishops of Rome themselves seem not to have much affected, or used this
style: but they were ordinarily owned to be Patriarchs, not only in the
Ecclesiastical account, but in the Imperial law. B. 1. C. 7.
And as this is a title of special honor, given to some Sees; so it encluded
an Ecclesiastical authority, extended to diverse Provinces, and over several
Metropolitans.

2. Now though the Romish Bishops pretense to an Universal Sovereignty, be very
vain and unjust; yet if he have but a patriarchal right, as some have demanded
for him, over all the Western Churches, this will entitle him to an authority
in this Realm, which is a member of them. Hereby he would be chief spiritual
judge, to receive appeals in Causes Ecclesiastical, from the Metropolitical
Jurisdiction, and to have the highest, constant, and fixed power of censure and
absolution: besides what concerns the Consecration of Archbishops, or
Metropolitans, by his act or consent, and a chief authority with respect to
Synods. And though a true Patriarchal right, be of the same nature with the
Archiepiscopal, which ought to acknowledge the supreme authority of the Crown,
yet if any such authority be placed in any Foreigner, it would impair the just
dignity of the Prince, as I shall hereafter evidence. But that no foreign
Bishop or Patriarch, ought to have any such authority in this Realm, will
appear manifest, by the proving three assertions, which I shall perform in this
Chapter.

3. Assert. 1. The ancient Christian Churches, were never all of them under the
Patriarchal Bishops; viz. of Rome, Many free Churches not anciently under any
Patriarch.
Constantinople, Alexandria, Antioch and Jerusalem. But there were anciently
diverse free Churches, or Dioceses (which word was several times of old used,
for the larger limits of many Provinces) independent on any superior
Patriarch. For that all the Patriarchates, and other ancient great Dioceses or
Eparchyes, were only within the limits of the Roman Empire, is manifest,
because the extent and bounds of their particular Churches, was ordered and
fixed, according to the division of the Imperial Provinces. And therefore
besides the greater Armenia, which was a Christian Kingdom and no part of the
Empire, in the time of Constantine, and both before and after him; all the
Christians who lived under the Barbarous Nations, are reckoned as distinct from
the Patriarchal, and other head Dioceses or Churches, by the second General
Council. Conc. Constable. c. 2.


4. And whereas until 450. years after Christ, The Pontick, Thracian, and Asian
Churches.
there were only three Patriarchal Sees erected, at Rome, Alexandria, and
Antioch; not only the Churches in the remote parts of Asia, and Africa, and
others without the Empire: but those of the Pontick, Thracian, and Asian
Dioceses or Eparchies, which were in the heart of the Empire, were in
subjection to none of those Patriarchs, but were all that time (...), governed
by themselves, as appears from the second general Council. Conc. Constable. ib.
But when the patriarchal limits, and authority of the Church of Constantinople
was established; the Churches of those three regions now mentioned, which as
Theodoret acquaints us, Theod. Hist. l. 5. c. 28.
contained twenty eight Provinces, or Metropolitical Jurisdictions, were made
subject to the Bishop of Constantinople, by the authority of the fourth general
Council. Conc. Chalc. c. 28.
But besides these, there were also other particular Churches, free from all
Patriarchal Jurisdiction, of which I shall give some instances.

5. The Province of Cyprus in the Eastern Church, The Cyprian Church.
when the Patriarch of Antioch claimed a superiority over it, and a right of
ordaining therein, had its liberty and freedom defended, and secured against
him, by the third General Council. Indeed this Canon of the Council of Ephesus
did chiefly provide, Conc. Ephesians. c. 8.
that no Cyprian Bishops should receive their ordination, from the Bishop of
Antioch, or from any other than the Bishops of their own Island. Yet to put a
stop to those evasions, which some have endeavored to make, in this Case, as
if in other things besides Ordination, they might be subject to the Bishop of
Antioch, he who duly weighteth this Canon will discern, that it plainly enough
condemns the attempt of the Bishop of Antioch, as an invading (...), another
distinct Eparchy or Province, which was not heretofore and from the beginning,
under the authority of him, or of those who did precede him. Conc. in Trul. c.
39.
And when the sixth General Council did confirm this Canon of Ephesus,
concerning the Liberties of the Cyprian Churches, they do own the privileges,
given to the Metropolitan of Cyprus in his Territories, to be equal to those,
which the Bishop of Constantinople enjoys in his. To which may be added, that
in the Synod of Antioch, in the Reign of Constantius, among the several
Provinces belonging to that Patriarch, which therein assembled, there is no
mention at all of Cyprus.

6. Also the West African Churches, The African Churches.
taking in all Numidia, Mauritania, and the other ample Territories of the
Carthaginian Jurisdiction, were never under any of the Patriarchs. These limits
were never claimed to any of the Eastern Patriarchates, and are sufficiently
excluded from thence, by the Canons of Nice, Nic. Conc. c. 6.
Constantinople, and Chalcedon, which fix the bounds of those Churches. Constable.
c. 2. Chalc. c. 28.
But when the Bishop of Rome claimed a power; to receive appeals from those
Churches, in the case of an African Presbyter, who was therein censured; and
pretended a Canon of the Council of Nice, to give him that authority: the
African Fathers, after they had diligently sought for the most perfect Copies
of the Nicene Canons, from Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, besides
what they had before in Latin, did detect the fraud, and falsehood of the claim
of the Bishop of Rome, and rejected his demand. To this purpose the sum of
their proceedings may be viewed, not only in particular Writers, but also in
the Greek Copy of the African Code, which was received in the sixth general
Council, partly in the beginning and partly in the conclusion thereof.

7. But whereas it is pretended by several Romish Writers, that these African
Fathers did in the end of this contest, yield this authority to the Bishop of
Rome; even this is very far from truth. Indeed they were resolved to submit, if
there was any Canon of Nice which enjoined that submission: but after this
demand concerning appeals, was made by Pope Zosimus, and canvased in the time
of his Successor Bonifacius, the African Fathers write to Coelestin who
succeeded him, Ad finem Conc. Carth. Gr.
both asserting their own liberty of Governing their own Church, and requiring
him not to receive any into Communion, whom they had rejected from it. And
whereas in the beginning of this contest with Zosimus, there was a Canon made
in the Council of Milevis, declaring, Conc. Milev. 2. Can. 22.
that those who should make appeals beyond the Seas, (or to Rome) should be
incapable of being received into Communion, by any in Africa: Cod. Afric, c. 27.
after this dispute was more fully debated and considered, they were so far
from retracting this Canon, that they caused it to be put into the African, or
Carthaginian Code, Conc. Carth. gr. c. 31.
which was compiled and confirmed, about the end of this disquisition, and
therein this Canon remains as a standing rule.

8. But because it has been observed by Zonaras, Zonar. in Conc. Sard. c. 5.
and by very many since, that what the Bishop of Rome falsely urged as a Canon
of Nice, was to be found among the Canons of Sardica: concerning that I shall
note two things. First, Of the Canon of Sardica.
That he who considers, that Zosimus would herein have falsified the Council of
Nice; that neither he nor they who managed this contest under him, or after
him, did urge the authority of the Council of Sardica, to those African
Bishops; and that those Bishops after all their enquiry, did declare to the
Bishop of Rome, Epist. ad Coelestin. ubi sup.
that they had never read in any Synod of the Fathers, that any such authority
was granted to him; may be apt to suspect, that possibly there has been no
very fair dealing about this Council of Sardica; or at least must conclude,
that they at Rome were sensible, that Africa was not subject to the authority
of that Council.

9. Secondly, That in this Council of Sardica, Cham. Tom. 2. l. 13. c. 7. Marc.
de Conc. l. 7. c. 3. n. 6.
as Chamier observed, and P. de Marca owneth, here were no proper appeals to
Rome asserted, that the case under complaint might be there determined; but
only that the Bishop of Rome might order a revising of the sentence, which had
been pronounced against any Bishop, upon his application to him. And the state
of the Church, and the occasion of this Constitution was this. Socr. l. 2. c.
5, 6, 7, 16, 18. Sozom. l. 3. c. 5, 10, 11.
Arianisme greatly prevailing in the East, the Arian Bishops there sentenced,
and deposed diverse Catholic Bishops, as particularly they had done to
Athanasius in a Synod of Antioch, who yet was received at Sardica. Now that the
faith of Nice might not by such methods be suppressed, and the Communion of the
Catholic Church be thereby confounded; the Orthodox Bishops at Sardica, who
thought themselves not bound to disclaim Communion with all whom the Arian
Heretical Bishops should reject, allowed the Bishop who had been censured, a
liberty to have his Case re-examined. And they committed this as a trust to the
Bishop of Rome, for the preserving the Catholic Communion, that he should
appoint Bishops about that Province, sending others also to join with them, to
judge of that Case: which trust the succeeding Bishops of Rome made ill use of,
for the inordinate advancement of that See. But this Canon gave not the Bishop
of Rome an Universal superiority, in the right of his Church; Sozom. l. 7. c.
9. Marca de Conc. l. 1. c. 3. n. 9.
but dealt with him, as the second General Council did with several eminent
Bishops of the Eastern Churches, who were appointed as Capita communionis that
the rest of the Church might communicate with them, with whom they held
Communion. Nor could the Western Bishops convey any authority over the Eastern
Church, which was here chiefly concerned.

10 Now as these Cyprian and African Churches, as well as those in these
Islands, had an Independent Ecclesiastical authority, of the same nature with
the Patriarchal, but not honored with that title; so I might discourse further
of other somewhat like instances, both in the East and the West: but I think
that would be needless, especially because the Patriarchal bounds, and the
limits of other free Churches, ought not now to be fixed in all places, upon
the same terms, on which they stood in the ancient Church, as I shall evidence
in my third assertion. And therefore I shall omit the considering the Church of
Bulgaria, and of the Asia, Iberia which by Balsamon are owned to have been in
his time (...), Bals. in Conc. Constable. c. 2. Novel. 131.
the former according to the Constitution of Justinian; and the latter by a
Synod of Antioch, appointing that that Church which was before under the
Patriarch of Antioch, should be free and head of it self.

11. And concerning the Western Church, it may be observed, that whereas a
prime patriarchal right is expressed by the Council of Chalcedon, (and the same
may be collected from the Council of Ephesus, in the place abovementioned,
concerning the Cyprian Church) to be this; that the Metropolitans under him,
Conc. Chalc. c. 28.
who have liberty to ordain the Bishops of their Provinces, should be ordained
by the Patriarch: it is no difficulty to prove, and is granted by P. de Marca,
Ubi sup. l. 1. c. 7.
that the chief part of the Western Church, even all out of the Vrbicarian
Diocese, which took in only some part of Italy, did never thus anciently depend
on the Bishop of Rome for Ordination.

12. And touching the Eastern Church, the limits of the Patriarchate of
Constantinople, have been above observed. The Territories of Alexandria were by
the Council of Nice declared to be Egypt, Conc. Nic. Can. 6. V. Praef. and
Conc. Antioch. Conc. Chalc. Actions 7.
Libya, and Pentapolis. Antioch had once under it Coelosyria, Phoenicia,
Palaestine, Arabia, Mesopotamia, Cilicia and Isauria: but when the Church of
Jerusalem was made Patriarchal, it was agreed in the Council of Chalcedon, that
all the three Palaestines should be reserved to its Jurisdiction.

13. And such few expressions in some ancient Authors, as speak of the Bishop
of Rome presiding in the West, or being the Patriarch of the West, are not
sufficient to prove the whole Western Church, to have been subject to him,
Conc. Constable. c. 2. Conc. Chalc. Act. 1. Hieron. Ep. 61. c. 15.
but only some part thereof. For the Bishop of Antioch is often said, both by
Councils, and other Writers, to govern the East; and yet the whole Eastern
Church as distinguished from the Western, never was under his Jurisdiction.

SECT. II.
No Patriarch ever had any just claim of Patriarchal Authority in this Island.
1. The second Assertion, which I shall make good, is, that the Churches of
this Island had that ancient liberty and freedom, that no Patriarch had any
just claim of Patriarchal Authority over them. The Eastern Patriarchs never
pretended to any, nor had the Romish Bishop any right to challenge it.

2. For since this Island received Christianity, Britain received Christianity
before Rome.
some years before any Church was founded at Rome, it could not then have any
dependence upon the Church of Rome. Besides what many other Writers express,
concerning Joseph of Arimathea, preaching the Gospel here; Bar. An. 35. n. 5.
even Baronius from a Manuscript in the Vatican, gives a relation of his coming
into France, and thence into England, upon the dispersion after the death of S.
Steven: and this must be diverse years before S. Peter's coming to Rome. Antiq.
Brit. p. 1, 2, 3. Mason. de Min. Angl. l. 2. c. 2. Usser. de Prim. Ec. Br.
And there want not Authors to assert, that S. Simon, S. Philip, and other
Apostles and Apostolical men, did declare the doctrine of Christ in this
Island, as has been observed by those, who purposely give us an account of the
original of Christianity here. Conversion of the Britans, it will be sufficient
to observe the testimony of Gildas, who was himself a Britan, Gild. de Excid.
Brit.
who tells us, that here the Precepts of Christ were made known, tempore ut
scimus summo Tiberii Caesaris; in the latter end of the reign of Tiberius
Caesar. Baron. An. 44. n. 25.
Now the second year of Claudius, when according to the general account S.
Peter first preached Christianity at Rome, must be about five years after the
death of Tiberius: Caligula wanting but little more than a month of four years.
Wherefore with respect to the first planting of the Church, one Sister Church
cannot claim superiority over another, especially not over the Elder.

3. Nor were there ever any Canons of the ancient Church, which subjected these
Realms to the Sea of Rome: but the fixed rights of the free Churches were
secured in the three first General Councils, in those Canons I have above
mentioned. Conc. Nic. c. 6. Constable. c. 2. Ephesians. c. 8.
And the Council of Ephesus is very zealous, against the invaders of these
privileges, as being a thing in which the liberties of all Churches are
concerned, and by which the intent of the sacerdotal function is perverted.

4. That these Churches did preserve and retain their liberties, Britannick
liberty preserved till Austin the Monk. Bed. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 4.
until the time that Austin the Monk came into England, is manifest, in that
both in the Southern and Northern parts of this Island (as also in Ireland)
they celebrated Easter, and observed some other rites, differently from the
Rules and Canons of the other Western Churches, and particularly of the Roman;
and therefore were not governed by them. Indeed they celebrated Easter upon the
Lords day, as was noted by the Emperor Constantine, Eusebius. de Vit. Constable. l.
3. c. 18. Bed. Hist. Eccl. Ang. l. 2. c. 2. and l. 3. c. 4.
at the time of the Council of Nice: but they fixed on this day by a different
rule, from that of other Churches. And when Austin required them, to submit
themselves to the Romish Church, and to change these their different rites,
they would not hearken to him herein, but both Britans and Scots long observed
their former usages; and some of their Clergy and Monks who lived within the
English limits, Bedae Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 20. and l. 3. c. 26. Bishop Spotsw.
Hist. of Sc. l. 1. p. 18. H. Huntingd. Hist. l. 3.
and Colman Bishop of the Northumbrians, rather left their places, than they
would forsake the customs of their own Church. Yea they disowned Communion with
him, as invading the Liberties of their Churches, and the Scotch Bishops would
not so much as eat in the House where Austins Company was, as is related in a
Letter of Laurentius, who succeeded Austin at Canterbury, recorded in H.
Huntingdon. And the plain Declaration of the Abbot and Monks of Bangor, who
were the most eminent Society of the British Church, consisting of thousands,
did fully disclaim, and protest against all right of subjection to the Bishop
of Rome, as is expressed in their protestation made to Austin, and exhibited in
the British tongue by Sir Hen. Spelman, Spelm. Conc. Vol. 1. p. 108, 109.
wherein they own no subjection to any, above their own Archbishop, as a
superior Ecclesiastical Officer.

5. Nor did the Bishop of Rome gain any just right of Patriarchal Authority
over this Realm, This Realm not made subject to Rome by the Conversion of the
Saxons.
after the coming of Austin into England, and all that can be pretended to that
purpose is, either by pleading that the English were converted by Austin, who
was sent hither by Pope Gregory or that there was a great honor, respect, and
subjection, for many years yielded to the Bishop of Rome in this Island. Both
these pretenses I shall examine.

6. Now it is acknowledged, that this Austin was instrumental for the
converting very many of the Saxons to Christianity. Yet here I observe three
things. 1. That they who Convert Foreign Nations, do not thereby make those
Nations and Churches, to be perpetually subject to those Foreign Churches, from
whence they came. For this would make Christianity to enclude a servitude in
the profession of it, and worldly Dominion in the preaching it. Had this been a
rule in the Primitive Times, this Island and a greater part of the Christian
Church all over the World, must have yielded subjection to the Bishop of
Jerusalem, many Cities and Regions being first instructed in the Christian
Doctrine, and converted thereto, by the dispersed Members of that Church; and
amongst others Antioch it self, Act. 11.19, 22, 26. and even Rome also was
partaker of their spiritual things, Romans 15.27. And yet these Christians being
made subject to Christ, and not to Jerusalem; Hieron. Ep. 61. n. 15. Conc. Nic.
c. 7.
the Bishop of Jerusalem for some hundred years, was no Patriarch, even till
the Council of Chalcedon; nor Metropolitan, but was under the Bishop of
Cesarea: only he had a peculiar honor reserved to him by the Council of Nice.
Bed. Hist. l. 5. c. 20.
And if this had been a rule for later times, then Frisia, Zealand, and other
Belgic Provinces, must have been subject to the Church of England, since under
God they owed their Conversion to Wilfrid an English Bishop. Cone. Carth. gr.
c. 103, 120, 121.
Indeed some Canons have given Bishops Authority, to govern such places as they
should convert: but this tended only to give those persons, the deserved
honor, of being the Bishops of those places which they had reduced from heresy
or infidelity, where any other had not a previous right thereto; but not to
make that Church or Kingdom subject to a remote Foreign Sovereignty. All that
could be hence inferred is, that it was reasonable that Austin should be Bishop
in England, but not that Gregory should be Patriarch over it; though he also
deserved to be greatly honored, for being so instrumental to the Conversion of
the English.

7. I observe, Secondly, That when Austin came into this Island, it was
inhabited by four distinct sorts of Nations, or people, the Britans, the Scots,
the Picts, and the English (with which, without being curious about words, I
enclude also the Sexons, and others who accompanied them out of Germany) That
the Britans were ancient Christians, before the coming of Austin, needs no
further proof. Bed. Hist. l. 1. c. 13. Bed. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. Chronol. Sax.
And such were also the Scots, over whom Palladius was an eminent Bishop,
almost two hundred years before Austin. The Picts also in their Northern
quarters, toward forty years before the coming of Austin, were Converted by
Columba or Columbanus, who came out of Ireland; and the Southern Picts before
that time by Ninias a British Bishop. Now what pretense can be made, that they
who converted or presided in the three former Nations, should neither have an
authority over the whole Island, nor a liberty left to govern themselves; and
yet the conversion of the last should swallow up the liberties of all the
former three, and convey a Patriarchal right over the whole Island; yea though
this last Nation or people, were possessors of those limits, which were within
the ancient British Dioceses?

8. I observe, Thirdly, That the Conversion of the English and Saxons was not
performed only by Austin or his Successors, or any other appointed by him, or
sent from Rome; but a very considerable part of this work was effected by other
persons, who observed the rites of the British Church. Bed. Hist. l. 3. c. 1, 3.
Amongst many things worthy observation, the Kingdom of the Northumbrians,
after defection from Christianity which Paulinus taught them, we instructed
therein and Converted, Sporsw. Hist. l. 1. p. 14.
by Aidanus a Scotchman, who observed the ancient Rites of that Church, and was
made Bishop among the Northumbrians, of whom it is related, that in seven days
he converted and baptized fifteen thousand. The Mercians also, and Middle
Angles, received their Conversion by Finanus a Scotchman, Bed. Hist. l. 3. c.
21, 25.
who was Successor to Aidanus in his Bishopric among the Northumibrians: and
is observed by Beda, to have been a strict opposer of the introduced Romish
Rites. And this good work was carried on by others, of the ancient British and
Scotch Church.

9. And Finanus abovementioned, did baptize Sighercht, King of the
East-Sexons, and others of his Company, who were converted to Christianity,
among the Northumbrians. Bed. ibid. c. 22.
After which Cedda and another Presbyter of the Middle-Angles, was sent for, to
instruct the Kingdom of the East Saxons in the Christian Faith, and by them
they we Converted, after the defection of that Kingdom from their formerly
professed Christianity. And this Cedda was made Bishop of the East Saxons by
Finanus, and two other Bishops with him; and at that time observed the ancient
British Rites; but after the death of Sinanus, when Colman Finanus his
Successor, deserted his bishopric among the Northumbrians, and went into
Scotland, Ibid. c. 26.
rather than he would relinquish the ancient practices and usage of his Church,
Cedda was then brought over, to comply with the Rites brought in by Austin. All
which will evidence, that what was done by Austin, could not bring England into
a subjction to the Bishop of Rome, unless he admit diverse equals, and rivals in
his claim. And a reflection upon what has been now observed will evidence, that
to found a constant Ecclesiastical superiority and subjection upon such
pretenses as these, would bring in an unavoidable confusion sinto the Church;
and it would have overthrown in all the ancient Patriarchates, in which no such
rule was observed.

10. Nor by the power the Pope once here exercised.
I shall now consider that subjection, which was yielded to the Bishop of Rome
in this Island. And it is acknowledged, that the Roman Bishop was for many
years highly esteemed in this Realm, and consulted with, and many things after
the Conquest, were decided by his determination. And also that he did receive
great sums of money from hence, not only from the Clergy, in disms,
first fruits, and other payments, but also Peter Pence were paid by the Laity
also; not as a tributary acknowledgment of the subjection of the Realm, Spelm.
Conc. Vol. 1. p. 794.
as some Romanists would have it; but this was granted as an Eleemosynary
pension, for maintaining an English School at Rome. And it must also be
acknowledged, that the Pope did sometimes since the Conquest, exercise a great
authority here, disposing frequently by his provision of spiritual preferments,
confirming or nulling the Election of Metropolitans, Pyn in Edward 1. an. 30.
p. 985, 986. and an. 32. p. 1040.
and some other Bishops, and receiving Appeals. And in those days, there are
some instances in our Records, that the Kings Writ against persons
excommunicated by the Archbishop, was sometimes superseded, upon their
alleging, that they prosecuted Appeals to the Apostolical See.

11. But this submission in different persons, had not always the same
principle; being sometimes yielded out of an high measure of voluntary respect
and kindness; and sometimes more was given to the Pope, than otherwise would
have been, because the circumstances of Princes often made their courting the
Popes favor, in former times, to be thought by them to be a piece of needful
policy. And much also was done, from the superstition and misapprehension of
those Ages, in many persons, who supposed him to have that right of governing
these Churches, as S. Peter's successor, which he is now sufficiently evidenced
not to have had. Now what is done out of courtesy and by leave, or out of some
emergent necessity, may at other times be otherwise ordered; and no Christians
are obliged to continue in practicing upon superstitious mistakes, more than
they are obliged to live in error and superstition. And mere possession upon
an unjust claim, can give no good title to the Government of a Church; but when
the injustice thereof is made manifest, it may be rejected and abolished: Conc.
Ephesians. c. 8.
as the ancient Canons, especially that Canon of the Council of Ephesus, which
speaks particularly of the Patriarchal Authority, enjoin, that no Bishop shall
invade any Church, which was not from the beginning under his Predecessors, and
if he should compel it to be under him, he must restore its Jurisdiction again.

12. Yet that exercise and possession of authority, which the Pope here
enjoyed, was not so constant and undisturbed, but that it was many times by the
Kings and States of the Realm, and even by the Bishops at some times,
complained of and opposed, as injurious; and the true rights and liberties of
this Church and Kingdom, were often demanded and insisted upon. Of which, among
very many instances, I shall take notice of so many, as are sufficient. Before
the Conquest, I find not that the Pope exercised, or claimed any governing
authority, distinct from counsel and advice, in this Realm; and therefore there
was no need of any opposition to be made agianst it. Indeed when Wilfrid Bishop
of York, who was twice censured in England, G. Malmsbur. de Gestis Pontific. l.
3. f. 150.
did both times make his application to Rome, his Case was there heard and
considered in a Synod (and such examination and consideration of the Case even
of the Bishop of Rome, as Cornelius and others, was sometimes had in other
ancient Churches.) But for the decision of the Case, the Pope requires it,
either to be ended by an English Council, or to be determined by a more general
Council. And when Wilfrid at his first return from Rome brings the Popes
Letters in favor of him, King Egfrid put him in Prison: and at his second
return from Rome, Ib. f. 152.
King Alfrid, who succeeded Egfrid in the Kingdom, a Prince highly commended
for hispiety, learning and valor, declared that it was against all reason to
communicate with a man who had been twice condemned by English Councils,
notwithstanding any writing whatsoever from the Pope. Nor were these things
only sudden words, but when the Pope had done all he could, Wilfrid was not
thereby restored; or as Malmsburiensis expresses it, Malms. de gest. pont. l.
1. init. f. 111. Ib. f. 124.
non tamen rem obtinuit. After the Conquest it was declared by W. Rufus, to be
a custom of the Kingdom, which had been established in the reign of his Father,
that no Pope should be appealed unto, without the Kings License; consuetudo
regni mei est, a patre meo instituta, ut nullus praeter licentiam regis
appelletur Papa. Anselm. Epist. l. 3. Ep. 40. Paschali.
And Anselme acquainted the Pope that this King William the Second, would not
have the Bishop of Rome received or appealed unto in England, without his
command. Nor would he allow Anselme then Archbishop of Canterbury, to send
Letters to him, or receive any from him, or to obey his Decrees. He further
tells the Pope, that the generality of the Kingdom, and even the Bishops of his
own Province, sided with the King; and that when Anselme asked the Kings leave
to go to Rome, he was highly offended at this request, and required that no
such leave be afterward asked, and that he appeal not to the Apostolical See;
and that when Anselme went to Rome without his leave, he seized the Revenue of
his Bishopric. M. Paris. in Henr. 2. an. 1164.
And amongst the liberties and customs sworn to at the Parliament at Clarendon,
one was against appeals to Rome, and receiving Decrees from thence.

13. Ex lib. Assis. Lord Cokes Reports in Cawdreys Case.
In the Reign of King Edward the First, a subject of this Realm brought a Bull
of Excommunication against another subject from Rome, and this was adjudged
Treason by the Common law of England; and diverse other instances are brought by
Sir Edward Coke, wherein the Excommunication and Absolution of the Pope or his
Legate, was declared null or invalid. Pryn in Edw. 1. An. 20. p. 454.
And much of the usurped power, which the Pope here practiced and claimed, was
rejected as a great grievance, in the Statute of Provisors, An. 25 Edw. 3.
concerning his making provision for, and collating to Dignities and Benefices,
against the method of free Elections; and they who should apply themselves to
Rome for this purpose, became thereby liable to severe penalties. And appeals
to Rome in certain Cases, and the procuring thereupon Processes, Bulls, and
Excommunications from thence, was by the Parliament in the Reign of King
Richard the Second, 16 Ric. 5.
taxed and complained of, as that which did apparently hinder the determining
causes, and the effectual execution of justice in England, and tended to the
destruction of the Kings Sovereignty Crown and Regalty. And all those who
should bring from Rome, such Processes, Excommunications, Bulls, or other
Instruments; both themselves and all their Fauthors, were then by the Statute
of Praemunire, put out of the Kings Protection, their Lands and Goods
forfeited, and their Bodies to be attached. And this Statute continued in
force, and unrepealed (as that former also) notwithstanding all the endeavors
of the Pope and his Adherents, even an hundred and fifty years before the
Protestant Reformation. And this is sufficient to show, that the Popes usurped
power, was not so quietly and freely submitted to in this Realm, as thereby to
give him any right to govern here.

SECT. III.
The present Jurisdiction of those Churches which have been called Patriarchal,
ought not to be determined by the ancient bounds of their Patriarchates.
1. The bounds of Patriarchal Authority altered.
The third Assertion is, That the Patriarchal rights, especially those of Rome,
do not now stand on the same terms, as they did in the ancient Church; nor can
the present Roman Bishop claim subjection in all those limits, which of right
were under the ancient and Catholic Bishops of Rome. No man can reasonably
think, that the bounds of the Patriarchal Sees were unalterable, unless they
had been of a divine or Apostolical Authority. But that they were never looked
upon as such, in the Catholic Church, may besides other testimonies appear, in
that the General Councils undertook to erect Patriarchates, and to divide the
limits of others, as they saw cause. dignity and honor of a Patriarch was
given to the Bishop of Constantinople, Conc. Constable. c. 3.
in the second General Council, and his Patriarchal limits and Jurisdiction
were fixed in the fourth: and in the same, the Patriarchate of Antioch was
divided, and part thereof allotted to the Bishop of Jerusalem who then received
Patriarchal limits and Jurisdiction. Conc. Chalc. Act. 7.
But I shall only consider four things, which may so alter the state of
Patriarchal Jurisdictions, that every one of them, besides what is abovesaid,
is a bar against all claim of authority in the Bishop of Rome, to these
Churches and Realms.

2. First from the different territories, 1. From the different bounds of free
Kingdoms.
and Dominions of Sovereign Kings and Princes. For the doctrine and design of
Christianity, did not intend to undermine and enervate, but to establish and
secure the right of Kings: and no rule of the Christian Religion requires free
Kingdoms, to divest themselves of sufficient means to preserve their own
security and peace, and the necessary administration of justice. Nor can the
former acts of any Councils or Bishops wheresoever any such were, give away the
rights of Kings and Realms. But a Foreign Bishop, who is under no Allegiance to
this Crown, and has no particular obligation to seek the good of this Kingdom,
Mischiefs from Foreign Jurisdiction.
may probably often incline to designs, either of his own ambition, or the
interests of other Princes, against the true welfare of this Realm, as has
sufficiently been done in the Court of Rome. And if such an one has power, to
cite before him any person whomsoever of this Realm, either to his Patriarchal
Seat, or his Legate; and has the authority without all redress or appeal (save
to an Ecumenical Council, which probably will never be had) to inflict so
severe a sentence as Excommunication truly is; he would hereby have a
considerable awe and curb, upon many of the subjects of the Realm, that they
would be wary of opposing or provoking him. And if Canonical obedience were due
to him from all the Clergy, and filial reverence from the laiety; such a person
being the Kings Enemy, may have greater opportunity of indirect managing his
ill projects, than is consistent with the safety of the Realm, or with the
innocence and goodness of the Christian Religion to promote.

3. The exercise of a foreign authority, when managed by haughty and ambitious
spirits, has been of such ill consequence to Kings and Emperors, that King
John was forced upon his knees to surrender his Crown to the Popes Legate;
Henry the Third Emperor of Germany, Mart. Polon. in Greg. Sept. p. 361.
was compelled to stand at the Popes Gate barefoot several days n frost and
snow to beg for absolution; and Frederick the First to submit to Pope
Alexander, treading upon his neck. And other instances there are of like
nature, of the despising Dominions and Dignities, being the effects of
Interdicts and Romish Excommunications. Toward the whole Kingdom, St. 25 Hen.
8.21.
it becomes a method of exhausting its treasure, by tedious and expensive
prosecution of appeals, and many other ways, which were not without cause
publicly complained of in this Kingdom; Antiq. Brit. p. 178.
insomuch that the yearly revenue of the Court of Rome, out of this Kingdom,
was in the time of Henry the Third, found to be greater, than the revenue of
the King. And it is an high derogation from the Sovereignty of a King, as well
as a prejudice to the subjects, where justice cannot be effectually
administered, and Cases of right determined, by any authority within his own
Dominions. And with respect to the Clergy, Pryn An. 24, and 25 Edw. 1. p. 689,
etc.
the Foreign Jurisdiction sometimes brought them into great straits; as did
that Bull of Boniface the Eighth, which put them to avoid his Excommunication,
upon contesting with the King, and thereby brought them under the Kings
displeasure, and into very great grievances, as appears from the Records of
that time.

4. And as upon these accounts it appears reasonable and necessary, that the
Dominions of Sovereign Princes, should be free from any Foreign Ecclesiastical
superiority: so there are many things which may be observed to this purpose, in
the ancient state of the Church. The Government of Dioceses, Provinces, and
Patriarchates, has been acknowledged to have been ordered within the Empire,
and according to the distinct limits of the Provinces thereof. Conc. Constable. c.
3. Chalc. c. 28. Conc. Chalc. c. 17. Trul. c 38.
The Sees of Rome and Constantinople, enjoyed the greatest Ecclesiastical
privileges, because they were the Imperial Cities. The Canons also of
Ecumenical Councils enjoined, that if any City receive new privileges of
honor, by the Imperial authority, the Ecclesiastical Constitutions for the
honor of its See, shall be regulated thereby. And whereas the Slavonian
Churches were first Converted to Christianity, by them who were of the Eastern
or Greek Church, and embraced their Rites; when Bohemia and some other branches
of the Slavonian Nations, were made members of the German Empire, they
thereupon became subject to the Government of the Western Church. Thus also
when the Bishop of Arles had an eminent authority, in the ancient Gallia; Com^.
Hist.n. 18.
upon that City being divided from those Dominions, and becoming subject to the
Goths, who then Commanded Italy and Spain, he exercised no longer any
Jurisdiction there, but had his authority changed, to be Delegate over the
Spanish Territories: but when this City was again reduced to the French
Government, he no longer exercised his authority in the Dominions of Spain.

5. Yet it must be acknowledged, that in practice the Dominions of several
Sovereign Princes, have been subject to a Foreign Patriarch, which was not
their duty. But this was undertaken, either upon presumption, that because of
the excellency and simplicity of the Christian Religion, there could be no fear
of prejudice, from its Ecclesiastical Governors; or else because those Princes
did not sufficiently understand, or thought it not advisable to claim and
exercise, their own right of Sovereignty, even in Ecclesiastical matters. And
it must also be granted, Conc. Chalc. c. 28.
that if any part of the Roman Provinces, and consequently of the Christian
Churches therein, were by Wars brought under the power of barbarous Nations,
the Canons required that their Ecclesiastical Government should be ordered, as
it was before. But this was no so much a claiming dominion over them, by their
former Patriarch; as his exercising Christian Charity toward them, in
assisting those afflicted parts of the Church.

6. But it may possibly be objected, that if every Sovereign Princes Dominions
may claim a freedom from Foreign Ecclesiastical Supremacy, how shall Christian
Unity be preserved? Ans. In the same manner as in the Primitive times, wherein
whilst many of the Nations of Europe had not yet embraced Christianity, there
were within the Empire many head and independent Churches, as I have above
manifested. But the Christian Unity did then consist, Theod. Hist. l. 3. c. 8.
partly in their embracing the same faith, and giving the same worship to God,
as the Fathers at Sardica declared; partly in their holding communion with, and
receiving one another in all parts of the World as Brethren, which is by
Tertullian discoursing hereof, De Praescr. c. 20.
expressed by communicatio pacis, appellatio fraternitatis, contesseratio
hospitalitatis; and partly also in that as need required, they held
correspondence with each other, and in chief matters of order and Government,
they observed the same Canonical Rules, and after the first Ecumenical
Councils, they generally submitted to their Canons. And they constantly
acknowledged all acts of Government, in the true Catholic Officers of a
particular Church, in receiving or rejecting members to be of force in the
whole Catholic Church: wherein no excommunicated person would be received in
any part of it, Can. Ap. 12. Nic. 5. Chalc. 13. Antioch. 6, 7.
nor any suspected persons without dimissory or commendatory Letters. And they
also owned all dividing from, or communicating with a particular Church, to
have respect to the whole Catholic Church, of which that particular was a
member; Cyp. de Unit. Eccles.
because as S. Cyprian declares, Episcopatus unus est, cujus a singulis in
solidum pars tenetur.

7. Secondly, 2. From the dangerons abuse of pretended Apostolical Power.
The right of Patriarchal claim is altered from what it once was, by the Romish
Bishops abusing and perverting the pretense of Apostolical authority, and
challenging such an Universal Supremacy, as encludeth a power of disposing
Kingdoms, deposing Kings, and dissolveing the bonds of subjects obedience. And
besides these general positions, he not only challenged this Kingdom as
feudatory, but undertook to discharge all English Subjects from their
Allegiance to Queen Elizabeth; but in the following Book I shall speak more to
the things contained under this head. But he who acts against the safety of the
Realm, V. Conc. Turon. 1510.
and the rights of the Crown, whatsoever his dignity is in the Church, may be
rejected as a common Enemy; even as Abiathar the High Priest when he became an
abetter of Sedition, was justly deposed by Solomon. That man who will give
liberty of free access to his House, for his Friend or his Physician, will not
think it reasonable to do the same to him, who without all right claims a
power, to turn him out of his own estate, and to dispose of it as the chief
Lord.

8. 3. From pernicious and false doctrine.
Thirdly, From the corrupt doctrines, which he propagates with that
earnestness, as to reject all others who will not embrace them. Now because
there is no authority above, or against God and his truth, there lies the same
obligation upon all good Christians in this Case, to reject and disown his
superiority; as there does to hold and maintain the true Catholic Christian
doctrine, which he will not allow, against the gross corruptions which have
invaded it. Thus in the time of Constantius, when the present possessors of the
Patriarchdom, were favorers of Arianisme, it was the honor of many Catholic
Bishops, and other Christians, that they kept close to the Catholic doctrine,
even in opposition to those Patriarchs. And the Ecumenical Council of Ephesus
declared, Conc. Ephesians. c. 1.
that if any Metropolitan had forsaken, or should forsake and oppose the true
doctrine, which the Council did profess, he should have no authority over
others in his province: and this was determined with a particular respect to
the Case of Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, whose Heresy was then also
favored by John Patriarch of Antioch.

9. Indeed upon pretense of personal crimes, concerning life and manners, no
inferior was allowed by the Canons, to deny his subjection to his Bishop,
Metropolitan, or Patriarch, until a Council had judged thereof. But if the Case
be such, that he with open face asserts manifest Heresy, or false doctrine,
which has been so declared by approved Councils, the disowning all Communion
with him, Syn. prim. and Sec. c. 15.
and subjection to him, even before a Council, is commended by some Canons, as
a practice which deserves honor. And it must be so, where subjection must
enclude embracing corruptions.

10. But the various, false, Conc. Trid. passim.
and Corrupt doctrines of the Church of Rome, are openly asserted, under
Anathema's against all who shall oppose them. And these present erroneous
doctrines of the Roman Church, according to the definitions of the Council of
Trent, are by the Bull of Pius the Fourth, declared to be the true Catholic
faith, Bull. Pii 4. superform. Juram. prof. fid.
extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, out of which no man can be saved, And an
assent unto all these doctrines, is enjoined in that Bull to be declared upon
Oath, by all persons who have any dignity or cure of souls; Sept. Decret. l. 3.
Tit. 5. c. 2.
which is extended by a following Constitution to all who take Academical
degrees in any faculty, and to all Professors and Readers in public Schools.

11. Now one thing in this Bull, enjoined to be thus necessarily professed and
believed, is, that the Roman Church is omnium Ecclesiarum matter and magistra;
the mother of all Churches, and has authority over them: but this is plainly
contrary to the determination of Ecumenical Councils, which I have above
produced, who do make the authority of other Churches, equal with the Roman.
Many other things are manifestly contrary to the doctrine of Christ himself,
and his Apostles, as their Transubstantiation, the allowing the Communion in
one kind, against the express institution of Christ; the proper propitiatory
sacrifice of the Mass, for the quick and the dead; and many more of like
nature. Eulla in Coena. c. 2.
And yet the Pope not only excommunicates all those as Heretics, who do oppose
these doctrines, but also all those who do appeal to any future Council.
Wherefore as much as it is the duty of any Church or Christian, to own Gods
authority and embrace his truth, so much it must be their duty, to reject the
Romish authority, which opposes and withstandeth them.

12. Fourthly, From the sin of pursuing Schism, with which the Romish Bishop
and Church do stand chargeable. 4. From Schism.
No Christian Bishop can have any authority, against the Unity of the Christian
Church, and against that authority, whereby that Unity is established. And
therefore all Christians are obliged to avoid sinful divisions and Schisms,
though the names of Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, may be pretended to head them.
And it was the fault of S. Barnabas to comply with, and be led by S. Peter
himself, in a groundless withdrawing from the Church of Antioch. And it could
not be the duty of any Catholic Christians, who lived within the Dioceses of
the Donatist Bishops, to submit to them, and thereby not hold the Catholic
Communion. Cyp. Ep. 52. ad Anton.
For as S. Cyprian said, he who does not keep the Unity of the Spirit, and the
conjunction of peace, and separateth himself from the bond of the Church, and
the Society of its Priests, Episcopi nec potestatem potest habere, nec honorem;
can neither have the honor; nor the power of a Bishop. And he who submits to,
or complyeth with, the manager of a Schism, in his prosecution thereof, does
involve himself in the same crime.

13. Gr. de Valent. Tom. 3. disp. 3. qu. 15. Punct. 2. Bannes in 2. ^ae. qu. 1.
Art. 10. p. 83, 84. and qu. 39. Art. 1.
Now that the Bishop of Rome himself may be a Schismatic, in separating from
the Unity of the Church, is acknowledged by their own Writers. And he is
actually guilty of Schism, in rejecting Communion with a great part, and with
the best and purest part of the Catholic Church, and requiring them to be
accounted Heretics. And his Schism has such aggravations as these. 1. In the
ill design of upholding corrupt doctrines, and practices of that Church,
without due reformation. 2 From his high uncharitableness, in not allowing
salvation to other Christian Churches, besides the Roman. 3. From his great
usurpation, excommunicating all who do not yield obedience to him, and the free
Churches who reform themselves, (although their power of holding Synods
includes a right to reform themselves) and all who appeal from him to a
general Council, who are subjected to excommunication, Jac. de Graf. Decis.
Aur. l. 4. c. 18. n. 55.
as some, who write upon the bull in coena domini, tell us, for accounting a
general Council superior to the Pope.

14. Wherefore the Bishop of Rome as things now stand, has no just right to a
Patriarchal Power, in any part whatsoever of the Christian Church, having
forfeited this by the corrupt doctrines and interests, and by the Schism, which
are there managed. And he is excluded from Foreign Sovereign Princes Dominions,
by the Supremacy of their Crown, and by his undue claims, inconsistent with
their regalities. But if he would become truly Catholic, both as to Christian
Unity and doctrine, and therein give due honor to secular authority, he might
then claim a Patriarchal right, so far as the present civil power of Rome
reaches, but no further, unless by the leave and pleasure of other Princes and
Churches. And he might then expect, and would receive, an high honor, all over
the Christian World, upon account of the ancient prime Patriarchal See.

CHAP. VIII.
B. 1. C. 8.
Some pretenses of other parties, against the Supremacy of Princes in Causes
Ecclesiastical, refuted.
SECT. I.
Of Liberty of Conscience, and Toleration.
AGainst the Authority of the Civil Power in matters of Religion, there are
some who undertake such a Patronage of Liberty of Conscience, as thereby to
infer a necessity of Toleration. And what is urged upon this Topic, has
either respect to Conscience it self, or else the peace of the Christian World;
and so either pretends, that it is the proper right of Conscience, to be free
from subjection to any men in matters Ecclesiastical, and the affairs of
Religion; or else, that the yielding this liberty to every man is a principle
of peace, The consequences from the Pleas for General liberty of Conscience.
and would tend greatly to the quiet of the World.

2. the chief force of what is said upon the first pretense, lies in this kind
of reasoning, which some account plausible, to wit, That every man has a
Conscience, or capacity of discerning what is his duty in matters of Religion,
and that what he thus discerns to be his duty he ought to practice, and no man
ought to hinder or restrain him: and the consequence of this is, that
concerning the affairs of Religion, he ought to be under no Government, whether
Civil or Ecclesiastical. But the vanity and fallaciousness of this way of
arguing, will sufficiently appear, by improving the same to a further purpose,
to which it is altogether as well adapted, concerning matters of common right.
For it may be said here that man is a Creature endued with principles of
Conscience, and capacities to discern what is just and honest, and what he
discerns to be so, he ought to pursue, and should be permitted so to do; and
therefore according to the former method of argumentation, he must in civil
affairs be under no Government, and no judge ought to question him. Now the
result of all this, and what it would tend to prove is, that man is such a
Creature, who ought not to be a subject, or under Government; and from hence it
would follow, that all the Precepts of subjection and obedience in the Gospel,
and the whole establishment which God has made, of Civil and Ecclesiastical
power and authority, are all of them opposite to the nature of man, and to the
rights and privileges of his being. And now would it not heartily grieve any
pious and understanding man, to see by what pitiful pretenses men undertake to
argue, against the institution and authority of God?

3. Men may not safely be left to the sole conduct of themselves and their
Consciences.
But they who make use of such arguments about matters of Religion, will be
ready to say concerning things civil, that though men have Consciences to guide
them, yet they may sometimes mistake the due measures of justice and right, and
sometimes an inordinate pursuing their own interest, or gratifying some evil
temper of mind, may make men act contrary to what they know to be right; and by
such means other men's properties would be injured, if there were not a civil
judge to interpose, and laws established for the securing these properties. And
all this is indeed truth: but then these two things are also to be observed. 1.
That hereby it is granted, that even in those things wherein men ought to be
directed by the rules of Conscience, they are still under the Government of
their Superiors, who may take care that they therein act not contrary to the
true grounds of Conscience, which in this Case is justice and right. 2. That in
matters of Religion also it is manifest that very many are prone to run into
mistakes, more than about other things, and to be too much hurried by pride,
prejudice, passion, or by following erroneous guides. And is it reasonable, to
think it agreeable to the will of God, and the Christian Doctrine, that it
should be necessary to preserve the civil interests of men, whether Princes or
Subjects; but that such liberty must be granted, that the sacred Majesty of God
may be affronted, the truths of the Gospel opposed, the Unity of the Church
broken by Schism, the power of Religion undermined by vain fancies; and the
reputation of the Christian Religion stained, and the eternal happiness of many
thousands be thereby hazarded, and all this not thought so considerable as to
provide against it? Or as S. Austin said, Aug. Ep. 50. An fidem non servare
levius est animam Deo, quam foeminam viro?
is it a lighter and more inconsiderable thing, for the soul of man not to be
faithful to God, than for a Woman not to be faithful to her Husband? Wherefore
since it is as easy for men of understanding, to discern the duty of man, in
the main things of Religion, and the Rules of decency, as in civil matters; it
is very requisite, that with allowance of reasonable liberty to them who are
soberly inquisitive about truth, there should be a restraint upon men by Laws
and Government, from following every inordinate inclination of their own minds,
though they miscal it by the name of Conscience; that so Piety, Order, and
Peace may be secured.

4. But though I would be as charitable to all who err in matters of Religion,
as may consist with a due consideration of things, yet I cannot account all
that to be Conscience, which is by some men in the World so called. Conscience
does not always really guide where its name is pretended.
For those proper dictates of Conscience, which in this case ought to command
obedience, must proceed upon such convictive evidence of truth and duty, which
no error and mistake can bring along with it, with that clearness which truth
does; and this ought to be followed by every pious man, whatever difficulties
may assault him herein; but passions and disordered affections ought to be
governed and restrained; and the Laws and Commands of Superiors ought to be
obeyed, where there is no such evidence to be opposed against them, as I have
mentioned. But let any person who understands the state of the World,
consider, whether it be not an apparent sad truth, and matter of real
lamentation, that the chief and most earnest men who close with erring and
dividing parties amongst us, do this either out of some fond affection to a
weak argument, which they are highly pleased with; or because they are resolved
to hold fast some things as certain principles, which have no evidence of
truth; or that they follow willingly and of choice the opinion of some other
persons whom they admire; or have a great prejudice against those, whom they
account an opposite party; or are not willing to be subject, and to be guided
by their Superiors, in things relating to order. And I heartily wish it were
not so plain a truth as it is, that such men are rarely willing to consider
seriously and impartially, of what is said against their error, and do not
make so much scruple of Conscience as they ought, of breaking those numerous
and plain Precepts, which enjoin obedience, humility, and the keeping the Peace
and Unity of the Church.

5. Now in men who thus proceed, True liberty of Conscience opposed by them who
plead for it in words.
it is very plain that their dissent is founded in the voluntary inclination,
and evil indisposition of their wills. And if any such persons shall say, that
their Consciences oblige them to entertain these inclinations, they must give
others leave to see, that they only substitute the name of Conscience, to be a
Plea for an unaccountable and bad temper of mind. And indeed those persons are
great opposers of the just and necessary Liberty of Conscience, who will bind
it up to comply with their own inclinations, and what pleases them, but will
not give it the liberty of impartial consideration, that thereby it might guide
them by its unbiassed dictates.

6. God has not left men's Consciences at liberty to neglect peace and
obedience.
But because I intend here to discourse no further of liberty of Conscience,
than to show that the pretense thereof, ought not to be any bar against the
exercise of government and authority, in the regular establishing of Religion,
and order in the Church: I shall only add, that I suppose no man will be so
presumptuously bold, as to assert, that this Plea of liberty should be a
privilege to men, against the authority of God, and his Laws and Precepts. And
then I cannot understand, what pretense can be made from hence, against the
necessity of practicing those duties, which the Commands of God have enjoined,
of following peace, maintaining order, and in things lawful being subject to
superiors; especially since God has particularly in this Case required us, to
be subject for Conscience sake, and that not as in a matter left at liberty,
but where he has declared a necessity upon Conscience. Romans 13.5. (...), you
most needs be subject for Conscience sake.

7. But there are some who say, Toleration pretended to be a method for peace.
that a general liberty for all men to profess what they please, or think fit
in Religion, if it be not necessary from the nature of Conscience, yet is the
most excellent expedient for the general peace of the World. This liberty has
been pretended by them who engage in several Sects, to be a principal means to
promote the Unity of the Church; which must be by a like method, as the
compactness and united strength of a building may be procured, by providing
that all the parts of it, may without difficulty fall from one another. But
this general liberty in Religion is also proposed, Humane Reason, p. 78.
as the best requisite to hinder civil and foreign Wars, by a late Writer. He
tells us, that all Wars of late Ages, have been either really for Religion, or
at least that has been one of the chief pretenses, and therefore as conducing
to peace, he requires the embracing this Position, P. 79.
That every man ought quietly to enjoy his own Religion. And in another place
he says, there cannot certainly in the World be found out, P. 11, 12.
so mild and so peaceable a doctrine, as that which permits a difference in
beliefs.

8. But since he that observes the World must acknowledge, that many Wars have
been occasioned, upon the sole pretense of civil rights, and secular interests;
that there may be a provision for this Case as well as for the former, it will
not be unmeet to accompany this Position of his, with another which is much of
like nature with it, and equally peaceable. And this is, That all men ought to
suffer each other, without any disturbance or complaint, to take and enjoy
whatsoever goods, persons, and possessions, they shall please to possess
themselves of. And if this principle with the former, were entertained by all
men (as it never was, nor can be) there would then be no Wars, nor contests in
the World, neither concerning matters of Religion, nor any other rights. And
then we should have a quiet World, but with little regard to Religion,
Righteousness, Chastity and Virtue, and without all Order, Government, and
civil Societies, the Earth being then overgrown with the height of Barbarism,
far surpassing the wildness of the Native Indians.

9. No Peace can be from thence expected.
But against the former method here proposed, for the procuring peace, I shall
observe further two things. 1. That there are so many things necessary for the
making this proposal practicable, that even that may well make any man despair
of its effect. For first, care must be taken, that there be no such pious men
in the World, who will think that Gods honor ought to be maintained, and the
true Religion defended and secured, by the authority of Governors: and yet
either the peaceable principle must be forsaken, or else thereupon these men
must enjoy the liberty of their opinion, as well as others, Secondly, there
must be security given, that there shall be no such furious men in the World,
who will at any time vent notions in Religion, which may tend to undermine
authority and Government, to make men's minds fierce and cruel, or to evacuate
obedience; nor yet that there be any such eager and earnest men, who will be
forward to use what power they can gain, for the establishing their own
opinions. Thirdly, as this proposal can never become useful for peace, until
all men be brought to be of the opinion of the proposer, which is as unlike as
any thing can be; so even then there must be some provision made, that the
practice of this proposal, be not the ready way to hinder the effect thereof.
For the practice of this general liberty for all opinions in Religion, does
according to common experience ordinarily beget, instead of peace, discords,
oppositions, disturbances, confusions, and other ill effects; which make all
men of consideration see the hurt, and danger of such licentious liberty, and
the necessity of Order and Government. Fourthly, And there must be no men so
far Christians and conscientious, as to acknowledge that there are any
doctrines of Faith, duties of Christian worship, or institutions of Christ, so
necessary and sacred; that the opposers or contemners of them, ought to be
checked and withstood. And though he be so bold as to assert, P. 68, 69.
that we ought not to teach, that any errors in belief overthrow the hope of
salvation, and speaks of the hopeful estate of persons, whatsoever doctrines
they embrace, P. 70, 71.
in the whole compass of Religions; which large expressions must include those
Jews, who in our Saviors time asserted him to be a blasphemer and not the
Christ: yet thanks be to God, there are many who will believe those words of
our Lord to the Jews, Job. 8.24. If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die
in your sins. And from this and many other expressions in the Scripture, of the
great danger of unbelief, will conclude, that under the clear promulgation of
the Gospel, it is necessary to Salvation, to believe that Jesus is the Christ,
and Savior of the World, and to profess and obey his doctrine.

10. I observe, 2. That the best way to promote the peace of the World, Peace
best promoted by uniform establishing true Religion and worship.
is by endeavoring that true Christianity in doctrine and practice, be with
one accord, and with a spirit of Unity, embraced among men. For first the
nature of Christianity is such, that so far as it really prevails, it must be
a strong bond of peace, since it makes men tender of wronging any by word or
deed, and enjoins a necessity of making satisfaction for injuries; a readiness
to forgive enemies; with a care of reverence, fidelity, and obedience to
superiors, and of gentleness, humility, patience and charity toward all men.
De duodeeim. abus. seculi. cap. 7.
On this account it was thought one of the great disorders amongst men, that
there should be Christianus contentiosus, a Christian given to contention. And
though there are great miscarriages in this particular, among many who profess
this Religion, but do not live according to it; yet it is apparent, that the
spreading of Christianity in the World, did greatly amend and reform it, Eus.
de Them. Evang. l. 9. c. 17. De laud. Constable. p. 486, 487.
and as Eusebius long since noted, did advantage the peace thereof; and it will
mightily promote this effect, in all them who heartily practice it. Secondly,
Unity in Religion has a natural force to excite friendliness, whence even
Jews, Mahometans, and all Sects are more kind to one another, than to others;
and Philo accounts concord in the worship of God, Phil. de Charit. p. 717.
to be the greatest cement of love; and Joseph's Brethren thought it a
considerable argument to engage his favor, because they were the servants of
the God of his Father. Genesis 50.17.
Thirdly, The quiet of the World having chief dependence upon God, it may be
justly feared that where the care of true Religion is neglected, the
flourishing and peaceable state of Kingdoms should not long continue. This was
frequently observable in the times of the Judges, and the Kings of Israel and
Judah: See Judge. 5.8.1 Kin. 11.4, Gild. de Exc. Brit. Mar. Par. an. 1067. P. 5.
14, 23. And remarkable decay of piety was observed, to precede the two great
Conquests of this Realm, by Foreign Armies.

SECT. II.
Of some other rigid and dangerous principles, against the supremacy of Princes.
1. Of the rigid Presbyterians.
There are some of the rigid Presbyterians, especially those of the Scottish
way, who though they allow the King some authority, both in matters
Ecclesiastical, and over Ecclesiastical persons, do yet in terminis reject the
Kings being supreme Governor, Rutherf. of Chapter Gov. Chapter 23. p. 508. Henderson's
second Paper to the King.
in all causes Ecclesiastical and civil; and withal do plainly misrepresent the
sense thereof. But that those of this way, do in a dangerous manner, oppose the
just supremacy of Princes, in things Ecclesiastical, may be partly manifest
from their general position, That the institution of God has so provided for
all things, pertaining to Religion, that there is no room left for any
appointments of order, by the authority of men; the substance of which I have
in another discourse taken notice of. But this will be more apparently manifest
from another position, which I shall now reflect upon.

2. It is asserted by them, that if a Minister shall speak treason in his
Pulpit, by way of doctrine, the Church only is to try whether it be treason
indeed; Ibid. Chapter 24. p. 551, 552. The like Plea was used by A. Melvil. a chief
Modeller of the Scottish Presbytery, in his own Case 1584.
and he may decline the civil judge and appeal to a Synod. This is not only
affirmed by Mr Rutherford, but this position was in an exceeding strange manner
espoused, by the General Assembly of the Kirk, who contested with King James
concerning it, upon this occasion. Mr D. Blake having in his Sermon at S.
Andrews, declared, that the King had discovered the treachery of his heart,
That all Kings are the Devils Bearnes, That the Queen of England ( Queen
Elizabeth) was an Atheist, with many more dangerous assertions: and being cited
by the Kings authority to answer these things, he alleged that he could not in
this case be judged by the King, till the Church had taken the first cognition
thereof. Spotsw. Hist. of Sc. l. 6. p. 330.
And the Kirk-Commissioners enter a Declinator, and Protestation against the
Kings proceedings; and would not consent that any punishment should be
inflicted upon Mr Blake, because there was no trial before a proper judge; and
declared, that if he should submit his doctrine to be tried by the Council, the
liberty of the Church, and the spiritual Government of the House of God, Hist.
of Sc. l. 6. an. 1596.
would be quite subverted. A full and particular account of this whole matter,
is expressed by Bishop Spotswood, and this contest was so great and famous, and
the disturbances ensuing thereupon so notorious, that they were thought fit to
be signified to the States General of the united Provinces, Adr. Damman. in
Praest. Viror. Epist. p. 49. etc.
by their Agent then sent into Scotland, in the entrance of 1597. But such
positions and undertakings as these, are calculated for a Meridian, equal in
Elevation with the Italian.

3. One thing insisted on for this exemption of the Church, and its Officers
from the Civil Authority, is, that the Officers of the Church act by Authority
from Christ, and therefore are not to be in immediate subjection to Kings and
Princes. Chap. 6. Sect. 4.
But this has been particularly answered above.

4. But they further argue, Christ's Royal Authority not invaded by Princes
governing in causes Ecclesiasticale
that it is the Royalty of Christ to Govern his Church in matters of Religion,
and if the Civil Rulers do intermeddle herein, they thereby invade Christ's
Kingly Government. To which I answer. 1. That this way of arguing put into
other language, would amount to thus much, That because Christ is the King of
his Church, or of all Christians, yea and of all the earth; therefore
Christians and the whole World, ought not to be subject to any other King or
Ruler but to Christ. And this would serve the design of the highest Fifth
Monarchy men, if it had any weight in it. 2. It is a gross falsehood, that no
act that Christ does as King, may be performed by any other King. There are
some great things in the Kingly power of Christ, which are wholly
incommunicable in the nature of them, to any other human person whomsoever,
being founded on his Mediatory Office. Such are his giving the Sanction to the
Laws and Precepts of the Gospel, to become the rule of the Christian Religion;
his Sovereign dispensing divine grace upon account of his own merits; his
pronouncing the final sentence of Absolution and Condemnation, and his having
by a peculiar right an Universal authority over all the World; all power in
heaven and earth being committed to him. And all such things as these, are as
far disclaimed from Kings, as from other men. But there are other acts of
Christ's Government of his Church, where some thing of like nature, ought to be
performed by others, though in a different manner: thus Christ rules
Christians, and so may all Christian Kings do; Christ does protect his Church,
and so ought all Sovereign Powers to do; Christ by his Authority encourages
the pious and devout, and discountenanceth the negligent, and so ought all
Rulers as well as all other good men to do by theirs. 3. If governing others
with respect to Religion, were peculiar to Christ himself and his Royal
Authority, the authority of Ecclesiastical Officers would by this method become
void also; for Christ has not conveyed the peculiarities of his Royal
Authority to them. But as they in their places have authority from Christ; so
the civil power is in subordination to him, who is King of Kings, and is
confirmed by him.

5. There have been also other very pernicious principles, which undermine the
whole foundation of the Royal Supremacy, both in matters civil, and
Ecclesiastical. In our late dreadful times of Civil War, the whole management
of things against the King, and the undertaking to alter and order public
affairs without him, was a manifest and practical disowning the Kings
Supremacy. Popular Supremacy disclaimed:
Some persons then who would be thought men of sense, did assert, that though
the King was owned to be supreme Governor, yet the supremest Sovereign power
was in the people. Others declared that the title of Supreme Governor, was an
honourary title given to the King, to please him instead of fuller power. And
in the Issue, July 17. 1649.
by a pretended Act, it was called Treason, to say, that the Commons assembled
in Parliament, were not the supreme authority of the Nation. But there were
also some who then affirmed, the whole body of the people to be superior to
the Parliament, and that they might call them to an account.

6. But because I hope these positions are now forsaken, and because much in
the following Book is designed against the dangerous effect of them, in taking
Arms, I shall content my self here to observe three things. First, that those
who would disprove the Royal Supremacy, because of some actions which have been
undertaken by some of the people, or by any in their name against their Kings,
or even to the deposing of them; do first stand bound to prove all these
actions to be regular and justifiable: or else it is no better argument, than
they might make use of against the authority of God, from the disobedience of
men.

7. Secondly, The asserting supremacy of Government in the body of the people,
is a position big with nonsense and irreligion. It Is nonsense (like a whole
Army being General) since Supremacy of Government in the whole body of the
people, can be over no body; unless something could be supreme over it self:
whereas if there be no higher power than what is in the whole body of the
people, this must be a state of Anarchy, where there is no superior or
supreme. It includes Irreligion, because Religion establishes the Government
of a people, to be the ordinance of God: and whereas Government must be by the
exercise of a superior authority, there can be no authority upon Earth
superior to the supreme.

8. Thirdly, Supremacy cannot be asserted in a Parliament, without doing
violence to plain evidence. For as loyal English Parliaments have constantly
acknowledged supremacy in the King; so it is manifest, that the Parliament
regularly is under the Government of the King. For he Summons and gives birth
to it by his Writ, continues it at his pleasure, and has the authority of
adjourning, proroguing or dissolving it, as he sees cause.

CHAP. IX.
Corollaries from the foregoing discourse, concerning some duties of subjection.
THE Royal Supremacy being asserted, it will hence follow, 1. Corol. 1. Of
submission and solemn professing the Kings Right.
That Subjects ought to own and acknowledge this just authority, and supremacy
of their Sovereign; and heartily to manifest an humble, peaceable, and faithful
submission thereunto. This is that which the Rules of the Christian Religion do
enjoin, and they who are averse from the performance hereof, do as much as in
them lies enervate this authority, and render it unmeet to attain its ends, for
which God did appoint it, even the peace and good of the World. And for the
more effectual promoting of this faithful subjection, the sacred bond of an
Oath of homage and fidelity, B. 1. C 9.
is approved by God himself, Eccl. 8.2. and has been made use of by the
general wisdom of the World. The ancient practice of such Oaths is manifest
under the Jewish Government, Jud. 11.10. 2 Kin. 11.17. as also under the
Chaldean Empire, Ezekiel 17.19. and under the Persian and Roman Empires. Joseph.
Ant. l. 11. c. 8. and l. 17. c. 3. Herodian l. 2. Bar. an. 169. n. 9.
And that the primitive Christians even in the time of persecution, did by
their Oaths assure their allegiance to those Princes, seems well observed by
Baronius, from Tertullian, Apol. c. 32. where discoursing of that fidelity and
honor, which the Christians had for the Emperor, upon that occasion says,
Sed and juramus.

2. Of speaking reverently.
Corol. 2. Subjects ought also to speak of their Princes with reverence and
expressions of honor. For all authority whether of Father, Master, or other
Ruler, deriving suitable degrees of honor upon the person; the greatest and
chief civil honor does of right belong to him, who in his Dominions is
possessor of the highest authority upon earth. And the ordinary using outward
expressions and titles of honor, is in this Case the more needful and
reasonable, because this has a considerable influence upon the disposing men
to obedience, and because Government it self becomes most useful, where it is
entertained with due reverence. Wherefore the title of (...), optimus or most
excellent, which was the usual style of honor which both Jews and Romans gave
to the president of Judea Act. 23.26. chapter 24.3. was readily made use of to
Festus, by S. Paul, Act. 26.25. And when Priests and Rulers were none of the
best men, the holy Scriptures style the Priest, the Angel or Messenger of the
Lord of Hosts, Mal. 2.7. and the Ruler, the Minister of God, Romans 13.4. and of
such they use that expression, Ps 82.6. I said, Ye are Gods.

3. And the primitive Christians were forward by such means to promote and
secure the due honor of superiors. Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 7. c. (...).
To which purpose Dionysius Bishop of Alex andria, when he was a Confessor, and
exposed himself to be banished for the Christian profession, did yield to
Valerian and Galienus, persecuting Emperors, the title of (...), most pious.
Athan. Ap. ad Constable. Testim. Eccl. Alexand. in Athanas. Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 10.
c. 5.
Both Athanasius himself, and the Alexandrian Church which held to him, called
Constantius the Arian, Most Religious, (...). And when Constantine wrote to
some of the Prefects of the Empire, he gave to them in two Rescripts mentioned
by Eusebius, the title of (...), your sanctity. And that the ancient Churches
did readily give to the Emperors their usual Imperial titles, and did
ordinarily treat them with such a style as Sanctissimi, Pientissimi,
Religiosissimi, is not only manifest from particular Writers, but is abundantly
apparent from the Synodical Epistles of Provincial, and even of Ecumenical
Councils.

4. Conc. Ephesians. Tom. 2. c. 10. and To. 4. c. 17.
And as the like expressions of honor were frequently and usually given to the
Christian Bishops: so when the Council of Ephesus were about to denounce the
sentence of deposition, against Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople, for his
Heresy; and when they wrote to Celestine, against John Bishop of Antioch, as
being an Enemy to the true Faith, in compliance with Nestorius, they gave them
both the title of Most Religious. And the like was done before the sentencing
Dioscorus, and other Bishops who complied with Eutyches, in the Council of
Chalcedon. Conc. Chalc. Act. 3. Evagr. Hist. l. 2. c. 18.
Wherefore such expressions as these were intended as titles of honor, given
to them upon account of their office, and without respect to their personal
virtues, and in that sense are to be understood. Mas. de Min. Angl. l. 3. c. 5.
n. 3. and ibid. Baron. and Bin.


5. The use of such expressions of honourary titles is allowed and defended,
both by Romish and Protestant Writers. And those persons who would appear
backward, in yielding to the supreme Governor his just style of eminency and
supremacy, are wanting in giving him the honor which God enjoins, and cannot
easily be acquitted from the guilt of scandal, in encouraging the bad temper of
some, and adding to the ignorance of others in that particular. And they who
are desirous to expose the persons, actions or constitutions of their
superiors, may take warning by the actings of Ham, toward his Father Noah,
which entailed a Curse upon his posterity.

6. Corol. 3. it is also the duty of subjects, Of praying for Kings.
heartily to pray for Gods blessing on the person, and Government of their
Sovereign; because therein both Church and State, and private interests also,
are so much concerned. This was enjoined by S. Paul, as a matter of principal
concernment, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and was performed in the early times of
Christianity. Tert. Apol. c. 30. Conc. Emer. in Praef.
And the Council of Merida did more particularly pray for their King
Recessuinthus, because he was Governor in all Causes Civil and Ecclesiastical;
quoniam de secularibus sancta illi manet cura, and Ecclesiastica per divinam
gratiam recte disponit mente intenta, sit illi opitulatrix ineffabilis
omnipotentis Dei gratia, quae se quaerentibus manet propinqua. But because it
is an high piece of Hypocrisy and dissembling with God, to pray to him for the
good of any person, whose good and happiness is not really desired; therefore
the divine Precept to pray for Kings, and the Christian practice answerable
thereto, was well urged as a sufficient evidence by Tertullian, Apol. c. 31.
to prove Christians to be true and real Friends and no Flatterers of Princes
and Emperors, wheresoever the true spirit of Christianity is embraced.

7. Of obedience to the laws of our Governors.
Corol. 4. The chief and principal duty required, is the practice of obedience
to the laws of our superiors. Even in lesser Societies, a Father or Master
whose authority is of an inferior nature, has a power of commanding, without
which there can be no order in Families. And it is the general acknowledgment
of the World, Arist. Eth. l. 10. c. 9. Politic. l. 6.
that the welfare of humane Society, of which Government takes care, cannot be
obtained without establishing laws and public Rules: and there is no Kingdom
or Country in the World under any civil Government, where laws have not been
established, and an authority to enjoin them acknowledged. And obedience to
such laws is plainly enjoined upon all Christians, since they are obliged to be
subject to the higher powers, and to submit themselves to every ordinance of
man. But that this duty of obedience may be the better declared, I shall take
notice of three pretensions which are made use of, for the undermining it.
Wherefore I shall observe,

8. First, That passive obedience (as some call it) or a submitting to
penalties, is in things which may lawfully be done, no sufficient discharge of
Conscience, or performance of duty, unto the laws of superiors. The necessity
of Active Obedience.
And here Active obedience only, deserves the name of obedience, and is
necessary to be performed. This is evident from these three things. 1. From the
general end and design of all Government, which a true Christian subjection
must comply with: and this is to restrain disorders and evils, and to promote
what is good and useful in the World. Now this end is obtained by the
practicing wholesome Rules, but is not at all effected by the mere bearing
penalties. For by the suspending active obedience, the order of the World would
be turned into confusion: since as Clemens Romanus urges in this Case, As the
serviceableness of an Army, Cl. Romans Ep. ad Cor. p. 49, 50.
depends much upon its being under Command, and the usefulness of the members
of our bodies appears, from their being ready to perform the motions, about
which they are employed; so the good estate of the weal public is procured, by
men's careful observing and attending to useful and profitable Rules and
directions. 2. From other parallel instances. It is against the nature of
Religion to imagine, that wicked men and evil Angels who despise Gods laws, and
reject his Precepts, are to be esteemed as blameless and Welldoers, merely
because they bear the punishment and misery, which God inflicts. And surely no
reasonable man can think, that if a servant be idle, careless, and unfaithful;
by being only beaten for his fault, without any amendment of his carriage, he
becomes thereby faithful and innocent: or that if a Child be disobedient to his
Parents, and stubborn, he has sufficiently discharged all that duty, which God
or Man requires from him, by being corrected. And the pretense of general
performing obedience to Governors, by bare submitting to penalties, but
neglecting in things lawful to practice what is enjoined, is as opposite as
these former instances, to the Rules both of Reason and Religion. 3. From the
Sanction of punishment toward them who do evil, and are disobedient. For God
who is so just that he will not condemn the righteous, nor punish the innocent,
has committed to Rulers the power of the sword, to execute punishment on the
disorderly and disobedient: which he would never have done, if the neglect of
active obedience to laws, which is the cause for which punishments are
inflicted, were not in it self a fault. Prove. 20.2.
But whosoever provokes him (a King) to anger, sins against his own Soul.

9. Secondly, Nor are subjects disobliged from obeying the laws of their
superiors, by their entertaining doubts or scruples concerning the lawfulness
of them. But because what I have written elsewhere, is sufficient for the proof
of this, I shall chiefly refer the Reader thither, and shall only add, 1. That
if we consider doubts in themselves, Doubts do not discharge from obedience.
since here is no certain evidence concerning the unlawfulness of the things
commanded; if these doubts and scruples proceed from a regular and uniform
cautiousness of Conscience, there is as much reason (if not much more, because
of the plainness of the commands of obedience) to scruple or doubt of the
lawfulness of disobeying, as of the lawfulness of obeying. And so the
consideration of doubts and scruples, taken singly and alone, can be no
pretense against the performing obedience, when even these very things ought to
have as strong a force, against the neglecting obedience. 2. If we consider the
duty and state of subjection, it will thence appear, that it was well asserted
by S. Austin, Cont. Faust. l. 22. c. 75.
that subjects may and ought to obey their Princes Commands, where they are
certain that what he Commands, is not against the Command of God; and even
where they are not certain that it is so. And indeed if an uncertain doubt did
but make it safe not to perform obedience, this would bring very great
confusion and disorder into the World, and would teach it the ready way, which
many would listen unto, how children might safely disobey their Parents, and
servants their Masters, as well as subjects their Governors. But since next to
the obeying God, we owe obedience to our superiors, even by the command of
God: no man can warrantably disobey them, but where he knows he has in that
Case, the Command or Authority of God to the contrary.

10. Thirdly, Whereas many persons are prone in general to account them, who
are least studious to comply with the authority of men, (though they be their
Governors) in matters of Religion, to be men of the greatest Conscience and
integrity, who do not affect the things of this World, nor aim at their own
interest therein: even this is a perfect misunderstanding, and a gross mistake.
For 1. Since the due performance of obedience in things lawful is a duty,
Performing obedience is a part of integrity and good Conscience.
there is more integrity and good Conscience in the peaceable practicing it,
than in the neglecting it. This may receive greater clearness by comparing it
with the parallel Case of obedience to Parents. Now that person who shall
forsake or disobey Father or Mother, in a necessary Case of Religion, acts as
one truly pious: but he who will be disobedient to his Parents in things
lawful, is far from showing himself thereby to be the better man, or the better
Christian; in that he may seem not to consult his own interest in the World, by
venturing to displease or provoke his Parents, and to lose those advantages and
favors, he might by a dutiful carriage receive from them. Notwithstanding such
empty pretenses to plead for disobedience, we must acknowledge the truth of
what Hierocles asserted, Hier. in Pythag. p. 53.
even from the principles of equity and reason, that Parents are no where else
to be disobeyed, but where themselves are not obedient to the divine Precepts.
And the duty to Princes is of a like nature.

11. 2. They who seem to disregard their own interest, in some things in the
World, and not to desire the favor of their superiors, do not deserve to be
accounted the better or the wiser men; unless this be done in the necessary
discharge of duty to God, and the keeping firm to the truth of Religion. In
those Cases forsaking Houses, and Lands, and Life, becomes a needful duty, but
it is not so at other times. Cont. Cells. l. 8. p. 420.
Origin tells us, that the Christians of his Age were not so far besides
themselves, and void of reason, as to displease and provoke Princes, further
than this was the effect of their observing the laws of God. Aug. de Haeres. c.
69. Cont. Gaud. Epist. l. 2. c. 15.
And the Schism of the Donatists, and especially the Circumcelliones, who were
furious and outrageous persons among them, has been never the better esteemed
in the Christian Church; because they not only withstood the laws of the
Christian Emperors against it, but were very prodigal in casting away their
own lives, to gain reputation to their party. That man who will spend or throw
away his Estate, in a contention with his equal, where it would better become
him to live in peace, is to be censured, not applauded: and to do the like in
contending with his superior, is the worse of the two; because the common
good, the peace of the Church and the duty of subjection, are herein concerned.
And he who has undervaluing thoughts of the approbation, favor and respect of
Governors, in the performance of his duty, cannot well have high thoughts of
the institution and ordinance of God, which appointed them for the praise of
them that do well. Romans 13.3. 1 Pet. 2.14.

12. 3. That man only acts as becomes a truly conscientious man, and a good
Christian, who is careful to avoid all sinful dispositions, without undue
affecting to please himself, or to oppose the ways of peace, or to seek
applause from any sort of men, in the neglect of his duty. And indeed the being
in vogue and reputation, with a particular company of men, is to some persons a
more prevailing temptation than the proposal of gain or public honor; of
which we have a plain example, even amongst the Apostles of our Savior. When
they had arrived so far, as that they could part with all their possessions,
and be content to undergo scorn and contempt, from the generality of their
Nation, for their Masters sake; they were so prone to affect the reputation of
being the greatest in their own Society, that they needed the watchful eye, and
frequent rebukes of their Savior, Luke 9.46, 47, 48. chapter 22.24, 25, 26. Mar.
10.44.
to check and curb this evil temper. And besides this there are those who make
use of the interest of a party, as a method of gain also, as is easily observed.

13. Wherefore the performing active obedience in lawful things, to the
Precepts of Superiors, is a duty which must not be neglected, by him who would
keep a good Conscience, since according to the will of God, we must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for Conscience sake.

Christian Loyalty. The Second Book. Of the Unlawfulness of Subjects taking
Arms against the King.
CHAP. I.
The public Forms of Declaration, against the lawfulness of resisting the King
by Arms, considered.
SECT. I.
Of the Oath of Allegiance or Obedience, and its disclaiming the Popes power of
deposing the King, or licensing his Subjects to offer any violence to his
Person, State, or Government.
1. THE preservation of Civil Governors, and the Peace of Kingdoms, is of so
great concernment, that the wisdom of Lawgivers has justly taken especial care
thereof. B. 2. C. 1.
And Tumults, Conspiracies and civil Wars, are usually attended with the
highest mischiefs; the violation of things Sacred, the banishing of natural
affection, and therewith Christian love, meekness, mercy, and the duties of
subjection; and the practicing murder, rapine, violence and lewdness. And
besides what every man may himself personally suffer, in such Calamities; the
dismal spectacles which his eyes may behold, the tragical relations which his
ears must hear, and the perplexing fears which may assault his mind; in the
lively sense of them, are effectual and astonishing convictions, of the
dreadfulness of tumultuous and treasonable Conspiracies, beyond all that can be
expressed concerning them.

2. But though the Christian Religion does firmly oblige men to peace,
obedience, and due submission; there are many persons who own that name, and
yet entertain positions, wholly inconsistent with the Precepts of that
Religion, and the safety of Princes and their Kingdoms. And therefore it is but
reasonable, that those who are admitted into any Office in the Church, and are
to teach and instruct others; and they who receive any Government in the State,
and have the power of commanding others, loyalty, and their detestation of such
positions, as undermine the security of Kings and Kingdoms. And to this purpose
is established in this Realm, a twofold acknowledgment; the one more particular
against Romish Conspiracies, and the other more general.

3. The former is contained in the Oath of Obedience or Allegiance, 3 Jac. 4.
The Oath of Allegiance, against the Popes deposing power.
which all the Clergy, and other principal subjects of this Realm do constantly
take. And therein it is declared, that the Pope has no power to depose the
King, or to dispose of his Dominions, to absolve his Subjects from their
Obedience, or to License them to bear Arms against, or offer violence to his
Person or Government; whether he proceed by Declaration, Sentence,
Excommunication, or any otherwise.

4. And indeed there was very great reason, to use needful circumspection, This
power of the Pope to depose Kings, assorted in the Church of Rome.
against the pretense of this Papal power of deposing Kings, which had appeared
with so great boldness in the World, and done so much mischief in it. And this
pretense is not only managed, as an intrigue of the policy of the Court of
Rome, but is engraffed into the doctrine of the Romish Church. Conc. Lat. c. de
haeret. an. 1215.
In the General Council (as they at Rome esteem it) at the Laterane, under
Innocent the Third, it was declared, that if any temporal Lord did not purge
his land from Heresy, he should be Excommunicated by the Metropolitan and
Bishops, and if he make not satisfaction within a year, the Pope shall
pronounce his subjects absolved from their fealty, and shall give his Country
to Catholics to possess it without any contradiction. And this Constitution
does not only respect such temporal Lords, Sheldon's Reasons for lawfulness of
Oath of Allegiance.
who have some inferior Dominions, without Sovereign dignity, as some of the
more loyally inclined Romanists would interpret it: but it also concerns
Sovereign Princes, as these words thereof will evince; eadem lege servata circa
eos, qui non habent dominos Principales.

5. In Council. Lugdun. an. 1245.
And in another reputed General Council, Innocent the Fourth did actually
pronounce this sentence, against Frederick the Second then Emperor; That as
Christ's Vicar, and by virtue of his having said to S. Peter, whatsoever thou
shall bind on earth, shall be bound in heaven, he did declare and denounce the
Emperor, for his sins. to be by God deprived of all honor and dignity,
adding, and nihilominus sententiando privamus. And thereupon he proceeds to
absolve his Subjects from their Oath of fealty, and by his Apostolical
Authority to Command them, that they yield him no obedience, help, or counsel,
as Emperor, and Decrees that all who shall do otherwise, shall be ipso facto
excommunicate. And this proceeding and sentence, Sext. Decr. l. 2. Tit. 14. c.
2.
And this proceeding and sentence, which was related by M. Paris, and from him
by Binius, in his account of this Council, was also taken into the Decrees of
the Canon Law.

6. And though Santarellus, and some few others, may have spoken more broadly
and expressly, and have been more taken notice of, by the public censures of
France; yet he who shall consult the generality of the Romish Writers, which
are most in vogue amongst themselves, will find them for some hundred years
past, to be asserters of these dangerous positions. So much do the Romish
Doctrines tend to the undermining the Rights and Authority of Princes. Bellarm.
adv. Barclainm, de Potest. Pap.
Cardinal Bellarmine produces the testimony, of toward fourscore of their
Writers, beginning from Gregory the Seventh, and Aquinas, for the asserting the
Popes temporal power, and almost all of them do indeed plainly own his power of
deposing Kings. And a further account is to the same purpose given, by Cardinal
Perron. In the Jesuits Loyalty.
The same spirit has been since propagated; and in England the Treatises
lately written by that sort of men, against the lawfulness of taking the Oath
of Allegiance, because it disclaimeth this deposing power of the Pope, are open
to public view: and the first of those Treatises undertaketh to prove, the
acknowledging this deposing power, to be a branch of the doctrine of the Romish
Church.

7. These Papal practices mischievous to the World. Platin. in Vit. Greg. 7.
Nor are these only words and opinions, but things which have been in many Ages
pernicious to the World. Since Gregory the Seventh, for six hundred years past,
the Roman Bishop has frequently by his Sentence and Excommunication,
undertaken to depose Kings and Emperors, to stir up Subjects to take Arms
against their Sovereigns, and even Children against their own Fathers; as was
done against the Emperor Henry the Fourth; and thereby dreadful Wars have been
often occasioned in many Countries, and especially in the Empire. And with
respect to England, some years before King John was forced to yield his Crown
to Pandulphus, the Popes Legate; the Pope undertook by his sentence to depose
him from being King, and to order that another person should succeed him, being
chosen by the Pope; M. Par. an. 1212.
as M. Paris expresses it, Sententialiter definivit, ut Rex Anglorum Johannes
a solio regni deponeretur, and alius Papa procurante succederet. And of later
times the Bull of Pius the Fifth against Queen Elizabeth, did presume to
deprive her of her Title to her Kingdom, and to Command her Subjects not to
obey her. And in her Reign, other Bulls and Breves were sent into England, to
the same purpose; and also to declare all persons, who were not of the Romish
Communion, to be excluded from the succession to the Crown. These things
together with several treasonable attempts of the Romish party (which were the
reducing this doctrine into practice) and particularly the Gunpowder-Treason,
made it needful to provide the Oath of Allegiance, wherein this dangerous
pretended power of the Pope is renounced. In Bellarm. Resp. ad Apolog. pro Jur.
Fidelitatis.
And since the forming that Oath, Paul the Fifth sent over his Breves, (and
Card. Bellarmine his Letters) declaring that this Oath could not be taken,
Salva fide Catholica, with the preservation of the Catholic Faith, and the
Salvation of their own Souls.

8. Now this pretended power of the Pope, if it had any real foundation, must
bear it self either upon his peculiar eminency and superiority over Princes,
even with respect to things temporal; or upon the force and virtue of the mere
spiritual power of Excommunication; or from the occasion thereof, the pretended
crimes of Heresy, Apostasy, or Infidelity, and their being so adjudged. The
Pope has no superiority over Princes, whereby he may deprive them of their
Dominions.
The first of these is that which the Popes themselves do much insist upon; as
appears from their own Instruments, Grants, and Bulls, relating to the deposing
Kings, and the disposing of Kingdoms and Countries. And it may be observed,
that the claim of the deposing power, upon account of a Sovereign Dominion, to
give and take away Kingdoms, does lay the rights of Kings at the mercy and
pleasure of the Pope; as other Officers and Dependents are at the pleasure of
the King in his Kingdom. Greg. 7. l. 8. Episc. 21 c. 15. q. 7. c. alius.
And then it must be also granted, that the Pope may deprive them, without
respect to any such Case Ecclesiastical, as Heresy, Excommunication, or
spiritual punishment of sin; and such a power was claimed by some Popes.

9. But having in the former Book, as I hope, sufficiently proved the Supremacy
of Kings in their Dominions, and disproved the superiority of the Pope over
them, it may be thence inferred, that no deposing power can possibly belong to
him upon this pretense: which also will receive further confirmation, from many
things in the following Chapters of this Book. Only I shall here take notice,
that as some other Scriptures are produced for this deposing power, which at
first sight appear to signify no such thing, as the instance of Jehoiada who
only acted the part of a faithful subject to Joash, Bishop Montagues Acts and
Monum. chapter 6. n. 26, 27. Gr. de Valent. Tom. 3. Disp. 1. Qu. 12. punct. 2. V.
and Bellarm. de Romans Pont. l. 5. c. 7.
against a cruel Usurper; and does not certainly appear to have been the High
Priest; so there is a peculiar Wire-drawn nicety, which some make use of, to
prove this deposing power from those words of our Savior, Joh. 21.16. Feed my
Sheep. Hence they argue, that it belongs to the office of a Pastor to drive
away Wolves; and therefore the chief Pastor may depose such Princes, who are
hurtful to the Church. And this same argument may also prove, that all Pastors
have the power of the Sword, and of making resistance, and of killing and
destroying men's lives, and exercising such Authority as the Kings of the
Gentiles did. But to this which will admit of many answers, it may be
sufficient to say. 1. That it is a great vanity to found an argument, upon the
straining a metaphorical expression, which only proves that they want better
proofs. As if all Christians from the same text might be concluded to be Fools,
because Sheep are silly Creatures: and that it is not fit that Christian
Kingdoms should defend themselves by Arms, against an invading Enemy, because
it agrees not with the nature of Sheep, to fight with Foxes or Wolves. 2. And
it is no part of the peculiar authority of a Shepherd, to drive away of Wolf;
which any Man, or Dog either, may warrantably do, as well as the Shepherd.

10. Gr. de Val. ubi supra. C. 15. qu. 7. c. nos sanctorum, etc. Juratos.
But it is pretended also, that those who are Excommunicated because of Heresy,
(or as some add for any other cause) do thereby lose their Dominion, and
Authority over their Subjects. And this is asserted and declared by Gregory the
Seventh, and Vrbane the Second. Now though the having disproved the authority
of the Bishop of Rome, to extend to this Kingdom, does sufficiently manifest,
that he has no more power to Excommunicate any Prince, or Subject of England
(having no Jurisdiction here) than a Bishop in England has, to Excommunicate
any Prince or Subject in Italy: yet I shall here take notice of some things
further concerning Excommunication, and also concerning Heresy. Concerning
Excommunication I shall observe,

II. Excommunication does not forfeit temporal rights.
First, That it is contrary to the nature of Excommunication, though in the
highest degree, that any person and especially a Sovereign Prince, should
thereby lose those temporal rights, which are not founded in their relation to
the Church. Indeed in Christian Kingdoms there are ordinarily some temporal
penalties, and abatement of legal privileges, inflicted upon the persons
excommunicate: but this is not the natural effect of that sentence, but is
added thereto by the civil Government and Sovereignty, under which such persons
do live. And therefore no such thing can take place with respect to Sovereign
Princes, who have no temporal superior, to annex this as a penalty.
Excommunication is a separating an Offender from the Christian Society of the
Church, not a casting him out of the World; it removes him as Tertullian
expresses it, Tertul. Ap. c. 39.
a communicatione orationis, and conventus, and omnis sancti Commercii; from
communicating in Prayer, Christian Assemblies, and all holy Commerce. But that
temporal rights are not thereby lost or forfeited, is acknowledged by some
considerable Writers of the Romish Church; Blackw. his Examination. 1607. n. 39.
as Richeome and Soto, who are cited with approbation by Blackwell.

12. This may be further manifest from the words of our Savior; wherein he
expresses the state and condition of a person Excommunicate, Mat. 18.17. Let
him be to thee as an Heathen man, and a Publican. Now supposing here that a
Christian Prince were Excommunicated; to be as an Heathen man is no more, than
to be as the Roman Governors were, to whom S. Paul and S. Peter enjoin
obedience, and to be as Tiberius himself was, toward whom our Savior commands
the performance of duty. The Publicans who received the Roman Tribute, were so
hateful to the Jews, that they would not eat with them; Hor. Hebr. in Mat. 5.
46.
they were accounted oppressive exactors, as the Jewish Rabbis declare, and
the words of S. John Baptist intimate, Luke 3.12, 13. And indeed they had so
general a reputation of injustice even amongst the Romans, that it was thought
a remarkable commendation of the Father of Vespasian, Suet. in Vesp. n. 1.
in the public Inscription upon the Statues erected in honor of him, (...),
that he was an honest Publican. But yet with respect to the civil rights of
tribute which they demanded, our Savior requires and commands to render unto
Caesar, the things that are Caesar's, Mat. 22.21.

13. Princes may not be Excommunicated as others may.
Secondly, I observe that Sovereign Princes, are not liable to the Sentence of
Excommunication, in the same manner with Christian Subjects. Though Princes
must be under the care and conduct of Ecclesiastical Pastors and Guides, yet
the duties of that relation must be discharged, with a reverent respect to the
state of subjection. And the different Case of a Prince and a subject, with
respect to Excommunication, may be discerned by distinct reflecting on the
causes, the effects, the end, and the manner of proceeding in Excommunication.
If we consider the causes or occasions of Excommunication; a Sovereign is
capable of losing, and forfeiting his relation to the Society of the Christian
Church, as well as other persons; Right of the Church. Chapter 4. p. 236.
because as Mr Thorndike observes, he as well as others comes into the
Communion of the Church, upon the terms and conditions of Christianity; and a
failure in the condition must make the effect void. Such was the Case of
Julian, who being an Apostate, and no longer embracing Christianity, had no
more any right to be accounted a Christian. The effect of Excommunication is
such, that it sometimes prohibits converse among private persons; except in
such relations, as do not depend upon the Society of the Church, and therefore
remain entire, notwithstanding the separation from that Society; as of Parents
and Children, Husband and Wife, Master and Servant. And upon this account,
Davenant. Determ. 48.
no subject can by virtue of Excommunication, be prohibited converse with, and
discharge of all duty and respect to his Sovereign; because this is that which
he owes him by the bond of Allegiance, and the laws of nature, humane Society
and civil polity.

14. And the end of all Ecclesiastical power, being for the good of the Church
and of Mankind, it being an authority for edification and not for destruction;
in all the acts thereof due caution ought to be used, in avoiding the
unnecessary exasperating those who are in chief authority, against the Officers
of the Church, which often occasioneth lamentable discords and contentions. V.
Barcl. de potest. Papae, c. 9. etc. 26.
And because the good of the Church consists chiefly in the advancement of
Piety, and Religious obedience, of which one branch is, the honoring and
obeying superiors and Governors; upon account of Christian piety all just
care must be taken, that no acts of Ecclesiastical authority, do render
Sovereign Princes the more disrespected, and disesteemed of their Subjects. And
upon this account also it is needful, that all Ecclesiastical Officers do
carefully avoid the suspicion, of undermining the secular rights of Princes,
which has been inordinately done in the Romish Church, under the pretense of
the power of the Keys, and of binding and loosing.

15. And lastly and chiefly, The manner of proceeding in the Sentence of
Excommunication, being ordinarily by a judicial process, and a public Judicial
sentence; and there being no Ecclesiastical Court or Person, who has any
superior power or authority over a Sovereign Prince, to Command or Summon his
appearing before them, to answer to what shall be objected against him; I
cannot see how, unless by his own consent, he should become subject to such
Judicial proceedings. The Bishop of Rome did indeed presume to summon Kings
before him; but this was an high act of his Usurpation. Whereas according to
the groundwork now laid, a Sovereign Prince cannot by any coactive
Ecclesiastical Power, become subject to such a sentence, and the open and
outward proceedings therein. But still Princes as well as any other persons,
must submit themselves to the power of the Keys, in undertaking the rules of
repentance; so far as they are needful for procuring the favor of God, and
obtaining the benefit of the Keys by Absolution; as was in a great part done,
in that memorable Case of Theodosius, Theod. Hist. l. 5. c. 17. Sozom. Hist.
Eccl. l. 7. c. 24.
upon the sharp rebuke of S. Ambrose. And though all Christians upon manifest
evidence, may in some Cases see cause to disown a Sovereign Prince (as was done
in Julian) from being any longer a Member of the Christian Society; yet in such
Cases this Membership cease, and is forfeited by his own act, and not
properly by a Judicial sentence, and formal Process. Gr. de Val. Tom. 3. Disp.
3. Qu. 15. Punct. 3.
And some of the Romish Writers go much this way in giving an account, how the
Bishop of Rome whom they suppose to be superior to all men on Earth may be
reason of Heresy or such Crimes, be deprived of Christian Communion.

16. Heresy does not deprive men of all temporal rights. Valent. T. 3. Disp. 1.
Qu. 10. P. 8. and qu. 11. P. 3. and qu. 12. p. 2.
Concerning Heresy, it might be sufficient in this Case to observe, that those
who in Communion with the Church of England, embrace that true Christian
Doctrine, which was taught in the Primitive and Apostolical Church, are as far
from being concerned in the crime and guilt of Heresy, as loyal Subjects are,
from being chargeable with Rebellion. But that assertion which some Romish
Writers embrace, that Heretics are ipso facto, deprived of all temporal
rights, Layman. The Mor. l. 2. Tr. 2. c. 16.
and superiority, ( etiam ante judicis sententiam, say some) is necessary to be
rejected. For this is a position that would ruin the Peace of the World, when
it would put every party upon seizing the possessions of all, whom they account
Heretics, as having a just right so to do. And this is certainly false,
because temporal Dominion is not originally founded, in the entertaining the
true Doctrine of Religion, or the Faith of Christianity, since S. Paul required
subjection to the Pagan Rulers, as being ordained of God, Romans 13.1, -- 7. Had
this been true, the Scribes and Pharisees, who were guilty of Heresy, could not
have sat in Moses Seat, nor ought Constantius and Valens to have been
acknowledged, as they always were by the Christian Church, for Sovereign
Princes.

17. That damnable doctrine and position, Suar. in Reg. Brit. l. 6. c. 6. Vide
Arnaldi Oration. cont. Jesuitas in Cur. Parlam. Sixth. 5. in Orat. in Consist.
Romans Comolet. in Arnald. Orat. ubi sup.
which is abjured in the Oath of Allegiance, as impious and heretical; That
Princes which be Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects, or any other whatsoever, is owned and asserted,
even, with respect to the murdering them by several Popish Doctors, and by some
of them as a thing most highly meritorious. Among whom also the murdering of
Princes is approved, if they be only thought remiss, and not zealous in
carrying on the interest of the Romish Church: and on this account, the horrid
murder of Hen. 3. and Hen. 4. of France, has been applauded and commended by
diverse of them. But the wickedness of all such assertions and practices, will
be abhorred by all loyal and Christian Spirits, and will I hope be plainly
manifested, from the following part of this discourse.

18. And whereas this Doctrine and Position is abjured as Heretical, Of
Heretical Doctrines.
the phrase Heretical, must be here taken in a proper and strict sense. But
when the Scriptures or ancient Fathers speak of Heresy, or Heretical Doctrines
strictly and properly they thereby understand such Positions, which under the
profession of Christianity, do so far oppose and undermine the true Christian
Doctrine, as to bring those who maintain and practice these things, to the
ways of destruction. Thus those Doctrines were by S. Peter esteemed damnable
Heresies, which were proposed by false Teachers, and were pernicious and
destructive, both to them, and to those who followed them, Ignat. ad Trallian.
2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. Ignatius also describes Heresy to be a strange Herb, no
Christian food, which joineth the name of Christ with corrupt doctrines ( quae
and inquinatis implicat Jesum Christum, in the Latin published by Bishop Usher,
by which the Medicean Greek, (...), which is certainly amiss, and concerning
which, both Vossius and P. Junius add their different conjectures, may be
corrected: for that Copy out of which this Latin was translated, seems to
have read, (...). etc.) as they who give a deadly poison with wine and honey,
which may please and yet kill. And Tertullian accounted such assertions to be
Heresy, as undermine the Faith, Tert. de Praescript. c. 2, 5.
and lead to eternal death; and where the Teachers of them, though they profess
the name of Christ, do corrupt his Doctrine, and are Adulteri Evangelizatores.
In like manner S. Austin owneth him to be an Heretic, Aug. de Civ. Dei, l. 18.
c. 51.
who under the Christian name resists the Christian Doctrine, and persisteth
in maintaining dogmata pestifera and mortifera; pestilent and deadly opinions.
And when Aquinas treated of Heresy, 22ae. q. 11. a. 2. o.
he declared that the import thereof is, the corruption of the Christian Faith.
Nor would it be difficult to add a numerous Company of approved Writers to the
same purpose.

19. Doctrines allowing Subjects or others to depose or murder Princes, are
Heretical.
Now since the Popes depriving power has been disproved, this Position here
abjured is not only false, but according to this notion of Heresy, it is
properly an Heretical Position. For this justifies the highest disobedience
and resistance of Superiors, though the Apostle declares that such shall
receive to themselves damnation. This gives liberty to the greatest acts of
unrighteousness toward Princes, and consequently toward their Subjects, and
the whole Community, although the doctrine of Christianity declares, that the
unrighteous cannot inherit the Kingdom of God. It also gives way to the wicked
practices of murder, The like Position in the Arrest of the Parl. of Paris
against Chastell, was condemned as heretical. And on these accounts in Greg. 7.
Plerisque Episcopis pestifera haeresis visa est. Aventin. Annal. Boior. l. 5.
and breaking the peace and order of the World, under most heinous
aggravations, though all this be severely decryed and condemned in the
Christian Doctrine. And it allows of the most signal instances of
perfideiousness, notwithstanding the obligations in this Case to fidelity, from
the divine Precepts; the reverence of an Oath; the respect to Gods Ordinance,
by which Rulers are established; and the interest of the common good. And after
all this to aver that any thing of Christ's institution and appointment, does
give a Warrant to, and approbation of these impieties, is a Position both
heretical and blasphemous, concerning the Government of our Savior. Now not
only those assertions which directly contradict the Articles of our Creed, but
those also which oppose the necessary Rules and Precepts of a holy life, which
are a considerable part of the Christian Faith and Doctrine, have generally
been esteemed heretical doctrines in the Church of God. Thus those assertions
of Simon Magus, Epiph. Haer. 21, 25, 26.
the Gnostics and the Nicolaitans, whereby they gave allowance to impure and
unclean practices, have ever been reckoned among their heretical doctrines.
Ibid. Haer. 47. and 61.
Such also were accounted the Positions condemning Marriage, by the Encratitae
and Apotactici, and the rejecting all proper possessions and Dominion by the
latter of them; with many other things of like sort.

20. But some may incline to think, that wicked assertions contrary to the
Faith and Doctrine of Christianity, ought not to be accounted heretical, unless
they be so adjudged and declared by a Catholic Council. Now here I
acknowledge, that with respect to external penalties to be inflicted on
Heretics, such Rules have often times been reasonably observed. And it must also
be granted, that in what Church soever truth and a zeal for Religion is
maintained, it may well be expected, that spurious and dangerous Doctrines
which openly spring up therein, will be there detested and condemned, and the
authoritative sentence of lawful Councils ought to be reverenced. But it cannot
be, that in the inward nature of the thing, the being of an heretical doctrine
must depend on such a Declaration. Had this been true, the first Broachers and
secret Spreaders of all Heresies, how impious soever they were, could not be
forthwith chargeable with Heretical doctrine. And if the Catholic Bishops were
either wanting to their duties; or by any extraordinary emergency were in an
incapacity of meeting in Council; or else were over-voted in the Council, as it
happened in the Synod of Ephesus concerning Eutyches, and in many other
Heretical Conventions; this would excuse from Heresy the Teachers of the most
wicked doctrines, though they propagated them and persisted in them to their
lives end. And if the determination of an Ecumenical Council should be thought
necessary, to the asserting any doctrine to be Heretical; then could there be
no Heresies in the first three hundred years after Christ, unless it should be
in opposition to the things declared in that Council, Acts 15. if that should
be supposed general. Then also Irenaeus, Tertullian, and others of the Fathers
were unadvised, in their undertaking to write against Heresies, which there
never had been any such things. And then it must be asserted also that Arius
was falsely accused of Heresy, before the meeting of the Council of Nice. And
what in its nature is not Heresy, cannot be truly so adjudged.

21. Practices of difloyalty condemned by Councils.
Yet the substance of this Position here rejected and abjured, has been also
censured and condemned by Christian Councils. In the beginning of the Primitive
Church, it cannot reasonably be expected that such things should be condemned
by Councils, because no such positions were then defended, nor any such wicked
undertakings against Princes than practiced, by the Professors of Christianity.
But after that disloyal and treacherous practices were entertained, they were
earnestly censured and condemned by diverse Councils. In the fourth Council of
Toledo it was declared, Conc. Tolet. 4. c. 74.
that whosoever should violate their Oaths, made for the preservation of the
King, or should attempt his death, or the deposing him from his Kingdom,
qualibet conjuratione aut studio, by any Covenant or design whatsoever, should
be Anathema from the presence of God, and have no Society with his Church.
Conc. Tolet. 5. c. 2.
And much to the same purpose was declared in the fifth and other following
Councils of Toledo. And in a Synod of all England, in which also the Popes
Legates were present, In Conc. Calcuthens. an. 787. c. 12. in Spelm.
a like dreadful Curse is denounced against them who shall violate the Majesty
of Princes, and also that they who shall consent to such a sacrilege, as to
take away the life of the King, shall perish with an everlasting Curse, and
being Companions with Judas, shall be burnt with eternal fire. And in the
Council of Constance, Conc. Constant. Sess. 15.
that assertion, that an ill governing Prince may lawfully or meritoriously be
killed, by his subject or Vasal, was condemned as erroneous in faith and
manners, and rejected as heretical, scandalous. etc.

22. It is confessed indeed, that there is no particular clause in these
Councils now produced, for condemning these treasonable acts, in this special
Case of the Popes pretended deprivation: But yet the former Councils take in
all Cases without exception, and no such Papal power was ever pretended to in
those days. And though the Council of Constance has a reservation, of a
dangerous aspect, concerning the sentence of a judge: yet since the Pope is in
truth no judge to depose Princes, the pretense hereof can no more mend the
matter; than the censure of the High Priest against our Savior, Apud Brixinam
Hildebrandum Haereseoscondemnam. Avent. l. 5. p. 460. Urspergens. ad ann. 1080.
and 1085.
could vindicate Judas for betraying him, or the Jews for Crucifying him. Yet
still it is easy to produce several Councils who since the appearance of this
haughty Papal claim of deposing Princes, have with particular respect thereto,
declared against this impious doctrine, which is detested by them who take the
Oath of Allegiance. When this Papal Usurpation was first put in practice, by
Greg. 7. against Henry 4. Emperor, there were Councils at Mentz, Ticinum, and
Brixia, and others after them, who still condemned all those who in that Case
acted against the Emperor. And the consideration of the Popes pretense, was
also included in that general Declaration in our own Church, Can. 1. 1640.
against Subjects bearing Arms against their King, upon any pretense
whatsoever. And these Councils though disallowed at Rome, were in this respect
truly Catholic, because they held to the Rules and Foundations of the true and
Primitive Doctrine of the Catholic Church.

23. But it is unreasonable to demand, This Heretical Position entertained by
the Pope and his Adherents.
that for the declaring this to be Heresy, we should produce the determination
of the present Church of Rome, against this detestable Position, since the Pope
and the main part of the Romish church, are the persons who stand chargeable
with maintaining, either the whole, or at least a considerable part, of this
heretical position here abjured. For in this Position, That Princes which be
Excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may he deposed or murdered by their
Subjects or any other whatsoever; the two main branches do concern the deposing
and the murdering of Princes deprived or Excommunicated by the Pope. Touching
the former, the deposing of them, the very forms of the Papal sentence which I
have above mentioned, Supra n. 5, and 7.
not only allow but require and command that such Princes be deposed, and that
their Subjects do renounce all fealty and Allegiance to them. Aventin. Ann.
Boior. l. 5. p. 460. Epist. Leodiens. advers. Paschal. 2.
And by the Pope, his Conclave, and their Adherents, it has been accounted a
crime deserving Excommunication and Death also, for Subjects to defend their
Sovereign whom the Pope had sentenced, as was long since complained of, by some
of them who maintained their Allegiance to the Emperor, Hen. 4. and were
therefore by the Pope devoted to destruction.

24. Yet it is certain, that there have been and are diverse persons, and the
chief part of some Countries of the Romish Communion, who own not, but oppose
that part of this assertion, which concerns the deposing of Princes. Le Merc.
Franc. an. 1609.
But several Writings of this sort of men, as of Barclay de potestate Papae,
and others of the like temper, have undergone a public censure at Rome; and
their opinions are herein looked on with so ill an eye, that at Rome they are
thought not to be altogether found in the Roman Faith.

25. And touching the depriving such Princes of their lives; Bell. Resp. ad p.
66. Apolog. pro juram. fidelit.
when Cardinal Bellarmine had asserted, that it was not the Popes method, to
promote any thing against their lives, he explains himself, that he meant this
with respect to private assassinates, and not to what might happen in the
raising open Wars. But yet concerning the more secret attempts of Parricide
against such Princes: C. 23. q. 5. Excommunicatorum.
1. Their Canons declare, that they are not accounted Murderers, who in a zeal
to the Catholic Church, do kill some who are Excommunicate. 2. The horrid act
of James Clement, who murdered Henry the Third of France, was applauded by
Sixtus the Fifth, in the Roman Consistory. 3. Le Mercure Francois. an. 1609. f.
376.
The arrest of the Parliament of Paris against John Chastell, who attempted the
murder of Henry the Fourth, and wounded him, was censured at Rome by a public
Edict, Nov. 9. 1609. 4. When Parry undertook to kill Queen Elizabeth, Eliz.
Annal. Christian. Subjection. Part. 3. p. 503, 504.
his intention was not only promoted by the Popes Nuncio's, and other persons
in Venice and France; but desiring for his full satisfaction, to understand the
Popes approbation, by a Letter from Cardinal di Como, which was read at his
Arraignment, and owned by him, he was assured, that the Pope himself highly
praised and favored his undertaking, as may appear from the Letter it self in
Bishop Bilson, dated Januar. 30. 1584. And to these, other things of like
nature, and of later time might be added, which will show that at least at some
times such things as these have been encouraged at Rome.

26. Yet it may be observed, that such Positions as this expressed in this
Oath, But it was declared to be damnable Heresy by S. Peter.
were in general accounted and declared damnable Heresies, by one who is owned
to have had both Apostolical and Episcopal Authority at Rome, even by S. Peter
himself. When he had foretold the comeing in and spreading of damnable
Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2. and declared the destruction that should come upon
those who received them, v. 1, 3, 4, 9. he then tells us in some particulars
who they are whom God will thus punish, v. 10. chiefly them who walk after the
flesh, in the lusts of uncleanness, and despise Government; presumptuous are
they, self-willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities. Now the
walking in the lusts of uncleanness, was the practical embracing the impure and
heretical doctrines of Simon Magus, the Gnostics, and others like them. And
since Government and Dignities do very properly express Civil, as well as
Ecclesiastical, or any other power; and the temper of those who are prone to
despise Civil Government, is fitly described by their being presumptuous and
self-willed; and S. Jude in the parallel place, Jude 8, 11. speaks of their
perishing in the gainsaying of Core; these words may reasonably be thought, to
have a great respect to Civil Authority. And if we further consider, that among
those ancient Heretics, some under a pretense of liberty, so far opposed
Dominion, that they despised their Masters, and would not obey them; the
allowing of which S. Paul condemns, as a great opposition to the doctrine of
Christ. 1 Timothy 6.1, 2, 3, 4. and that there is some intimation of the same
spirit, toward Kings and other Governors, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 16. and that at
last this proceeded so far, that they taught that the Government of the World
had its original not from God, but from the evil spirit (which Position
Irenaeus confutes) this may well persuade and manifest, Iren. adv. Haeres. l.
5. c. 24. Tertul. adv. Valent. c. 22.
that the Apostle had in this palce an eye to these things. And then this sense
must be comprehended nder these words, that those assertions which eminently
include the despising, disobeying, and speaking evil of civil Government and
Authority (as the declaring it lawful to depose, or murder a Sovereign does)
are damnable Heresies.

27. I only add, that pertinaciousness, which is included in the description of
an Heretic, having respect to the temper of the person, who embraces
Heretical Doctrine, is not needful (though it be also in this Case sufficiently
evident) to prove a Position to be Heretical.

28. Of absolveing from the Oath of Allegiance.
I shall not insist particularly on that clause in the Oath of Allegiance, That
neither the Pope, nor any person whatsoever, has power to absolve from that
Oath; because this must stand and fall with the deposing power. For the
absolving Subjects from the Oath of Allegiance, must be presumed to be to this
end, that such persons should be no longer obliged to acknowledge the
Authority, or perform the duty, which is therein expressed and contained: and
the best of their own Writers do found the Popes Authority of dischargeing
Subjects from such Oaths and Duties, upon the effect of his deposing or
depriveing power. And it must be granted, that if the Pope cannot depose a
Prince, as is sufficiently evinced that he cannot; then Princes have a right of
governing, notwithstanding all the Pope can do, and his Subjects are then bound
by the divine law, to perform Allegiance, though they should never have taken
any special Oath to that purpose. But if the Prince could be indeed deposed by
the Pope, and consequently has no longer a right of governing; I acknowledge
that any other man as well as the Pope, may pronounce the duties and obligation
of subjection to cease, Ruler and Governor.

SECT. II.
Of the Unlawfulness of taking Arms, upon any pretense whatsoever, against the
King.
1. The more general acknowledgment, for the preservation of the Kings safety
is, That it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against
the King. And that I do abhor that traitorous position, of taking Arms b his
Authority against his person, or against those that are commissionated by him.
this profession is required by the Act. of Uniformity to be made by all the
Clergy, and the same thing in sense, is enjoined upon all civil and military
Officers. And here I shall distinctly consider the several clauses; which are
all to be interpreted, with respect to the end and design of them, which is the
preservation and just security, of the Kings person and government, and the due
performance of the Subjects Loyalty. Of the unlawfulness upon any pretense to
take Arms against the King.


2. The first clause, that it is not lawful, upon any pretense whatsoever, to
take Arms against the King, is the chief and principal part of this
acknowledgment: which in the due latitude of its sense, does include what is
more particularly expressed in the following words. And the sense of this is
nothing more, than what the Church of England, and the eminent members thereof,
has constantly acknowledged. Our Homilies teach, Hom. of Obedience. Part. 2.
that it is not lawful for inferiors and subjects in any Case, to stand
against and resist the superior power. Can. 1. Concerning Regal Power.
And in the Canons 1640. it was declared, that for subjects to bear Arms
against their Kings, offensive or defensive, upon any pretense whatsoever, is
at the least to resist the powers, which are ordained of God: and though they
do not invade, but only resist, S. Paul tells them plainly, they shall receive
to themselves damnation. And to the same sense the University of Oxford
hereafter mentioned.

3. This clause of acknowledgment, being framed and enjoined by an English
Parliament, not without respect to the disloyal and unchristian proceedings in
this Nation, and tendered to English Subjects, and relating particularly to the
King, not indefinitely to any King; can bear no other rational construction,
than to condemn the English Subjects taking Arms against their natural
Sovereign, the King of England. And therefore, though the like attempts against
any other Kings, who enjoy Sovereign Authority are equally blameable in their
Subjects; yet this Position does not assert the utter unlawfulness of taking
Arms, amongst any other Nations, against him who has the title of King, if he
does not therewith enjoy that right of supreme government, which our Kings have
and exercise. And therefore in such a Constitution of government as the
Lacedemonian was, Plut. in Pausan.
in which Pausanias had the title of a King under the Ephori, but with as much
distance from Royal Power and Supremacy, as was in the military Imperator, or
General among the Romans, from the Dignity of an Emperor; we are not concerned
to determine any thing concerning their Rights. Plin. Not. Hist. l. 6. c. 22.
The like condition of the Kings of Tabrobana, is mentioned by Pliny; and
others have given somewhat a like account concerning some other places. But
against a Sovereign Prince, all open Hostility, and secret treachery in his
Subjects, is Universally to be esteemed utterly unlawful.

4. And it might be wished, Violence has too ost been offered to Princes.
that there had never been in England, or elsewhere, any such treacherous and
disloyal actions, or assertions (from which the true Friends of the Church of
England have been free) as should render it exceeding needful, to make use of
the greatest care and caution, for the preservation of the persons of Princes.
But alas! the wretched practices against our late Dread Sovereign, are equally
manifest and horrid: and the too forward proneness of vicious men to entertain
rebellious designs, both under Paganism, Judaism, Mahometanism, and
Christianity, might afford matter enough for multiplied Tragedies. I shall
forbear many instances which might be given, both in our own and many other
Kingdoms, and shall only reflect on that temper and spirit, which has
prevailed in Rome and Scotland.

5. De Civ. Dei, l. 3. c. 15.
In the first rise of the Roman Power, it was observed by S. Austin, that of
their Kings which reigned before the Consuls, there were only two, Numa
Pompilius, and Ancus Martius, who died of any Disease, if so much may be
affirmed of both them. Suet. in Calig. n. 58. Claudio n. 44. Ner. n. 49. Galb.
n. 19. Othon. n. 11. Vitell. n. 17.
And Suctonius who writes the lives of the twelve first Caesar's, shows, that
besides Julius Caesar, and Domitian, no less than six of them who immediately
succeeded one another, even all from Tiberius to Vespasian, had their Deaths
procured either by secret treachery or open assaults: and that there were
suspicions concerning, and frequent Conspiracies against others of them. And of
later times, omitting many other instances, and the Rebellions in other
Countries which was the fruit of the doctrine, propagated from Rome since Greg.
7. I shall only add, Extrav. Joh. Tit. 12. c. 1.
that though Ancona be under the government of the Popes Officers, and lies
near the Gates of Rome, the Inhabitants thereof are complained of, in one of
the Summaries of their Canon Law to this purpose, soliti sunt rectores
interficere, it is usual with them to kill their Governors. And it has been
observed, that the Scots in the succession of somewhat above an hundred
Princes, have killed betwixt thirty and forty of them.

6. And hence it may appear, that that Genius and temper which has too much
prevailed in Rome and Scotland, was such as disposed them to show no very great
respect unto Princes: and this may possibly have had some influence upon the
Conclave in the one, and the Kirk in the other. And indeed where bad notions or
inclinations get a through entrance, they are apt to propagate, and are not
easily rooted out. Thus S Hierome observes, Hier. Prooem. in lib. 2. Comment.
ad Galat.
that Galatia which too readily embraced corrupt doctrines in the Apostles
times, notwithstanding S. Paul's Epistle to them, continued to be a place prone
to Heresy unto his time. And the Church of corinth was so apt to fall into
Divisions and Schisms, that notwithstanding the Apostles severe rebukes of them
for that sin, they were soon after his Death, Clem. Romans Ep. ad Cor.
strangely overrun with it again, to the great disparagement of their
Christian profession.

7. Of the undutiful carriage of the Kirk of Scotland, I gave a considerable,
and known instance, in the former Book. And that they at Rome do cast high
disrespects, and create great danger to Princes, may be discerned both by the
former Book, and by the foregoing Section.

8. Positions of Fanaticism and Jesuicism disloyal.
And besides these matters of Jact and practice, it has been manifest, that
many wild, extravagant, and disloyal Positions, which are dangerous and
destructive to Government and humane Society, have been asserted by men of a
Fanatic strain and temper; of some of which, I shall have occasion to take
more particular notice, in the progress of this discourse. De Jur. Mag. in
Subd. qu. 6. Junius Brut. Vind. Qu. 2. Rutherf. of Civil Policy. Qu. 9, 31, 32,
etc.
Some of them assert, that the people in general may take the Power and
Government into their own hands, and deprive and punish their governors when
they see cause; others grant this power only to the persons who are the peoples
representatives, others fix the same in inferior Officers, with respect to the
supreme governor. And others have run on so far, as to yield this pwoer to the
meanest part of the people, as was asserted by an Anonymous Scotchman, about
the time of the Galloway Rebellion, that in the right of self defense, the
concourse of the Nobles, or the Primores Regni, is no way of absolute necessity.

9. And amongst the Papists, they who are of the Jesuitical strain, do not only
embrace those notions of the Popes deposing power, to the great prejudice of
Sovereign Princes Authority and safety: but they also run into the highest
strain of Fanaticism, in violating the majesty of Kings, and subjecting them
and their authority to the people. De Rege l. 1. c. 6.
Thus Mariana when the Prince is accounted by the people to pervert his
government, allows to them the liberty of public resistance by open War: and
also the use of Private violence, commending the treasonable Murder of Hen. 3.
of France, by James Clement; and allows very man to set himself against such a
Prince, whom he calls a Tyrant, saying, Ibid. c. 3.
tanquam fera omnium telis peti debet. He also (such are the wicked and
wretched principles of these Jesuits!) approves the use in this Case of deceit
and fraud, yea and of poison, by poisoning his Seat or Clothes. But that we may
think there is something of Conscience remaining in such a spirit as this: he
condemns, Ibid. c. 7.
and declares against the giving such a person poison, in his meat and drink,
for this doughty reason, because it is, says he, against humanity, that he
should be put upon contributing to his own Death, by any act of his own, which
he would here do, by taking this poison in his food. But sure this man's reason
was as far from him as Conscience, when he wrote these things, in his not
discerning, that there was altogether as much done, in contributing to his own
death, by putting on his poisoned Clothes.

10. ^ess. de Just. and Iure, l. 2. c. 9. ^ub. 4. Becan. de jure and Just. ad
Qu. 64. D. Thom. qu. 4.
And Lessius and M. Becanus, two other Jesuits, in this particular agree almost
word for word with one another, in asserting these Positions. that a Prince who
has a just title, becomes a Tyrant with respect to the administration of his
Government, when he designs in his Government, and aims at his private
advantage, and not the public good, and burdens the commonwealth with unjust
exactions, sells the offices and places of Judges; and makes Laws to his own
advantage, and not the public. That when this Tyranny is no longer fit to be
born, this Prince is first to be deposed, or to be declared an enemy by the
Commonwealth, or the chief Estates of the Kingdom, or by any other who has
authority, and then he thereby cease to be a Prince, and it becomes lawful to
attempt any thing against his person and life. That so long as he remains a
Prince (that is, till such acts be done as are now mentioned) he may not be
killed by private persons, unless it be for their necessary self defense. And
Lessius says, in another place, Dubit. 8.
for the further clearing his sense in this particular, that for the necessary
defending a man's own life, or securing himself from being maimed, it is lawful
to kill him who sets upon him himself, or procures another to do it. And this,
says he, must be owned allowable against any superiors whatsoever, even that
a Vasal may in this Case kill his King: unless it be likely that civil Wars may
follow for discord about succession. And in such an high strain of treason and
Unchristian disloyalty, is the Jesuits Casuistical Divinity! But against the
falsehood and wickedness of these assertions, it is needful to declare, and
defend the true and peaceable principles of Reason and Christianity; and
against the dangerous effects which such positions tend to promote, it is
necessary that public laws provide due security for the person of the King, to
which purpose the general acknowledgment of the unlawfulness of taking up Arms
against him, The Laws of England condemnall Waragainst the King.
is of very good use.

11. Our English Laws providing for the safety both of King and Subjects, and
the preservation of their just Rights, do declare it universally unlawful to
make or levy any War against the King, And upon this account it must also be as
much against reason, and Christianity (yea more, both because of the greater
duty to superiors, and the concern of the general good) to invade that Right
and Royalty, which the Law secures to the King, as to deny to Subjects that
property, right and safety, which the Law provides for them. I confess the
consideration of our Law in matters of doubtfulness, difficulty, or profound
disquisition, would be an unfit undertaking for my profession, and especially
for a man of no deeper study in the Law than my self. But I am persuaded, that
if no men had made use of subtle Artifices, and designed methods, to obscure
plain things, there would have been no want of evidence, even to any ordinary
understanding in this particular, to direct them to the honest practices of
their duty in loyal obedience. And indeed it would be an high reflection on the
Laws of our Realm, if such things as these, should be acknowledged to be
matters of such a perplexed intricacy, that honest and indifferent minds, who
stand obliged to the practice of peace and loyalty, should not without
consulting skillful Lawyers, be able to understand the general rule of their
duty, and to whom they ought to yield obedience and submission.

12. Besides the words of this public Declaration and acknowledgment, against
lawfulness of taking Arms, which yet might be accounted sufficient; in the
Statutes in the time of King Edw. the third, ^t Edw. 3.2.
it is declared, without allowance of any case or pretense to the contrary, to
be treason, if any man do levy War against our Lord the King in his Realm, or
be adherent to the Kings enemies in his Realm, giving them aid or comfort in
the Realm or elsewhere. 13 Car. 2.1.
And since the restoration of his present Majesty, it is also in general terms
declared treason, to levy War against the King, within the Realm or without.
And to cut off all pretenses, either from the nature of the War as defensive
only, or from the authority of a Parliament, or of the Lrods, or commons, we
have in two several Statutes this Declaration, 13 Car. 2.6.
that both, or either Houses of Parliament, cannot, nor lawfully may, raise or
levy any War, offensive or defensive, 14 Car. 2.3.
against his Majesty, his Heirs and lawful Successors. In which Statutes also,
the sole supreme Command and Government of the Militia, is declared by the Law
of England, ever to be the undoubted right of his Majesty and his Predecessors,
Kings and Queens of England.

13. And from the Declaration and evidence of these Laws, that Plea which has
been made, from the Authority of Grotius, becomes wholly void. Grot. de J. B.
and P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 13.
That learned man indeed did assert, that if the supreme Government be part in
the people or Senate, and part in the King: if the King invade what is not his
right, he may be opposed with just force, because he has not so far any
Supremacy. And this he thinks must take place, though it be said, that the
power of War is in the King; for that, says he, is only to be understood of
Foreign War, when whosoever has any pat in the supreme power, cannot but have
a right to defend that part. But these words seem very strange and
inconsiderate, from so intelligent a person, if they be intended, as they seem
to be, concerning one simple and unmixt supremacy. For to assert two capacities
where each has authority to make War with the other, is not to found one only
regular Government, but to erect two distinct Governments, each of which have a
supreme power of judging and of execution. Indeed in such a mixed and divided
Government, as is in the German Empire, it is allowed by the Constitutions and
Capitulations of the Empire, that the several Principalities, or rather the
Princes and Governors thereof, have a power of taking Arms, if their rights
be invaded by the Emperor: but then these Princes in their own territories,
enjoy a right of peculiar Sovereignty. But if the whole of this notion of
Grotius be taken together, it will according to his judgment conclude, that the
people of England, Lords, Commons, or both jointly, have no part in the supreme
power; because these public Laws declare, that they have no power of making so
much as a defensive War, against the King.

14. And if we look into the Records of the former Ages, we may thence discern,
that no Subjects whatsoever of this Realm, had under any pretense an Authority
to bear Arms against the King. To which purpose it may be sufficient to
consider the Conclusion of the Barons Wars, in the latter end of the Reign of
King Henry the Third. Very many of the Peers and chief Barons of the Realm,
undertook to make War with the King, under the Conduct of Simon de Montfort
Earl of Leicester, M. Par. An. 1264.
whom M. Paris calls Baronum Capitaneum, and after several Battles had been
fought, the Kings person was seized and taken at Lewis. And not long after
this, Idem, an. 1265.
the King Summons a Parliament at Winchester, in which all those who acted
under, or with Simon de Montfort are disinherited: Sir W. Raleigh Priv. of
Parl. p. 31.
which act of disinheriting is reported to have been confirmed, in a following
Parliament at Westminster. But in order to the settling the State of the Realm
upon more mild and gentle terms, by agreement between the King and the Barons,
a Plenipotentiary Power was delegated and committed to twelve Peers, that they
might establish what they thought fit and convenient, concerning them who thus
stood disinherited.

15. These twelve published their determination, An. 51 H. 3. Dict. de Kenilw.
c. 2.
which had the force of a Law, under the name of Dictum de Kenilworth. In which
it was concluded, that they who had been engaged in Arms against the King,
unless the King had pardoned them, should pay the revenue of their lands for
five years. And they who had no Lands, were to give their own Oath, and to find
other Sureties for their peaceable behavior; and also make such satisfaction,
and undergo such penance as the Church should appoint. Ibid. c. 9.
And that they who were Tenants should lose their right in their Farms, C. 11.
saving the right of their Lords. And that they who by their persuasion did
instigate any to fight against the King, should forfeit the profit of their
Lands for two years; with many other provisions for particular Cases. And they
also determined, that if any persons should refuse these terms (which were
proposed as a favorable mitigation of strict justice) they should be de
exhaeredatis, C. 29.
and have no power of recovering their Estates. But some persons and
particularly Simon de Montfort himself, C. 21.
was excluded from these terms of favor, and left to the ordinary proceedings
of justice, in manus Regis. Now those practices and enterprises which were so
publicly censured, condemned and punished, by our Parliaments, and proceedings
of justice, must needs be accounted by them unlawful actings.

16. In the year following. An. 52 Hen. 3. the Statute of Marlbridge mentions
it, St. Marlbridge, c. 1.
as a great and heavy mischief and evil, that in the time of the late troubles
in England, many Peers and others, refused to receive justice from the King and
his Court, as they ought to have done (which is more expressly contained in the
Original Latin, than in the common English Translation, justitiam indignati
fuerint recipere, per Dominum Regem and curiam suam, prout debuerunt and
consueverunt) and did undertake to vindicate their own causes of themselves.
Now to declare that all Peers, and all other persons, ought to have received
justice only from the King and his Courts; and not to revenge themselves, or be
Judges in their own Cases; does more especially condemn the entering into War it
self, which is an undertaking founded upon a direct contrary proceeding. And
thus far we have a sufficient censure in our English Laws, upon that War
against the King, which those who have pleaded for the lawfulness of Subjects
taking Arms, do account the most plausible instance for their purpose, which
our Chronicles can furnish them with. And it is needless to go about to prove,
that many other Conspiracies and Rebellions, have been justly condemned and
punished, according to their demerit.

17. And whereas unchristian and evil actions, Some pretenses shortly reflected
on.
may often be carried on under some fair colors and appearances; all such
pretenses for taking Arms against the King, are in this acknowledgment
disclaimed: the truth of which will be justified in the following Chapters. And
I shall here only shortly reflect, upon some few of those pretenses which are
commonly made.

18. Some have accounted the defense of Religion, to be a sufficient Warrant
for taking Arms. But if the Christian Religion gives a right to him who
professes it, to defend himself and his profession, against his Superiors by
Arms; then must not our Religion be a taking up the Cross but the Sword, and
it would then be perfectly unlike the Religion of the Primitive Christians and
Martyrs, and would be no longer a following of Christ, our Lord and Savior.

19. Others have asserted the defaults and miscarriages of Superiors, Jun.
Brut. Vindic. Qu. 1. and 3.
to be a forfeiture of their Power and Dominion; even as a tenure may be
forfeited, upon the nonperformance of the conditions upon which it is held.
But though God may justly as a punishment of Offenders, deprive them of what
good they here possess; he has not made inferiors the Judges of their
Superiors, nor can any such forfeiture devolve on them. And he who considers
the great viciousness and cruelty of Saul, of Tiberius, and of Nero, under
whose Reigns the Holy Scripture presses the duty of Allegiance, will thence
discern, that the making such a pretense as this, is contrary to true Religion,
and Christianity.

20. By many the defending of the rights, freedoms and liberties of the
Subject, has been esteemed the most specious pretense of all the rest. But
whereas there are other better ways to preserve these rights, which are most
violated by Wars, and intestine Tumults and Broils: it cannot easily be thought
probable, that he may be a judge and avenger of his own cause by force, against
his superior, who may not be so against his equal. And since the tenderness of
David's Conscience was such, that notwithstanding the many undeserved injuries
he sustained, he durst not stretch out his hand against the Lords anointed; and
Peter's drawing his Sword to defend his Master, was severely rebuked (of which
things more hereafter) the management of this objection must proceed from a
Spirit contrary to that of pious David, and to the doctrine also of our Lord
and Master.

SECT. III.
Of the traitorous Position of taking Arms by the Kings Authority, against his
person, or against those who are commissionated by him.
1. The other clause in the forementioned Declaration or acknowledgment, is
intended against another particular pretense of taking Arms: and is this, That
I do abhor that traitorous Position, of taking Arms by his (the Kings)
authority, against his person, or against those that are Commissionated by him.
The Position or assertion here rejected, is thus expressed in the Oath to be
taken by the Lord Lieutenants and Soldiers. 14 Car. 2.3.
That Arms may be taken by the Kings Authority ( viz. though the King never own
them, or give any Commission for them, yea though they be) against his own
person, or against those which are Commissionated by him. And this Position,
Taking Arms by the Kings Authority against his person disclaimed.
exposing the sacred person of the King to the highest danger, and being
against the safety of his Life and Crown, is justly declared to be traitorous;
and it stands chargeable with these enormities.

2. First, It is so unreasonable, as to be against the common sense of Mankind.
Would it not look strange, and be accounted a prodigious thing, to see a
Company of Children or Servants, beat and abuse the person of their Father or
Master, dispossess him by violence, and possibly at last to confine and murder
him; and yet to expect that all men should believe, they did this for the
preservation of his Right and Government, and in obedience to his Authority;
yea, though he plainly declared and protested against these things, as being
heinously injurious and unnatural. And it is no less unaccountable to pretend
the Kings Authority, Judic. Univers. Oxon. de foedere, p. 66.
for taking Arms against his person. This is, as it has been expressed, a
like contradiction in sense, reason and polity, as Transubstantiation is in
Religion; both which must suppose such a presence, as is impossible to be
there; and is contrary to the plainest evidence. This pretense of the Kings
Authority against his person, was hatched under the Romish Territories, and
made use of in the Holy League of France. In the Guisian attempts against Henry
the Third, Hist. of Civil Wars of France, l. 5. an. 1588.
it has been related as a matter of wonder to the common sense of men, that
they should besiege the Loure where the King was, and yet this should pass
under the disguise of obeying the King and defending the King and Country. That
the name of the King does denote the royal person who governs, is the general
apprehension of Mankind. And it is vainly pretended that all the proceedings of
justice, being always in the Kings name, and by his Authority, when many of
them are not particularly known to his person; must require the forming such a
legal Idea or Notion of the King as is distinct from his person: but this
supposes the Sovereign Authority to be in his Royal person, under whom and
from whom, other Ministers of Justice do execute their several Offices. As when
any man intrusts another, to manage any part of his business and affairs in his
name, and by his Authority, this does not make the man who commits the trust,
to become an Idea or Notion, distinct from himself or his person.

3. Secondly, This strained perverting of plain sense in this particular, is
not only against the security of the King, but may upon the same foundation
become fatal to the lives of the subjects. Manual concerning some privileges
of Parl. p. 16, 17, and p. 60.
For whereas some who managed this conceit, did assert in plain words, that
even the Statutes which condemned treason against the King, had respect to the
King in this Novel Idea, as intending thereby the Laws and the Kings Courts of
Justice: it is easy to discern, that any subjects, who shall stand in the way
of such an ill-designing party of men, or shall displease them, may easily be
charged with treason, and thereby be cut off, upon pretense of opposing the
Laws and Government when the very discharge of honesty and integrity may be so
accounted.

4. Thirdly, They who made use of this Position, did give the World sufficient
proof, that it was only a designed pretense, to serve a present turn. For when
in our late sad commotions, they used the Plea of the Kings Authority, in
acting against his person, before they had murdered his person; they then laid
aside also all pretense of reverent regard to the Kings Authority, and by
several Acts as they were called, Acts May 19. 1649. and of Treason, July 17.
1649.
declare the supreme authority of England to be in the Commons, not at all
regarding this Ideal Authority of the King; which if they had been true to
their own notion, must have been acknowledged still remaining. And they then
required the Engagement to be taken, to be true and faithful, (not to the Kings
Laws and Government, according to their own Idea, but) to the Commonwealth of
England, without King, etc. Which is evidence enough, that those men intended
as much to act against, and oppose the true Regal dignity and authority, as the
person of that excellent Prince: and that this distinction was not only void of
truth and justice in it self, but of honesty and good meaning also, in these
contriving men, who were the maintainers of it.

5. The last part of this Clause of the acknowledgment, Taking Arms against
them who are Commissionated by the King unlawful.
has respect to them who are commissionated by the King: the sense of which
must be measured from the intent and tendency thereof, which is to secure the
Kings safety, and Government, and to maintain the Subjects true allegiance and
fidelity. And therefore I doubt not to aver, that the use of quirks and
niceties, Manual. p. 102.
in supposing some extraordinary Cases, which are inconsistent with these
duties, and which we may well presume or hope may never be in act, ought not to
be considered in making this acknowledgment. Wherefore to supppose that the
person of any King of England, should be violently surprised and seized by any
seditious, and ill-designing men (which I trust will never come to pass) and
they should by force or fraud, extort Commissions from him, against his loyal
Subjects and Friends: this acknowledgment concerning the ordinary duty of
Subjects, does not take in such extraordinary fictions of imaginary Cases,
which are not fit to be supposed; but they who are the Kings regular Officers,
ought to resist such evil men who offer violence to his person, for the good
both of the King and Kingdom.

6. And also that Case which some put, of the King granting a Commission,
against the legal power which he has committed to a Sheriff, or against any
other Commission, which himself has given, and does continue to other
Officers; is such an unreasonable and undutiful supposition of cross
Commissions, which no good subject ought to make, or to consider in this
acknowledgment. Only in such an extraordinary Case, where any persons whosoever
in any Office or Commission, shall become Authors or Abetters of Sedition or
Robellion, and oppose the Kings Authority and Government, it is reasonable to
be expected that the King will grant Commissions to suppress and reduce them.
And since no Office or Commission, either can, or is intended to warrant any
man to act against his Loyalty and Allegiance; such revolting Officers ought to
be opposed by them, who are empowered and commanded by their Prince so to do,
nor is it to be supposed, that this acknowledgment does at all assert the
contrary. But the true sense of this clause is, that it is a traitorous design.
and therefore to be abhorred, for the Kings Subjects, without any command from
their Prince, to take Arms against those, who act by virtue, and in pursuance
of his Commission, regularly granted to them. And that these words of this
acknowledgment, may be reasonably taken in this fair and just sense, is evident
from the result of what I have above discoursed, B. 1. Chapter 6. Sect. 1.
concerning the sense and interpretation of such public Declarations.

7. And it was reasonable for the avoiding evasions, that this acknowledgment,
condemning the taking Arms against them who are Commissionated by the King,
should be declared in such general terms. If only taking Arms against the
Kings person, should be disclaimed in a strict sense, then the fighting the
Kings Armies, destroying his Subjects, resisting his Government, and those who
are invested with his Authority, which are the usual methods of the most open
and daring Enemies, would not be provided against. But these are the highest
oppositions against the King, which the most disloyal Subjects can ordinarily
make, by taking up Arms; who cannot probably act immediately against his
person, unless they can first vanquish those loyal subjects, who are his
strength and defense. Fourth Sermon before King Edw. 6.
Bishop Latimer tells us, that when he was in the Tower, a Lord who had been
engaged in Rebellion, told him, If I had seen my Sovereign Lord in the Field
against us, I would have lighted from my Horse, and taken my Sword by the
point, and yielded it into his hands. To whom the Bishop replied, It has been
the cast of all Traitors, to pretend nothing against the Kings person: subjects
may not resist any Magistrate, nor do any thing contrary to the Kings Law. And
the Imperial Law declares, that all and every of them, are Rebels or Traitors,
who in any wise publicly or secretly, Extravag. Henr. 7. Tit. 2.
do the works of Rebellion, against our honor, or their fealty, and do
enterprise any thing against the welfare of our Empire, contra nos seu
officiales nostros, in iis quae ad commissum eis officium pertinent,
rebellando, by rebelling (or taking Arms) against us, or our Officers, in those
things which belong to the office committed to them.

CHAP. II.
The Laws of Nature and of general Equity, and the right grounds of humane
polity, do condemn all subjects taking Arms against the Sovereign power.
SECT. I.
The preservation of peace and common rights, will not allow Arms to be taken
in a Kingdom, against the Sovereign Prince and Governor.
Laws do carry along with them the strongest obligation, which are not only
established by a positive constitution, but are also enforced by the common and
necessary Rules of justice, truth, righteousness, and order. Rules of common
equity are against Subjects taking Arms. Bishop Fern Episcop. and Presbyter.
considered.
For here is a joint tie from the Bond of obedience to Superiors, of Religion
to God, and of the general Principles of equity and reason. Of this nature is
the duty of nonresistance against Sovereign Rulers, which our Laws establish.
And the doctrine of our Church does so far assert this, that it was truly
affirmed by a reverend person, B. 2. C. 2.
That since the Reformation, it is now again current Episcopal doctrine, as it
was always Apostolical, That Subjects ought not to resist, nor can be
disobliged of their obedience to their Sovereign, upon any pretense whatsoever.
And that this is founded upon the necessary Principles of equity, and the Laws
of nature and of civil Society, I shall now manifest.

2. And I lay this down as an undeniable Principle, Otherwise justice and peace
cannot be secured by Government.
that in every civil Government, such an authority must be acknowledged in the
supreme Governor, as is necessary for the administering justice, securing
property, and the preserving of order, peace, and quiet. For without this the
benefit of Government and civil Society is lost; and amongst such men, where
honesty and good Conscience do not greatly prevail, we should live as amongst
Wolves, in constant danger of having our rights or lives surprised. And where
there are not such advantages from Authority, according to the known expression
among the Jews, Pirk. Av. cap. 3.
(...) a man would swallow up his Brother alive. But if it be allowed lawful,
for Subjects or inferiors upon any pretense whatsoever, to take Arms against
their Rulers and Sovereign Governors, neither justice nor peace can be
sufficiently provided for, by the authority of that Government.

3. For if it be allowed lawful, for Subjects in any Case to take Arms against
their Sovereign, this must include a right in them of judging whether their
present Case be such, in which they may lawfully resist or no. Subjects no fit
Judges of their Superiors.
Otherwise they must either have a general power of resistance and taking
Arms, without distinction of any Cases; to assert which, would be all one as
to declare them to be no Subjects, or under no Government: or else they must
resist in no Case at all. But to assert, that the people or inferiors, are of
right Judges of the Cases, in which they may resist their Superiors, is as
much as to say, they are bound to subjection only so far as themselves shall
think it fit; and that they may claim an authority over their Governors, and
pass judgment upon them, and deprive them of their dignity, authority and life
it self, whenever they shall think it requisite and needful. But this cannot
be otherwise than a foundation of great and general confusion in the World. And
as the general proceedings of justice are stopped, whilst there is any open
violent opposition to that power which should administer it; so the particular
decisions thereof must needs prove ineffectual, where the execution of them may
be refisted by force, in any notable Case, concerning a popular person.

4. And besides this, the judgments of the common sort of men are so apt to be
imposed upon, and are many times so partially affected, and linked to that
which they esteem their own interest, that even under the best Government, they
are frequently prone to conceive themselves greatly injured, when they are not;
and to make grievous complaints and outcries against their Superiors, without
just cause. It is truly said in our Homilies, Hom. against Rebel. Part 1.
Some Subjects or other mislike even the best Government, and wish a change.
And it is rightly asserted by Philo, Phil. de Vit. Mos. l. 1.
that even plenty and prosperity sometimes dispose the generality of men, to be
insolent against their Superiors, and their established Laws. And where the
persons who promote these discontents are popular men, dissatisfactions and
unquietness of temper often spreads more than can well be imagined:
Discontented minds are apt to be unquiet under the best Government.
the minds of many men being inclined to pity and believe them, who complain of
injury or hard measure; and in these circumstances to join with them, as acting
their common interest. And how unsafe all Government would be, and how unfixed
and tumultuous a state, the World is like to be in, if Subjects were in any
Case, and upon any pretense allowed to take Arms, will appear by considering
some remarkable instances, where (besides what our own Nation may afford us) I
shall mention two from the Holy Scriptures, as known and certain accounts of
matters of fact.

5. The first instance is concerning the Government of Moses. They were so
under Moses.
He was faithful in all Gods House, a man of singular integrity and meekness,
and a great friend to Israel. His conduct over the Israelites was accompanied
with various miracles, and admirable and extraordinary deliverances and
preservations, which they received under him. While he guided Israel, the
dreadful presence of God on Mount Sinai was manifested to them, and a constant
visible Symbol of his presence was continued amongst them. And the fame and
honor of Moses was so great, that even the Gentile Historians, in some after
Ages, Joseph. cont. Apion. l. 1. Eus. pr. Ev. l. 9. c. 26.
took considerable notice thereof, as has been observed by Josephus, Eusebius,
and other ancient Writers. And at that time God had also signally testified his
choosing Aaron and his Family, to the Priesthood, both by his especial Command
to Moses concerning them, and by the Fire, which in the presence of all the
people, came from before the Lord, upon the Altar and Burnt-Offering, at the
first time of Aarons Ministration, Lev. 9.24. Yet in this Case, Corah, Dathan,
and Abiram, pretended themselves grievously wronged, and appeared to plead the
Religious rights of the whole Congregation, that they were all holy as well as
Aaron, Number. 16.3. and to defend their civil privileges against Moses. Him as
the Scripture intimates, and Josephus particularly expresses, Jos. Ant. Jud.
l. 4. c. 2.
they accused of tyranny, and charged him with a design of destroying, and
ruining the Congregation of Israel, Number. 16.13. and that this was so apparent,
that unless men's eyes were put out, they could not but see it, v. 14. And these
unjust and unreasonable outcries were so taking, that presently two hundred
and fifty Princes of the Congregation, took part with these men, Number. 16.2. and
not long after, the whole body of the Israelites were gathered against Moses
and Aaron, v. 19. And as Josephus represents it, Ibid.
they were taught by Corah, that it became them to inflict punishment upon such
persons, who secretly designed their destruction, that so they might not suffer
the utmost violence from them.

6. And it is wonderful to observe, how far these bold and confident Speeches
and popular pretenses, did prevail, even after God had manifested his
abhorrence of them, by the dreadful judgment of the earth opening its mouth,
and swallowing up Corah and his Company, Number. 16.32, 33. and by the fire from
the Lord, consuming the 250 men who offered incense, v. 35. For notwithstanding
this, all the body of the Israelites, the very next day, justify the Plea of
Corah, own those Rebels for the people of the Lord, charge Moses and Aaron, as
being guilty of their blood, and again gather themselves together against them,
v. 41, 42. And as S. Austin conceives (sutably to the tumultuous violence of
their Spirits) they came with a resolution of putting them to death; Aug. de
mirabil. S. Scriptur. l. 1. c. 30.
says he, Totus populus contra Moysem and Aaron, ut sanguinis reos
consurrexit, eosque in eorundem ultionem occidere voluit. And all these
transactions are the more to be admired, because they presently succeeded,
after that sad threatening (and the Plague therewith) that their Carcases should
fall in the Wilderness, and not enter into the Land of Canaan, Number. 14.29, 30,
37. which judgment was denounced against them in part, because they would
forsake Moses, and choose them another Captain to return to Egypt, Number. 14.4.
Ant. Jud. l. 3. c. 13.
and did then as Jo sephus expresses it, revile and conspire against Moses and
Aaron. And if under so excellent a Governor, who had so highly obliged Israel,
and done so much good for them, there were such dangerous consequences from the
people, or men of a popular strain, exercising a power of judging, concerning a
Case fit to warrant a forcible resistance, this must needs be a destructive
principle, if allowed, under the best Government in the World. This gave birth
to so bad an undertaking as that of Corah, which was an enterprise to heinous,
Sanhedrin. c. 11.
that besides the severe censures of the Scripture, the Jewish Talmud reckons
up the managers thereof, amongst them who shall have no portion in the life to
come.

7. And in the time of David.
The other instance I shall give, is in the Government of David. He was
peculiarly chosen of God to rule Israel, and known so to be; he was a man after
Gods own heart, and in his Government over Israel, he fed (or ruled (...)) them
according to the integrity of his heart, and guided them by the skilfulness of
his hands, Ps. 78.72. He was also so potent and victorious over all his
Enemies; and by reason hereof Israel in his time was so renowned, that
Maimonides says, their Consistories would not receive Proselytes in his Reign,
because they supposed it was the fare of his power, Maim. in Inure Biah.
which induced them to pretend respect, to the worship of the God of Israel.
Yet Absalom by a popular carriage and infinuating words, soon persuaded the
people they were greatly injured under the Government of David, and that no
justice could be had, 2 Samuel 15.3, 4. Josep. Ant. l 7. c. 8.
And Josephus declares he complained much of the Kings Officers, that there
were no good Counselors about him. And hereupon almost all the Kingdom of
Israel join themselves with Absalom again2t David, 2 Samuel 15.12, 13, 14. Chapter
16.18. Chapter 18.6. and their Elders with them, Chapter 17.15.

8. And though this wicked attempt of Absalom was defeated, and no less than
twenty thousand men slain therein in one day: yet while the people in their
discontent and passion, took to themselves, a liberty to take Arms as they
thought fit; it is remarkably observable, that no sooner was this rebellion
after Absalom over, but upon some hot words between the men of Judah and the
men of Israel concerning the manner of their performing their duty to the King,
2 Samuel 20, 2.
every man of Israel went up from David, and followed Sheba in a new Rebellion.
And though David's Conquests had been very great over many Nations, (which some
of the ancient Greek Historians gave an account of, as was observed by Eusebius
for Eupolemus) neither the splendor of his Kingdom, nor the sense of their
duty, Eus. Praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 30.
nor the bitter effects of their former Conspiracy, nor the Kings Kindness in
receiving them again into his favor, could contain them under the bond of
obedience, and in the paths of Peace.

9. Now all this will manifest, how extremely unsettled any Government in the
World must be, (and therein the authority of executing justice, preserving
peace, and conserving all rights and properties) if it be once admitted, that
Subjects when they shall judge it a Case of necessity, for the preservation of
the common good, may take Arms against their Sovereign. And therefore for the
Securing peace and righteousness, and the common rights and interests of all
men, it must be acknowledged, that the supreme Governor has such an
authority, that it is not lawful to take up Arms against him.

10. The sense of Grotius concerning Subjects taking Arms.
Besides these instances, I shall add the judgment of the learned Grotius,
after his long and more mature consideration of things. That worthy man in his
Book, de Jure Belli and pacis, and in another Discourse written in his younger
time, did make use of some unmeet expressions and notions, and unsound
arguments, too much tending to infringe the Authority of Kings, and to allow a
power in the people in some Cases of making War against them. But though he did
not expressly retract and alter those things, yet in his Writings which he
published after a greater experience of the World, he wrote at another rate,
and falls in directly with what I have not asserted. Grot. in Mat. 26.52.
Thus in his Commentaries upon S. Matthew, he says If it be once admitted,
that private persons being injuriously dealt with by the Magistrate, may make
forcible resistance; all places would be full of tumults, there would be no
force or authority of Laws or Judicatures, since there is no man who is not
inclined to favor himself.

11. And in his Votum pro pace, Vot. pro Pac. ad Art. 16.
after he had passionately complained, of Arms being taken upon the pretext of
Religion, he goes on, Ego vero -- non tantum subditos ab armis arceo etc. But I
do not only forbid Subjects from taking Arms, but desire that Kings who have
that power given to them, would use it as feldom as may be. Ibid.
After this Grotius relates at large, and with approbation, the proceedings of
the University of Oxford, about Paraeus upon the Romans, with his allowance
also of this their determination; Subditos nullo modo vi and armis Regi vel
Principi suo resistere debere, nec illis arma vel offensiva vel defensiva, in
cansa Religionis vel alia re quacunque, contra Regem, vel Principem saum,
capessere debere; That Subjects ought by no means to resist their King or
Prince by force; nor ought they to take either offensive or defensive Arms,
against their King or Prince, Ibid.
for the cause of Religion, or for any other thing whatsoever. And then
asserting the general rule of S. Paul, even against the Cases excepted by
Paraeus, that whosoever resists the power, receives to himself damnation, he
adds, If so many Exceptions of Paraeux, i. e. underminings of S. Paul's rule
be admitted, dico nullum imperium diutins in tuto fore, quam donec talia
sentientibus vires defuerint; I affirm, that no Government can be any longer
safe, than whilst those who have such sentiments want strength. And from hence
it is manifest, that Grotius in his elder time, did disallow all Subjects,
taking Arms against their King, and accounted it wholly inconsistent with the
peace, safety, and Government of the World.

12. The Royal Authority a legal right as well as the Subjects property.
And since it is part of the Kings Royalty; according to the Laws of this
Realm, that none may take Arms against him; legal rights, are obliged to
maintain this right of the King, by that great rule of Righteousness and
Religion as ye would that men should do unto you, do ye also unto them
likewise, Luke 6.31. And this also is included in the Oath of Supremacy,
wherein Subjects swear to maintain all Authorities, granted or belonging to the
Kings Highness, his Heirs and Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial
Crown of this Realm. V. Sanders. de obligat. Consc. Prael. 10.
And it is against all pretense of Reason, that the rights of Superiors which
are the greatest, and on which all inferior rights have dependence, should be
least regarded; as if it were fit that the interest of a Child or Servant
should be preserved, and not those of a Father or a Master.

SECT. II.
Rights and properties of Subjects may be secured, without allowing them to
take Arms against their Prince.
1. It must here be considered, as an objection and seeming difficulty, that
since it is greatly necessary to the good of the World, that the just
properties of subjects be defended, if it be once granted that they may in no
Case take Arms against their Sovereign, how can these properties be secured?
may they not then be exposed to irreparable injuries and the utmost pressures?
and if a Prince will exercise an unlimited power, where is there help and
redress? Now in answer to this I premise, that the principal care which must be
taken, for providing for the preservation of the rights of subjects, is not on
that part which concerns the defending them against their Prince, but rather
against the violence of other injurious persons, which is done by the great
Authority of Government, and the due execution thereof. For as in a Family, the
main thing designed in the Government thereof, is not that Children may be
secured from receiving any injury from their Father; The Authority of Rulers is
the defense of the people and their jecurity.
but rather that for their own quiet and good order at home, and their honor
and safety abroad, they submit without gainsaying and resistance to his
Government, and thereby receive protection from the injurious dealings of
others: so Gods providence for preventing the greatest dangers, of violence of
men one toward another, has established the Authority of Rulers, as a defense
against them. Rutherf. of Civil Policy. Qu. 9.
And therefore such such persons who say, a people cannot so readily destroy
themselves ( viz. if they have no Governor, or cast him off) as one man may;
speak falsely and rashly against the wisdom of God and his Ordinance, and
against the common sense of the World: as if Rulers were not Ministers of God
for good to men, and as if it would be better for the World to be without them,
(whom all Nations have found necessary) and consequently without peace, order,
and justice.

2. And as the Governors men live under, The security for the Subjects rights.
are their defense, from the violence and injuries, which may be sustained from
other men: so there is great security for Subjects, without their taking Arms,
that their rights and properties shall not be violated by their Prince, which I
shall manifest, with a particular respect to our English Government. Now
amongst the ground of this security, the Principles of Conscience, which lay a
great and moral obligation upon the greatest persons in the World, not to be
injurious to the meanest, and the watchful providence of God, who unless it be
for the punishment of the grievous sins of a people, does not suffer them to be
afflicted and oppressed, are considerations which are not in this Case to be
over-looked. But there are two thins which I shall chiefly insist upon.

3. From the Laws.
they have the security of good and wholesome Laws. fixed with us by general
accord, of King, Lords and Commons. And that Laws were originally established,
that right and justice might thereby be impartially administered to every man,
Cic. de Offic. l. 3. and de leg. l. 4.
is reasonably declared by Cicero. And it is a great privilege in this Realm,
that both civil rights, and matters of Religion, are established by our Laws;
and that no Law can be made or repealed, nor public moneys raised, but by
consent of the Commons, by their representatives. And somewhat a like form for
the Enacting Laws, was resolved on a most Excellent method, Cod. l. 1. Tit. 16.
leg. 8.
by the Emperor Theodosius. And since no design can be managed to defeat legal
rights, but the instruments therein must be private persons; every one of these
may be called to an account, and suffer their deserved punishment by the
justice of the Law. And this is a like security to that, which may be had
against the meanest Subject in the Realm, if he be the stronger man, or get an
advantage whereby he is able to do another a mischief. And it is here worthy to
be noted, that whereas many plausible notions and pretenses, when they are
reduced into practice, fall short of accomplishing what was expected, by their
proposal in the Theory; the benefit of the protection, which Subjects enjoy
from the Law is such, that for diverse Ages past in many hundred years, the
general rights and properties of the people of England legally established,
have thereby been excellently preserved. And the like may be asserted
concerning many other parts of the World: and therefore they who will dispute
against this provision, must dispute also against the evidence of sense, and of
a long continued experience.

4. But because jealous and suspicious minds may possibly suppose, that at one
time or other a Prince having the authority of administering justice, and
appointing Judges and Officers in his Kingdom, may design to destroy his
Subjects rights and property, and thereby the fruitful enclosures of their
civil interests may be laid wast, and all respect to Laws utterly laid aside; I
shall take these suspicious jealousies into consideration. And here we must all
grant, Naz. Orat. 19.
that the state of this present World is such, that at the best it is not above
all instability, uncertainty and danger. And I shall in the next Section show,
that there is much more cause of jealous fears, of Subjects losing their legal
rights, by granting, than by denying them liberty to take Arms, But I here
desire the Reader impartially to consider, that there are as great
improbabilities, of any such Case as is proposed ever happening, under any
Prince who has a just right to the Crown, as things of this World can admit:
and if any such should possibly happen, the second consideration which I shall
propose for the Subjects security, will show a way of help and redress therein.

5. How little foundation there is, for nourishing the jealousies expressed in
this supposition, may in part be discerned by looking backwards. And in turning
over the Annal and Chronicles of many Ages, no such thing does appear to have
been undertaken by any English Monarch, to enervate and make void the force of
all laws, and the rights founded upon them. And the most that was ever done to
this purpose, was by them who under a pretense of liberty, did take Arms
against the King, or forcibly prosecuted an opposition to his Government and
Authority: when great numbers were illegally deprived of their Lives or
Estates, sequestered, decimated, and suffered many other injuries.

6. But if we look forward, no such supposition can be admitted, but it must
require a Concurrence of all these strange things. 1. That all the subordinate
Rulers and Ministers of justice in the Realm, must conspire against their
Consciences, the Law, and their Oaths, either out of choice or fear, to pervert
justice, and to cast off all pious sense of God thereby, and all care of their
own Souls. 2. That such a Prince must have no respect, either to God, or to his
own interest and honor abroad, or safety at home; which under God consists
in the flourishing estate, and good affection of his Subjects. For where Laws
are in any high measure violated, and prostituted by the Governors, and
general injuries thereby sustained by the Subjects; since Mankind is not only
led by respect to duty, but also to advantage, Aurel. Vict. in Nerone. Suet. in
Nerone, n. 47. Tacit. Hist. l. 1.
such Subjects may be backward in defending that Prince against those who
oppose him; which was the Case in which Nero was generally forsaken by his
Roman Subjects, and put upon destroying himself, to avoid that shameful death,
to which he was sentenced by the Senate. Yea such a Prince has great reason to
stand in fear to his own Confidents and instruments; for since they must be men
of no Conscience and fidelity toward God, it may well be expected, according
to the determination of Constantius the Elder, Eus. de Vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 11.
that they will also prove unfaithful to their Prince, if they can thereby
propose a way to advance or better themselves. And such instruments may see
cause to nourish fears, that where injustice, violence, and cruelty, are
frequently exercised, they may upon slight occasions, expect a time when their
turn to suffer their part will be the next: and this was the occasion of the
Death of Commodus the Roman Emperor, Herodian. l. 1.
who was first poisoned, and then strangled, by the contrivance of some who had
been his great Favorites, that they might secure their own live which they
discovered were suddenly like to be taken away. And from this it may appear,
that there was just reason for that observation of Xenophon, Xenop. de Regn. p.
911.
that tyrannical Governors are under greater terrors, and have more reason of
fears at all times, than men ordinarily have in War, because they have not only
reason to be afraid of their professed Enemies, but of those whom they account
their friends and defense. And Hieronymus Osorius observes not without reason,
Osor. de Reg. Instit. l. 8.
that in such persons the stings and frequent lashes of their own Consciences,
and some inward, though unwilling dread of God, besides other fears and
jealousies, make their state sad and miserable. Wherefore though Usurpers
having no right, may account in their best and safest contrivance, to lay their
foundation in force and violence, until they think themselves otherwise secure,
this is so greatly opposite to the interest of a rightful Prince, that if he be
a person of any reason in the World, he must needs reject it. 3. It must also
be supposed, that all those who act as instruments in such oppressions, must be
devoid not only of the sense of God and good Conscience, but also of humane
cautionsness. For if such an imaginary Prince shall have his Conscience
awakened to repentance, or shall consult his own honor, or else shall end his
days, (as his breath is in his Nostrills) all such persons are then
accountable to the strict judgment of the Law, and being Enemies to the public
good, have little reason to expect favor.

7. The security of Subjects from Gods governing the World.
The other ground of subjects security though they may not take Arms against
their Sovereign, is from God being the Judge and Governor of the World. Shall
it be thought a sufficient restraint, to the exorbitancy of a Fathers power
over his Children, that if he becomes unnatural, the earthly judge can both
vindicate them and punish him, though Children be not allowed, when they think
fit, to beat and kill their Father? and shall not the judgment and authority of
God over Princes be thought valuable and considerable, though he is more
righteous and more able to help the oppressed, than any Judge upon Earth? And
the judgments of God have been especially remarkable in the World, against such
Princes, as have either designed the subverting the Laws of common
righteousness, or have set themselves in defiance against the true Religion and
worship of God. Socr. l. 3. c. 21. gr. Theodor. l. 3. c. 20. Sozom. l. 6. c. 1,
2. Naz. Orat. 4, and 21.
The Ecclesiastical Historians, and Fathers who write of the Death of Julian,
which was in the second year of his Reign, in his Expedition against the
Persians, do all agree that the (...), or divine vengeance ordered his Death;
and that he who did effect it, whether Man, Angel, or Devil (for by several
Writers it has been referred to all of these) was (...), one subservient to
the divine pleasure. And some of these Writers say, that himself dying did
express so much, Hieron. ad Heliodor. c. 8.
and S. Hierome declares, Christum sensit in Media, quem primum in Gallia
denegarat.

8. When the horrid impieties against the God of Israel, and dreadful cruelties
against the Jews, of Antiochus Epiphanes a puissant Prince, had increased to a
strange height, he was at last upon a defeat given to his enterprises, struck
even to death with inward terror, and the affrighting perplexities of his own
Conscience. And he then could not but acknowledge, that his own injustice and
cruelty, and his profaning the Temple, 1 Mac. 6.8. -- 13.
were the causes which brought upon him this sad trouble and forrow: adding
with respect thereunto, (...), and behold I perish by great grief in a strange
Land. So also Naboths injuries were revenged upon Ahab, 2 Kin. Chapter 21, and 22.
2 Samuel 21.1, 2, etc.
and the Gibeonites upon Saul. And to take notice only of some of the last
persecutors of Christianity, in whom irreligious defiance of the true God and
his Religion, and inhumane eruelty toward men did meet together: The severe
judgments which befell Decius and Valerianus, who were the Authors of the two
last persecutions before Diocletian, are observed by Constantine, that the
former was vanquished and slain in Scythia, Constant. Orat. ad Sanct. Coet. c.
24.
with great shame and dishonor to himself and the Roman power; and the latter
was taken Captive by the persians, and there flayed, and then being salted or
dried, was preserved among them as a Trophy.

9. When Diocletian, Maximianus Herculius, and Galerius Maximianus, not only
raised a cruel persecution against the Christians, but arrived to that height
of contempt against Christ, and opposition of is Religion; that they erected
Pillars, with inscriptions concerning their Reign, nomine Christianorum deleto,
Baron. an. 304. n. 8.
and superstitione Christi ubique deleta, the name of Christians being extinct
by them, and the superstition or Religion of Christ utterly destroyed; the two
former of them finding themselves defeated, by the success and increase of the
Christian Religion, in a short time being overcome with grief and anguish, Eus.
Hist. l. 8. c. 29. Baron. an. 316. n. 2. Eus. ibid. etc. 25 gr.
deserted their Imperial dignity. And Diocletian after many years of retired
sorrow and discontent, was stricken with an extraordinary loathsome and
miserable Disease, attended with blindness. And Maximianus Herculius ended his
own days by the shameful Death of an Halter.

10. Galerius Maximianus was smitten with such noisome Ulcers, and multitude of
Worms, in all parts of his Body, as rendered him a dreadful spectacle and
loathsome unto all. Eus. Hist. l. 8. c. 28, 29. and de vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 50.
Oros. l. 7. c. 28.
Of whom Eusebius tells us, that he therein acknowledged the stroke of Gods
vengeance; and Orosius reports, that after many Physicians had been put to
Death, because they afforded the Emperor no relief, he was at last told by
some of them, Iram Dei esse poenam suam, and ideo a medicis non posse curari;
that since the wrath of God had inflicted this punishment upon him, Physicians
could give him no cure. To these I shall only add the instance of Maximinus,
who was an Emperor of the same spirit and temper per with the former; was
Contemporary with Galerius Maximianus for some time, but survived him a few
years. He is noted by Eusebius to have been one of the worst Enemies to
Christianity, Eus. Hist. l. 9. c. 10, 11. gr. De Vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 51, 52.
and also to have been charged with tyranny, by the public Edicts of the other
Emperors. And he was so smitten by the hand of God, that he became blasted,
his Visage changed, and his whole body parched and dried up, like a Sceleton,
or an Image: and he who made a Law that the eyes of Christians should be pulled
out, and executed it upon multitudes of Men, Women, and Children, his own Eyes
also fell out of his Head, and himself was made sensible, that it was the
stroke of Gods hand. And these sensible tokens of divine justice wrought a
mighty change in the Roman Empire, for the safety and advantage of them who
piously served God.

11. And it ought to be a check to the passions of the greatest men, and a
support to the state of the meanest, that God not only executes judgment in
another World; but does govern this, and when he sees it meet, will stand up to
avenge the injured, and punish the evil doers. Wherefore it was a pious
admonition to the Emperor Frederick the First, by his Uncle, Otho Frising.
Epist. ad Frider. Oenobarb.
Otho Frisingensis, who tells him, that Kings are reserved only to the scrutiny
and judgment of God; and then adds, that according to the Apostle, it is a
fearful thing for every man, to fall into the hands of the living God, and
particularly for Princes, who have none other above them, whom they must fear,
And it is a good and loyal resolution for a subject to take up, if ever he
should live under an unjust Prince, that he will embrace the temper of David's
Spirit, in his words concerning Saul; 1 Samuel 26.10, 11.
The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to die, or be shall descend
into the Battle and perish; the Lord forbid that I should stretch forth mine
hand against the Lords anointed: provided that such expressions be not used, as
an imprecation of evil, but as an acknowledgment of Gods Sovereignty, and a
patient committing himself to him, still keeping to the practice of that
Christian Rule, Pray for them which despitefully use you and persecute you,
Mat. 5.44

SECT. III.
The condition of Subjects would not be the better, but the worse, if it were
lawful for them to take Arms against their Prince.
Arms, A liberty of taking Arms hurtful to subjects.
would be a disadvantage to themselves, and prejudicial to the common interest
of Mankind, I shall evidence by four Considerations.

Cons. 1. 1. By the frequent miseries of Civil Wars.
From the great mischief their lives and rights, and future interest must be
exposed unto, by frequent Civil Wars, the natural effect of Subjects taking
Arms, Let search be made into the Annals of the World, whether the properties
of Subjects, and the flourishing Estate of Kingdoms, have no been much better
preserved by peaceable obedience and subjection, than by the fomenting Civil
Wars and Insurrections. The Conspiracies of Absalom, Sheba, and others such
like, were not the honor or advantage of them who were engaged in them. And
while such commotions continue, little security can be promised either of men's
Lives or Estates, further than the strength of a Fortress, or the secrec of an
hiding place will extend. And if in the result the conspiring party should
prevail, and fix themselves in the supreme Government, the admitting this
Position of the Lawfulness of Subjects taking Arms, will be apt to put other
unquiet and ambitious spirits, upon following their example, and endeavoring
under the fair pretenses of Religion or liberty, or doing justice, to undermine
such prevailers; and by this means the Commonwealth is like to be exposed to
the saddest Calamities, and to be brought to ruin and destruction.

2. Of this I shall give a known instance, concerning the Kingdom of Israel,
toward the end of the Kingdom. 2 Kin. 15.
Then the practice of taking Arms against the King, who was possessed of the
Throne, was very frequent, insomuch that in the space of little more than
thirty years, four of them were assaulted by force, overcome and slain; and two
of them in one year, Salian. An. m. 3264. n. 1.
which Salianus observed as an ill omen, giving indication of the fall of that
State and Government; Tres hoc anno in Israele Reges, magnum collabentis
Reipublicae argumentum. During this time there was usurpation upon usurpation
in that Kingdom, and every one of the succeeding Usurpers had this Character,
that he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord. And such Calamities
then befell that Kingdom, that during this time, in a chief seat of these Wars,
2 Kin. 15.16.
all the Women with Child were ripped up: and this Kingdom being greatly weakened
by its home divisions, was in that compass of time, twice invaded by Foreign
Enemies; at the first time it was forced to pay a very great composition, 2
Kin. 15.19, 20. and at the second time a great part of the Kingdom was lost,
and the Inhabitants carried Captive, v. 29. And in the Reign of Hoshea who was
the last of these Conspirators, the Kingdom of Israel became first tributary to
Assyria; and soon after in his Reign, was the utter Captivity and ruin of the
ten Tribes, and the total subversion of that Kingdom: Josep. Ant. l. 9. c. 14.
and this as Josephus accounts it, was the end of those Israelites, a Kingdom
divided against it self being brought to desolation. So that if peace, safety,
and prosperity, be desirable to a people, the violent resistance of superiors
must be hurtful to them.

3. And if we reflect on the ordinary effects of such undertakings, for some
few instances, where the people did by Arms assert themselves into liberty,
from injurious oppressions (which things our English constitution does
excellently, and effectually provide against) diverse instances may be given,
where divine providence has wrought deliverances, for them who discharged the
duties of obedience; and many others of great devastation and ruin, which has
been the consequent of such enterprises. And the tragical relations which have
attended Rebellious taking Arms in the ancient Empires, and more lately in
the Eastern and Western Empires, in Germany, France, England, and other
Countries, might fill Volumes with a sad account of heavy Calamities, cruel
Sufferings, and wicked practices.

4. 2. By Authority becoming thereby ineffectual of its necessary ends.
Cons. 2. It is the necessary continual interest of Subjects, that so great a
power be in their Sovereign, that none in his Realm may withstand his
authority. This is consequent upon what was proved in the first Section. And if
any Prince should allow his Subjects, when they think it necessary to take
Arms against him, (which it cannot be his wisdom to do) the Subjects would
have a greater loss than gain thereby. For instead of gaining that, which
silenceth their suspicious fears of their Princes power, whose interest it is
to defend and preserve them; they lose the constant advantages of his
Government; since justice cannot be in all Cases so effectually administered,
nor peace so surely preserved. And upon this very account, they have much more
cause for frequent fears of suffering greater evils, from the mischievous
designs of usurping spirits, Theodor. Metochit. Hist. Romans a Jul. Caes.
who coming like empty and hungry flies upon a sore, (to which they have
sometimes been compared) (...), They will grievously torture. Now it is highly
imprudent, to seek a remedy for a possible inconvenience, which may be
otherwise prevented, by procuring a more certain mischief. As if all the strong
men in a Nation should have their sinews cut, lest they should hurt the weak,
whom the Laws desend; though thereby the Realm be left without any men of might
to oppose its Enemies.

5. Cons. 3. It is chiefly to be observed, 3. Because there must still at last
be owned a power that may not be resisted.
that unless all things be in utter confusion and Anarchy, it is not possible
but that there must be acknowledged such an authority, which none have power of
resisting; but this can no where be so well placed, for the subjects interest,
as in their Sovereign Prince, and supreme Governor. Wherefore to give place at
present to fiction and imagination, concerning any possible forms of
Government; it is all one to assert, that there must somewhere be fixed such an
authority, against which none has power of taking Arms, and to assert that
there must be in one or other some chief authority, which has the highest
command of the strength and Military force of a Nation. For whosoever has this
authority, all the military power ought to be subject to him, and none has any
right of commanding it against him. But unless it be admitted, that this
commanding power is placed in some person or persons, the Military power must
be under no Governor, nor can Subjects know whom to obey with respect to Peace
and War. Now this power of the Militia, Chapter 1. Sect. 2. n. 12.
must either be placed in the King (as our Laws abovementioned declare it is
in this Realm) or else either ordinarily, or in some certain Cases, in some
other single person, or Senate and Company of men, or in the whole body of the
people, or in so great a number as will repute themselves to include the whole.
And the allowing this power to any of these last mentioned, is liable to as
great or greater danger than the first.

6. This is more dangerous to the people, to be in any other than their
Sovereign.
To place any such power over the Military Force of a Nation, in any person or
persons, who are n ot the ordinary supreme Governor, is a thing can scarce be
supposed; because the giving them this authority, is the giving them power to
execute supremacy of Government, when they think it fit. But if such a
supposition be made, this must needs cause constant jealousies, between the
oridinary supreme Governor and them, and thereby that Nation and Government
must be under much unsettlement. And there is greater danger of this power
being exorbitantly abused, by such persons who may be tempted to affect their
own further advancement; than there can be in him who is already supreme, and
whose interest it is to preserve the liberties of his people.

7. If a Senate supposed to have this power, should become Patrons of
injustice, and opposers of known legal rights; and the same Company of men have
also authority of making laws, and raising moneys, it is not easy to know how
far the ill consequences of this may extend. For then they are put into the
fullest capacity of oppressing innocent persons, and depriving them of Estate,
Liberty, or Life, and of serving private interests of themselves or a party,
and even of establishing iniquity by a law. And he that thinks that no such
thing may be supposed, that the major part of such a Senate may be either so
formed, or over-witted, or over awed, as to comply with unjust attempts, is a
stranger to the proceedings in England, from 1640. till 1660.

8. If it should be supposed, that the chief power of the Sword, and of
commanding the military force, should be in the whole body of the people, or
the major part of them, this must include the greatest inconvenience of all the
other. Now though this supposition, amongst other things wherewith it is
chargeable, is impossible, because the whole body of the people of a great and
populous Kingdom, cannot meet together, or consult and advise with one another,
and therefore can give no commands; yet in our late distracted times, there
were some who embraced this assertion. Gangr. Part. 1. p. 33.
In England several Pamphlets from them, who allowed the Parliament to have
power to levy War against the King, did declare that the Parliament having
their power from the people, the people might call them to an account. And Mr
Rutherford also allowed, Ruth. of Civil Poli^r, Qu. 19. p. 152.
they gave to Commissioners of Parliament, when they abuse it, and may resist
them, and denude them of their fiduciary power; as the King may be denuded of
that same power by the three Estates. To such extravagant excesses have men's
ungoverned heats, and passions hurried them! But this supposition is a
foundation of confusion, and is not consistent with the people having any
Governors over them to command them, and thereupon would lay aside Gods
Ordinance of Rule and Government. It is also so opposite to Peace, that it is
the direct way to put the multitude upon insurrections, and would turn the
World into a disorderly Wilderness. And it is dangerous to the state of the
World, and to all good subjects, both because it is unpeaceable; and because
there can be no security given, that the major part of the body of a people,
who are easily imposed upon at some times, shall not incline to any ill design,
as they evidently did in the instances of Corah and Absalom, besides others
nearer home; and also because rash and ill actions, when managed by the body of
the people, are so much the worse, because they are usually attended with
violence and fury, like the overflowing of Waters.

9. Wherefore since there must some where be placed such a supreme power, as
has the highest right to command the force of a Nation, and by consequence
none can command it, or any part of it against that power; this from what I
have discoursed, cannot with so much safety to the people of this Realm, be
fixed any where else as in the King, according to the excellent constitution of
our Laws and Government. For as Royal Government is free from that heady
disorder, which attends popular motions; so the rule of its exercise is those
laws, which are not established without the consent of the people. Plat. in
Politic. verse. fin.
Upon this account Plato when he had viewed the various species of Government,
declared that that which was best of all was, (...), Monarchy coupled with Laws.

10. 4. From the insufficiency of the pretended security against these evils.
Cons. 4. If it were granted, that people had power to take Arms, but not in
any other Case, save in the highest oppressions, and utmost extremities; this
restriction with respect to the Case, would be of very little use, for the
Peace of the World, and the avoiding the inconveniences and mischiefs above
expressed. For the instances in the first Section, and the experience of this
Kingdom, and many others, testify how apt many people are, to be decoyed into
gross mistakes in this Case, and to be abused and misled by fair speeches of
discontented and aspiring men; and to draw up such heavy charges against
excellent Governors, as to conclude their ruin and destruction to be
designed, where there is not the least intention for their hurt. And besides
that gross falsehoods may easily pass with the credulous vulgar undetected, it
is an easy thing to persuade many of them, ill actions of any men, living under
the Government are mnanifested, to account these to be the faults of the
Rulers, who did not prevent or restrain them: whereas it is no doubt a great
truth which was asserted by Bishop Saunderson, Sanders. de oblig. Consc. prael.
10. n. 7.
that in the best constituted Commonwealths, there are Gravamina non pauca,
not a few things amiss, which the utmnost care and industry of Rulers, and the
severity of the Laws, is not sufficient wholly to prevent or cure.

SECT. IV.
The Plea, that self-defence is enjoined by the Law of nature, considered: and
of the end of Sovereign power: with a representation of the petence, that
Sovereign Authority is in Rulers derived from the people, and the inference
thence deduced examined.
1. Of self-defence, and self-preservation.
It is certain that prudence and the Laws of God and Man, oblige every man to
take just and due care of his own preservation: but yet there have been some
who under the specious appearance of pleading for self-defence, have run into
strange exorbitances, against the authority of Government. It has been said,
that self preservation is the first principle and prime law of nature; and
thence it must be inferred, that its obligation is so great in all Cases, that
all other Laws of Nature and Equity must give place thereto. And with respect
to resisting a Sovereign Prince by Arms, Of Civil Policy, Qu. 9. p. 59.
Mr Rutherford asserteth, that no community can without sin, alienate this
power of self-defence. But though he speaks of the community, his argument must
have as much force concerning any private person, viz. that as man has nopower
from God to murder his Brother; so has he no power to suffer himself or his
Brother to be murdered. And the consequence of this must be, that all men are
bound to take Arms against their Sovereign, who shall judge any person to be
in danger of losing his life without just cause. The strange positions of
Lessius and Becanus, in allowing the killing a King in self defense, I have
above produced: and amongst the Romish Doctors, who are very generally prone to
embrace disloyal principles, Dom. Soto, de Justit. and Jur. l. 1. Qu. 1. Art.
2. and Q. 5. Art. 3. and Q. 6. Art. 4.
Dom. Soto in this particular, is as exorbitant, as any I have met with. He in
several places gives such a description of a Tyrant, in the administration of
Government, as discontented persons may easily apply to the most worthy Prince;
that is, that he makes Laws, and orders affairs for his own private, and not
the public good. Id. ibid. l. 5. qu. 1. Art. 3.
And he declares, that such a person who has a right title to govern, may not
be killed by a private person, until a public sentence be declared against
him, and then any man may be made the Executioner. But then he adds, Besides
this, if he forcibly set upon a free subject, either to kill him, or to take
away his goods, potest civis ille vim vi repellendo, eum interimere; that
subject in repelling force by force may kill him.

2. Now this disorderly and unruly management of self defense, would fill the
World with tumults, and subvert the foundations of its Peace and Government;
since by this means, the power of the sword would be put into every private
man's hand, to use it against his Governors, when he shall think it fit for his
own interest. But that the falsehood, as well as the danger of this pretense may
be manifest, I shall return an answer thereto in three heads. 1. That it is
notoriously false, that men are obliged by the law of nature, in all Cases to
defend their own lives, and outward interests by force. And it is a sufficient
prejudice against this, that he who will maintain it, must acknowledge that all
those who died Martyrs for the Christian Religion, did violate the Laws of
nature, in not resisting their Persecutors; and that all malefactors ought to
fight for their lives, rather than to submit themselves to justice. The prime
laws of nature to rational beings, are the rules of good Conscience.
2. That the prime law, which the nature and being of man, who is a rational
Creature, and capable of happiness, does oblige him to observe, is, that he
ought to take care of his own welfare and chief good, and to endeavor after
true perfection. And because this is chiefly procured by well doing, therefore
to be pious and sober, loyal and peaceable, just and good, whereby purity of
heart, and integrity and peace of Conscience is preserved, and a good name
here, and a blessed state hereafter obtained; these are the things which our
nature and being, and our Religion also, oblige us principally to design, and
all outward interests of this life must be placed in subordination to them. And
sure no Christian will believe, that our Savior by his Religion, did subvert
the prime laws of our nature and being, when he required his Disciples to take
up the Cross, to be ready to lose their lives for his sake, and to forsake all
and follow him. 3. That self defense is then only lawful to be managed by
force, when this may be done by lawful means, and without transgressing any
necessary duty to God or Man. It is therefore justly allowed so far as it
necessary, against private violence and assaults, being then warrantable by the
Rules of right reason and good Conscience which are the laws of our nature. But
to allow a right of self-defence to every man, by taking Arms against his
superior, is as much as to say that no man is bound to own the Ordinance of
God in the World, or to submit himself and his interest to be governed by any
civil power.

3. It is also urged, Rutherf. ubi sup. Qu. 25. Jun. Brut. Qu. 3. p. 110. etc.
that in the Constitution of Government, Princes are appointed for this end, to
wit, the good of the people; and therefore the peoples good is to be pursued,
though against the person or Government of the Prince: and they most comply
with the great end of Government, who will take care of the community. Armin.
Disp. publ. These. 25. n. 10.
And therefore if a Prince do not promote the peoples good, the end must be
preferred before the means, and the good of the Commonwealth is otherwise to
be provided for. Of the end of Government.
Anbs. 1. That though the good of the people be a great end of Government, yet
it is not the sole end thereof. But as when a Prince appoints a chief Officer
of a Corporation, this is not only for the benefit of the members of that
Society; but it is also intended, that they may be more useful to do the King
service, and that the Commonwealth may receive benefit thereby: so in
Sovereignty, there is a claim of Gods authority in the World for his honor;
and therefore out of Conscience and duty to God, there must be a subjection
showed to Rulers as his Ministers, besides what the interest of the community
will require. 2. If Government were wholly intended with respect to the good of
subjects, I have proved in the former Sections, that order, peace, and justice
cannot be thereby established among men, unless it be acknowledged that none
may resist the Rulers Authority. 3. To lay down such Rules, that men are no
longer obliged to observe any constitution intended for a further end, than as
the parties concerned shall judge it to conduce to that end, is dangerous and
unsound. By this rule discontented persons might break the indissoluble bond of
conjugal Relation, where they account it not to answer the end, by mutual
helpfulness and comfort. Gemer. in Sanhedr. Cap. 2. Par. 11.
And when God forbad the King of Israel, to multiply Wives. lest his heart
should turn away from God, Deuteronomy. 17.17. the Jewish Writers account Solomon
justly blameable, for his multiplying Wives, though he mightpresume there would
be no danger of his forsaking God thereby.

4. Of the original of Government being from the people. Sov. power of Parl.
Part. 1. p. 35, 36. Ruth. Civ. Pol. Qu. 4. p. 10. and Qu. 19. p. 148. This
asserted by many Papists.
But thee is another thing which has been much insisted on, and will require a
larger Examination, concerning the original of Sovereignty, and the deductions
which may be made from thence. It was urged in our late unhappy times in
England, that the Sovereign power was more in the people than in the King or
Prince, who was originally created by them. And in Scotland it was asserted
then, as a ground of taking Arms against the King, that Royal power was
radically in the people, was communicated from them, and that they may take it
again, if the conditions on which they gave it be violated: and that the people
being the fountain power, are still superior to the King.

5. V. Bannes in 2. 2ae. Qu. 40. Art. 1. Dub. 2.
And it is ordinary with the Writers of the Romish Church, to make the people
the original of the Princes Sovereign power, and many of them make use of this
Assertion, as one way to show the excellency of the Pope above Princes. Thus
Salmeron, Salm. Tom. 12. Tract. 63.
Civil power, says he, is indeed from God, so far as he made the community
free, and gave them light and power to set up Governors: and therefore secular
power does not so descend from Heaven, but that it rather ascends from the
community, unto the King or other chief Magistrate. Dominicus Soto asserts, De
Justit. and Jur. l. 4. Qu. 4. Art. 2.
Reges a suis Regnis potestatem recipient, Kings receive their power from their
Kingdoms. Bell. de Laicis, c. 6.
Bellarmine asserteth indeed political powder and Government to be from God;
but that he gave it immediately to the whole multitude, and they transfer it to
one or more. Medin. in 1. 2ae. qu. 90. Art. 2.
And Medina declares, that Principes si legitimi sunt, habent authoritatem and
jus Dominandi a Republica, lawful Princes have their authority and right of
Governing from the Commonwealth.

6. The ill consequences they hence deduce.
And from this very principle, the same sort of Writers do also grant and
assert, the lawfulness of the people resisting their King by force, Bellarm. de
Council. l. 2. c. 19.
in necessary Cases. Bellarmine allows that the political head may be deposed
by the people, because he depends on them, and receives his power from them.
Gr. de Val. T. 3. Qu. 1. Disp. 1. Punc. 7. div. 45.
Greg. de Valentia affirms, that the secular Prince having his power from the
community over which he is, from hence it is, that he is above any parts of the
community, but not above the whole community jointly considered, at least he is
not so in all cases. Hence also Navarrus asserted, that the people did never so
give over their power unto the King, but that they retain it to themselves in
the habit, that in some certain Cases they may also receive it again in act.
Mariana de Rege, and Reg. insist. l. 1. c. 6.
And Mariana affirms, that the Royal power having its birth from the
Commonwealth, there is reserved in it, a power of deposing the King, and
making War against him, and if it be necessary, destroying him with the Sword.
And he advises as the safest course, that such an ill governing Prince should
be declared a common Enemy, in a public convention, and then he allows it
lawful for any private man to kill him: but if there can be no such public
Assembly, if it be according to the common vote of the people, he commends the
wicked attempts of such as would take away his life, as if such horrid
enterprises were famous achievements.

7. There are also other new Modellers, whose Positions founded upon the same
bottom, of Princes having their power from the people, are very dangerous to
Government. The like dangerous Positions of other extravagant Writers.
Such persons I mean as Mr Hobbs, and the Author of the Tractatus
Theologico-politicus: for though these men seemingly yield a great Authority to
the Prince, yet building upon a wrong and rotten foundation, they afford him no
further security in his Government, than is the effect of his mere strength and
power. The Tractatus Theologico-politicus owneth Dominion to be founded in men's
resigning up their own rights to another by pacts. But besides other things,
the admitting these two assertions in that Discourse, will be sufficient to
manifest, the instability of any Government, where those Positions are
embraced. For as he asserteth that naturally there is nothing unlawful, which
any man can desire and obtain: so 1. he says, Pactum nullam vim habere posse,
nisi ratione utilitatis, qua sublata pactum tollitur, and irritum manet: which
is as much as to say, that Subjects are no further bound to submission, Tract.
The-pol. Cap. 16. p. 254. p. 256. V. p. 262.
than till they can propose to themselves an advantage by Rebellion. And since
no rebellion was ever undertaken in the World, but upon the proposal of some
advantage to the undertakers, those evil men must be justified, as having a
right to do what they did, according to this pernicious Principle. Ib. p. 259.
V. p. 261, 257, 258.
2. It is there also asserted, Summis potestatibus hoc jus quicquid velint
imperandi, etc. The right of commanding what they please, does only so long
belong to the supreme powers, as they indeed have the highest (or greatest)
power; but if they lose that, they lose also the right of commanding all; and
this right falls upon him or them, who gain the greatest power, and are able to
keep it. Which words do make void all true and proper right of Princes, and
leave them no other foundation to support their Government, but their present
possession of power, which if any other person can possess himself of, he
therewith has the right also.

8. And though Mr Hobbs sometimes has over-large expressions concerning the
power of Governors; yet he having before laid the same foundation for the
original of political Government, does also undermine the safety and stability
of Governors and Government, 1 By asserting, Leviath. Cap. 14. p. 67, 68, 70.
That these pacts are so reciprocal, that they who yield up their right, do it
for the receiving good thereby: and the end of pacts being the preservation of
life, and of such things as conduce thereto, jus contra vim se defendendi
necessario retinetur, and any pact to give up the power of defending ones self
against Death, Wounds, or Imprisonment, must be void, being against that
self-preservation which is the end of these pacts. And these general Positions
and grounds concerning pacts, will destroy either the nature, or at least the
security of that power, which in words he otherwhere yields to Governors. 2.
Because according to his frame and model, there can be no foundation laid, for
these pacts becoming obligatory, further than the mere fear of external
coactive power can enforce the observation of them. Ibid. c. 14. p. 67, 71. and
Cap. 17. p. 83. and Cap. 18. p. 87.
For as he sometimes tells us, that these pacts do not oblige in their own
nature, but from the fear of loss, and the punishment from a visible power: so
since he asserts, that in the state or condition of liberty antecedently to
these pacts, Justice, equity, or doing to others as they would they should do
to them, Had no place, nor were men any ways obliged to observe them; it is
impossible there should be any obligation introduced upon men (according to
this method) to perform their pacts, save only from fear of external force.
Tract. The.-pol. p. 254.
For as the Tractator does expressly allow fraud and deceit, in that imaginary
state of liberty, the consequence of which will be that they may deal falsely in
their pacts; so the Leviathan model must according to the principles there
laid, allow the same. P. 71.
And though he sometimes speaks of the confirming these pacts by Oaths, and the
fear of a Deity: yet this can add nothing to the obligation, upon the
principles of the Leviathan: because the fear of God only obliges men to do
their duty, but does not deny them the use of their liberty in other things.
But as these Positions are framed upon such suppositions, as look upon man in
his beginning, to stand without due respect to God, and the rules and notions of
good and evil; so the dangerous aspect they have on peace and Government, does
speak the folly of them, and they will be sufficiently in this particular
confuted, by asserting the divine original of Sovereignty.

9. But it seems most strange, De Jur. B. and P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 7.
that the Learned Grotius, in his Book, De Jure Belli and pacis, should assert,
that men at the first did join themselves together in Civil Society, non Dei
praecepto sed sponte, not by any command of God, but of their own choice; and
that hence civil power has its original, which Peter therefore calls an humane
ordinance: and that it is also called an Ordinance of God, because God approved
the wholesome institution of men. And upon this Principle he thinks it may be
questioned, whether the people ever intended to excluded themselves, from a
power of taking Arms in all Cases. And therefore without all distinction of
Cases, he there is not willing to condemn their resisting their Governor. But
I think it needful to do him so much right, as to observe that this was not his
constant and fixed sense and judgment. For concerning the original of
Authority, he in another place declares this to be the doctrine of S. Paul,
Grot. in Romans 13.1.
that there are now no Empires, but where God gives to them his authority, even
as a King gives Authority to his Presidents: and he also affirms, that in all
Governments, the Authority is received from God, non minus quam si reges illi
per Prophei as uncti essent, as much as if those Kings had been anointed by
Prophets.

10. And when S. Peter requires submission to every ordinance of man for the
Lords sake, Grot. in 1 Pet. 2.13.
Grotius in his Annotations, thinks him to intend, ordinationem istam quae
inter homines in terra agentes locum habet, that ordinance which has place
amongst men: which Exposition has this advantage of the other, that according
to it, a good account may be given of the Apostles argument or motive,
injoining submission for the Lords sake. For this must infer that those men who
govern in the World, do not act only by an humane right; since if Government
were not by Gods authority and constitution, obedience to it could not bear a
respect to God himself. And touching the unlawfulness of forcible resistance of
Governors, besides the plain and full expressions I have above produced from
Grotius, violent defense which is lawful against an equal, is unlawful against
a superior: Gr. de Imp. Sum. Pot. Cap. 3. n. 6.
and he judges that the law of nature will not allow this, no not for
self-preservation. But says he, this is more plainly demonstrated, from the
written law of God: for when Christ said, he that takes the Sword shall perish
by the Sword, he expressly disallows that defense which is made by force,
against the most unjust but public violence; diserte improbat eam defensionem
quae vi fiat, contra vim injustissimam sed publicam.

11. Now it may be a just prejudice against this assertion, Unreasonable
inferences from this unsound foundation. V. Jun. Brut. Qu. 3. p. 91. De Jure
Magistr. c. 6.
of Sovereignty being derived from the people, that according to these various
Proposals, it may become dangerous to the settlement of the World. But withal
their way of arguing, who pretend that the people who make the Prince, have
therefore a power reserved to themselves greater than his, is a kind of
contradiction to it self; as if they who give up their power should by that
means have the greater power, and they who receive authority should thereby
have the less. This is such a fond argument, as would prove all servants by
contract, to be superior of their Masters, because by their contract they made
them their Masters; or that those Countries who became subject, and tributary
to the Roman Empire, or any other, had a superiority over that Empire; because
their becoming subject to it, was hat which made its Dominion so large and
eminent. And concerning that supposition, that possibly the people might not
intend, to deprive themselves of all power of resistance; with respect to this
Kingdom, V. Chapter 1.
it is evident from the plain expressions of our Statute Laws above produced,
that the Subjects did intend to reject all power of resistance. And yet they
who enter into any relation by their own contract, do stand obliged from the
nature of that relation, and the Laws that God has established concerning it,
and not only from their own intention. Thus the contracting to become a Wife or
a Servant, intending to be so to a kind and courteous man, does not hinder the
continuance of the bond in these relations, and the obligation to the duties
thereof, though this man contrary to their expectation, may prove ill-natured
and froward. And what I have discoursed in the beginning of this Chapter will
evidence, that even they who will assert Sovereignty to be of a mere humane
original, must acknowledge that the rejecting of all forcible resistance
against it, is necessary to the peace and welfare of the World, and therefore
this must be intended by the wiser part of Mankind.

SECT. V.
The Divine original of Sovereign Power asserted.
1. Sovereignty and rule proved to be the constitution of God. By rational
evidence.
That Government and its Authority is originally the constitution of God, may
receive considerable proof from rational evidence, supposing Creation and
Providence to be acknowledged. For since God is the Lord of the whole Earth, he
has a right to govern it, and it is in his power to appoint Rulers and
Magistrates, and to command subjection to them: and whosoever besides God,
shall undertake to confer a power to rule the World, as if it were originally
derived from themselves, do thereby put themselves upon the disposing of Gods
right. It was owned by the Ancient Poets, as Homer, and Hesiod, Hom. Il. ae.
Hes. Theogon. in init. Synes. de Regno.
that Kings are from God. In Homer, (...), and Hesiod says, (...). And
Synesius observed, that it was said by Plato, (...), that Royalty was a good
thing from God among men. And in the Book of Wisdom, Wisd. 6.4, 5.
both the Authority of Kings is asserted to be from God, and that themselves
also are Gods Ministers.

2. And it may well seem a strange thing, that God who not only gave a being to
all other parts of his Creation, but framed them in an excellent and beautiful
order, and made the Sun to rule by Day, and gave Man dominion over other lower
parts of his Creation, should leave Mankind only, which is so excellent a
being, without taking any order for that useful and regular public Society,
which is both suitable and beneficial to humane nature. And it is yet far more
unlikely, that he who is the God of Order, should for the peace and good of
lesser Societies in private Families, ordain the Authority of Parents over
their Children, and the Headship of the Husband over the Wife, and yet should
leave the more general and public state of Mankind, which is of greatest
concernment, in an unsettled ungoverned confusion. It would be also a reflection
upon the goodness of God to imagine, that it was not his will that justice
should be administered, and viciousness punished among men; that peace should
not be preserved, and goodness encouraged in the World: and it would be a
disparagement to his wisdom to conceive, that he should appoint all these
things to be done, whilst he commits no power or authority to any person, or
order of men to take care of them.

3. By the testimony of the Scriptures.
But the express testimonies of the holy Scripture, put this matter out of
doubt. There Governors as having Gods Authority, are styled Gods, and Children
of the most high, Ps. 82.6. And besides the Government of Israel, which was
evidently established by Gods appointment, which was the reason why David so
much reverenced Saul, as being the Lords anointed: we are told, Pr. 8.15, 16.
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice: by me Princes rule, and Nobles,
even all the Judges of the Earth. And God declared by Jeremy, Jer. 27.5, 6. I
have made the Earth, -- and have given it to whom it seemed meet unto me: and
now have I given all these lands into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar, the King of
Babylon my servant. Cyrus also was called the Lords Shepherd, Is. 44.28.
(Princes being often styled Shepherds, because their Office and Government is
thereby much resembled, (...), says S. Basil; and the Hebrew word for a
Shepherd is sometimes rendered in the Chaldee Paraphrase (...) a Prince or
Governor) he was also called the Lords anointed, Is. 45.1. And Daniel tells
Nebuchadnezzar, that God sets up Kings, Dan. 2.21. and that the God of
Heaven had given him a Kingdom, v. 37. S. Paul also declares, that there is no
power but of God, and the powers that be, are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. And
he styles the power, the ordinance of God, v. 2. and the Ruler, the Minister
of God, v. 4.

4. By the sense of the ancient Church.
The ancient Christian Church, even when they were under persecution by the
Roman Emperors, did yet constantly acknowledge their Authority to be from God.
Tert. ad S^^p. c. 2. Apol. c. 30. Adv. Hares l. 5. c. 24.
Tertullian declares, that the Christian knows that the Emperor is constituted
by his God. And, says he, from thence is the Emperor, from whence is the man;
from thence is his power from whence is his spirit. And the same sense is
expressed by Irenaeus. Eus. Hist. l. 7. c. 11. gr.
And Dionysius of Alexandria in Eusebius, acknowledged, that it was God who
gave the Empire to Valerian and Galienus. The same truth is asserted by S. Aug.
de Civ. Dei, l 5. c. 21. by Epiphanius, Haeres. 40. and by diverse other
Christian Writers: Bell. in Lib. Recogn. de laicis.
insomuch that when Bellarmine sought for the testimonies of ancient Writers,
to prove Dominion to be of humane original, he could meet with no Theological
Writer of the Christian Church, who favored his opinion amongst the Fathers,
and therefore takes up with Aquinas. And Paulus Orosius affirms, Oros. HIst. l.
2. c. 1. Vell. in 4. Tom. Aug. ad 22 Qu. Dc Concord. l. 2. c. 2. n. 1, 2, 3.
that all Power and Government is of god, is that which they who have not read
the Scriptures do think, and they who have read them do know. And some of the
Romish Church speak to this purpose, as Vellosillus and especially P. de Marca.

5. And now let any equal Reader consider, whether the evidence of reason,
Scripture, and the ancient Fathers, will agree with that reproachful Position
of Hildebrand, or Greg. 7. Greg. 7. Epist. l. 8. Ep. 21.
against God and his Vicegerents, That Kings had their beginning, from them
who affected rule by the instigation of the Devil. But they all tend to confirm
what has been asserted in our church; Can. 1. 1640.
That the most high and sacred order of Kings is of divine right, being the
ordinance of God himself, founded in the prime laws of nature, and clearly
established by express Texts, both of the Old and New Testaments.

6. And the nature of the Rulers power, And from the nature of this Authority.
will further speaks its Constitution to be from God. He is to judge the
people, but God being the judge of all the earth, all acts of judgment are
declared to be, not for men but for the Lord, 2 Chr. 19.6. and therefore must
be performed by an Authority derived from him. And the punishment inflicted by
Governors, is an act of vengeance or revenging; and therefore as vengeance or
revenging, (...) is claimed by God himself, as peculiarly belonging to him,
Romans 12.19. vengeance is mine; so the Ruler as the Minister of God is made an
Executor of Vengeance, or a Revenger, (...), Romans 13.4. which must be by Gods
Authority derived to him. And since the Ruler who bears the Sword, has an
Authority of Life and Death, this could not be derived to him from the
community, since no man has such a Dominion over his own Life, as to have a
power to take away his Life, Lessius de Just. and Jur. l. 2. c. 4. dub. 10. M.
Becan. de Jur. c. 4. q. 1.
as has been truly asserted by Schoolmen and others, and therefore cannot
transfer such a power to any other person: And therefore, this Authority of
Governors must be received from God, who is Lord of life and death.

7. divine extract, I shall now show, that the various pretenses for founding
it in the consent of men, are of very little weight. From the Election of some
Princes.
It is confessed, that there are elective Kingdoms, and Empires in the World;
and that where there has been a vacancy of a Governor, and none could claim a
right of succession, Princes have often been chosen by the people. In this Case
several Roman Emperors were Elected by their Army, and received by the Senate,
and thus were Gideon, Jephtha, and other Judges established in Israel. But such
a liberty of choice in the people in these circumstances, carries no opposition
to the Authority being from God. For the entering into a conjugal Society, is by
a free choice, (even so far of choice, that many persons if they please, may
live in celibate and single life, whilst men cannot live without Government)
and yet Matrimony, and the Husbands Authority is by divine appointment. And
Members of a Corporation do usually choose their chief Magistrate, but thought
they determine upon the person, it is not they, but the Princes Charter and
Grant, that gives him his Authority.

8. And they who tell us, M. Salamon. de princip.
that Sovereign Authority cannot be a proper divine institution, because then
its rights would be wholly unalterable, and the same in all the Governments in
the World, do rely upon a mere fallacy. From the different rights of Regality.
For this Topic would with equal force and evidence, prove the paternal right
not to be founded in the laws of nature, or the institution of God; because the
authority of the Father, and the privileges of Children, are not the same in
different parts of the World. The Rules of inheriting by the right of
devolution in some part of the Low Countries; Go^osred. not. ad Dig. l. 1. Tit.
6. n. 1. de jure. Capp. de vor. Jephthae. Instit. l. 1. Tit. 9.
and of Gavelkind, and some other tenures in England, do vary from the more
general usage. And in many places of the World the Father had Jus vitae and
neeis: and Cappellus asserteth him to have had that power of life and death
among the Jews. The Institutions of Justinian expressly testify, that that right
of power, which the Roman Fathers had over their Children, was that which was
proper to the Citizens of Rome: and it is there added, no other men have that
power over their Children, which we have. Nor will it prove Matrimony to be no
institution of God, because the privileges of the Wife are esteemed greater in
England than in other Countries; and are not the same at the Death of the
Husband, in the Province of York and the City of London, with the other parts
of the Kingdom. But the truth is, in those States or Relations which are fixed
by divine institution, there are some things so necessary and essential, that
they cannot be separated from them: such are in the Conjugal Relation, the
Headship of the Husband, the ordinary inseparableness of that Society till
Death, and the performance of Conjugal Duties; and such are in the supreme
Government, the necessary care of justice and the common good, and even of
matters of Religion, and the having a power fitted to these ends, and which in
pursuance of them, may not by inferiors be forcibly resisted. But in many
other particular things, the privileges of inseriour relations, and the
dignities and rights of superiors, may be greater or less, according to what
is concluded by their mutual consent.

9. The Solemnity of Coronation, From the Rites of Coronation.
when the people acknowledge their King, and the King again gives the people
assurance, that he will preserve their Religion Rights and Laws, and govern
them according to those Laws; is far from intending to express, the Kings
Authority to be derived from the people by a contract, as some have weakly
argued. For the King is actually King, by his right of inheritance and
succession, upon the Death of his Predecessor, antecedently to this Solemnity,
as our Law Books do generally acknowledge; and Henry the Sixth Reigned diverse
years in England before he was Crowned. Du May 's Estate of the Empire. Di^l.
2. verse. fin. Extrav. Com. l. 5. Tit. 10. c. 4.
And even in Elective Principalities, the rights of Sovereignty are invested in
the person elected thereto, before the Coronation; both in the Empire it self,
and other Dominions. But the intent of this Solemnity is, that as the Rites of
Inauguration in other Magistrates, tend to make such impressions in the people,
as may beget a reverence toward them; so the Prince his appearing with
splendor to his people, does both excite them to, and give them opportunity
for public acknowledgments, and expressions of affection and honor toward
him, and joyful acclamations. To this purpose Henry the Third was twice
Crowned, once in the first year of his Reign, Mat. Par. an. 1216.
where M. Paris treats, De prima Coronatione Regis Henrici, and again in his
twentieth year, as is manifest in the preamble of the Statute of Merton:
Fullers Hist. an. 1194.
and Richard the First was observed also to have been twice Crowned. In like
manner David notwithstanding his right by Divine appointment, besides his being
anointed by Samuel, was twice anointed by the people. Sed. Olam Rab. c. 13.
Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 6. c. 6.
And both the Jewish Chronicle, and Josephus declare, that Saul also was
anointed a second time. And the kind expressions of the Prince, and the
assurance that he gives his people, that he will govern them by their laws, and
maintain their Religion and Rights, is designed to banish and expel all jealous
fears from them, and to increase their affection to him, and make their
obedience and submission the more ready and cheerful, by their having security
from their Princes reputation, honor, and integrity, that he will intend the
preservation of the great things, which conduce to their welfare.

10. It has also been objected, From the Civil Law. Digest. l. 1. Tit. 4. n.
1. quod Principi.
that besides the like expressions in other Law Books, the Civil Law declares,
Lege Regia quae de ejus (Principis) imperio lata est, populus ei and in eum
omne suum imperium and potestatem confert, which words declare, that by that
Law which was made concerning the Empire of the Prince, the people yield to him
all their authority and power. It also asserteth, that Nations were divided,
and Kingdoms established by the Jus gentium or the Law of Nations: Ibid. Tit.
1. n. 5. Ex hoc jurc. Ibid. Tit. 1. n. 4. Manumiss. and Justin. Inst. l. 1.
Tit. 3.
and also that liberty is the natural state, and servitude is introduced by the
Law of Nations. Now though it might be said, against the force of any such
allegations, which seem to oppose this truth; that the right of God, and of his
constitution and authority, is not to be determined by any humane writings,
especially if they speak against the Scripture, and rational evidence: Yet I
further observe, 1. That the first expression has respect to the political
sanction, or establishment of the Civil Government of the Roman Empire; and
even with respect to the peculiar privileges of the Emperor himself, as
having a legislative power in his own breast; to which purpose that very law
declares, Quod Principi placuit, legis habet vigorem, utpote lege regia quae de
ejus imperio, etc. Novel. 73. and Novel. 85. and passim.
And though these political sanctions be a proper consideration for humane Laws
to take notice of, yet this hinders not, but that there may be a superior
divine constitution, of Sovereignty and secular power, which also is often
asserted in the Civil Law. 2. The following expression does speak of the like
political sanction, and does further acknowledge and assert, the bounds and
limits of the several Kingdoms and Nations, to be established by the Law of
Nations; jure gentium discretae gentes, regna condita. 3. That liberty which in
the last clause above cited, is declared to be the natural state, and the
servitude which is there said to be introduced, do not respect freedom from
Government and Laws, but from vasallage: which is evident, because in the
Digests, this servitude is said to be discharged by manumission, which still
leaves the person under civil Government; Ubi supra.
and in the Institutions the freedom which is opposed thereto is bounded by
that which is prohibited by law. And besides this freedom of the outward
condition, Ciceron. Paradox 5.
Cicero does well and wisely account that man to have attained a true and
proper freedom of mind, who obeys and reverenceth the Laws, not so much for
fear, as because he judges it useful and good so to do.

11. Now if Government be the Constitution of God, to make forcible opposition
against it, must either be in design to have Gods authority subject to them who
so act, or at least that themselves may not be subject unto it; both which are
unreasonable, and include a resisting the ordinance of God. But of the divine
law in this particular, I shall speak in the following Chapters.

CHAP. III.
Of the Unlawfulness of Subjects taking Arms against their King, under the
time of the Old Testament.
SECT. I.
The need and usefulness of considering this Case.
1. The reason why the state of the Old Testament is here particularly
considered.
THE enquiry into the times of the Old Testament is of the greater import,
because it would be a considerable testimony, that neither the Rules of common
equity, nor the true foundations of humane polity, do condemn all forcible
resistance against the Sovereign Power, if this was allowed to Subjects under
the Jewish constitution, which was very much ordained by the wisdom of God
himself. Concerning the Jewish Constitution, Lib. 1. c. 4. n. 3.
the learned Grotius does in his Book De Jure belli and pacis assert, that in
ordinary Cases of injury, they were not allowed to make resistance: and
therefore he expounds what Samuel spoke, of the (...) or the right or manner
of the King, 1 Samuel 8.11. -- 18. to intend that in such things as the King was
there declared to undertake, non resistendi obligationem, an obligation upon
them to make no resistance. Ibid. n. 7.
But yet he afterward asserteth, that in great and weighty Cases, either of
manifest civil injury, as in what David sustained from Saul; or of violence
offered to their Religion and whole Nation, as was done by Antiochus, when the
Maccabees withstood him, it was lawful for them to take Arms against their
Sovereign. But he proposes it as a Question of greater difficulty, whether
Christians may be allowed to do the like: and here he recommends the duty of
Christian Patience, and bearing the Cross, from the example of Christ himself
and the Primitive Church.

2. And Mr Thorndike in his Epilogue, Epil. Part. 2. Chapter 32.
from the instance of the Maccabees, does allow the lawfulness of subjects,
taking Arms under the Jewish State, for the defense of their Religion: and
very plainly asserteth the same, in his Treatise of the right of the Church in
a Christian State. Right of Church. Chapter 5. p. 306. etc.
But in both those places, he declares the unlawfulness of taking Arms upon
the same account under Christianity; because of the difference of the spirit,
rules and conditions of the Law and the Gospel. But yet in this last mentioned
Book, there are some expressions, which will make it manifest, that that
learned man was not so fixed in this Position, concerning the Jewish
Government, but that he sometimes much inclined to, and plainly embraced the
contrary assertion. For speaking of that Government, which the Jews entered into
under Ezra and Nehemiah, he declared, that this was allowed by the Grant, and
Commission of the King of Persia; and says, Right of Chapter Chapter 4. p. 229.
It is not in any common reason to imagine, that by any Covenant of the Law,
renewed by Esdras and Nehemias, they conceived themselves enabled or obliged,
to maintain themselves by force, in the profession and exercise of their
Religion, against their Sovereign, in case he had not allowed it them.

3. But that which will make this enquiry into the times of the Old Testament,
The Gospel makes no new model for the rights of all political Societies.
the more necessary, is this; because so far as I can discern, it is an
assertion which cannot be maintained or defended. That there is in this
particular, any such difference between the State of the Old Testament and the
New, as that it should be lawful for Subjects before the coming of Christ, and
particularly for the Jews, to defend their Liberties or Religion by War against
their Sovereign; but it is now become unlawful for all Subjects under
Christianity, by the peculiar Precepts of the Gospel. For though it is
manifest, that the spirit of the Law and the Gospel do very much differ, and
that meekness and peace are more peculiarly recommended in the Gospel, by the
Precepts, and by the example of Christ, both to Rulers and Subjects; yet I see
not how Christianity does alter the model and frame of humane political
Societies, so as to debase Subjects, or deprive them of any rights or freedoms,
which they did before enjoy. It is indeed truly observed by S. Chrysostom,
Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de Dav. and Saul.
that David in his actings toward Saul, had not all those arguments for
subjection, which Christians now have, having never seen nor heard of the
great example of Christ Crucified, and his doctrine of patience and suffering.
But though these are high motives to the performance of our duty, they do not
lay a new foundation for common rights; nor do they establish any such new
Rules, as thereby to determine the unlawfulness of all Wars in the defense of
just rights, if they be managed by a warrantable authority.

4. And they who insist upon the Gospel Precepts, of taking up the Cross, as if
that did put such a difference between the legal State and the Evangelical,
that thereupon upon it is now become unlawful for Subjects to take Arms,
especially for the defense of Religion, do also proceed upon a mistaken ground.
For though this Precept and the profession of Christianity, does require great
meekness and patience, and a firm and steadfast resolution under all
difficulties, to pursue and maintain the Faith and practice of the Gospel, it
does not deprive such persons, of a power and right to make War, even in the
defense of Religion, who antecedently to Christianity were invested with such a
right. And he who will assert this, must grant it unlawful for any Sovereign
Prince, to defend his free profession of the Christian Religion, which is one
of his just rights, against an external force which would impose a contrary
Religion upon him; Eus. Eccl. Hist. l. 9. c. 7. gr.
as was done in the Christian Kingdom of Armenia, which then had a Sovereign
Prince, against the fury of Maximinus, who would have forced them to embrace
the Pagan Idolatry.

5. And whereas in the New Testament, we have clear Declarations, that the
higher Powers are the Ordinance of God, and that they who resist them, shall
receive to themselves damnation, Romans 13.1, 2. the sense of these truths was
contained under the acknowledgment, which David made in the Old Testament, who
can stretch forth his hand against the Lords anointed, Hom. 1. de Dav. and Saul.
and be guiltless? For as S. Chrysostom noted, when David declared Saul to be
the Lords anointed, he did acknowledge him to have Gods Authority, and that to
resist him was, (...), to fight against God; or in the Apostles words, to
resist the Ordinance of God. Aug. Quaest. ex Vet. Test. c. 35.
And S. Austin observing, that David called Saul the Lords anointed, after the
Lord had departed from him, he adds, that David was not ignorant, divinam esse
traditionem in officio ordinis Regalis, that the royal office was Gods
Ordinance and appointment; and therefore he both did honor Saul, and ought so
to do.

6. Some possibly may here urge, that the Laws and Rules of right, and all the
Precepts of Religion amongst the Israelites, were there established
antecedently to the being of the Royal Authority among them; and that these
things standing by Divine Authority, no King had any power to repeal or break
them; and on this account, they might have liberty from the nature of their
Constitution, to defend these rights by the Sword, though Christians have not.
But even this also will not alter the Case. For throughout all the World, the
common Rules of right and justice have a divine stamp, and are of as great
Antiquity as the World it self, and the nature of man: and there is scarce any
Kingdom in the World, which has continued without interruption of its
succession and establishment, so long as the doctrine of Christianity has been
in the World, Tert. Ap. c. 4. Cl. Alex. Strom. l. 4. Orig. cont. Cel. l. 1. l.
5. and l. 8.
which peculiarly is from God. And however, no prescription can be pleaded
against the right of God, and the Sovereignty of Christ, no more than it could
be pleaded for the establishment of the Pagan Idolatry; in which Case the
ancient Christians constantly asserted, their duty to God and his Religion, to
be above that which they owed to the contrary Laws and Constitutions of humane
Authority.

7. Wherefore it will be of considerable moment, clearly to prove, that
Subjects in the Church of Israel, according to the will of God under the Old
Testament, were not allowed in any such Cases as have been pretended, to take
Arms against their Sovereign. And if this was then unlawful, it is now much
more so under the dispensation of the Gospel.

SECT. II.
The general unlawfulness of Subjects taking Arms against their Prince, under
the Old Testament, evidenced.
Kings under the Old Testament might not be resisted.
under the Old Testament, will receive the fullest evidence from the behavior
of David toward Saul, and those principles of duty whereby he was guided; I
shall pass by many other things with much brevity. When Samuel declared the
(...) the manner (or as very many Translations render it, and the word most
frequently signifies, V. Verse. Vulg. Sir. Arab. Par. Chald. and Sept. Barclai.
adv. Monarch. l. 2. p. 64.
the judgment or right) of the King, 1 Samuel 8.11. -- 18. and Chapter 10.25. many
judicious men with great reason, have accounted it to contain this sense, that
such was the right, dignity and authority of their King, that though the people
might bear and sustain such injuries, as are there mentioned, Carpzov. in
Schick. Th. 1. p. 1. and Th. 7. p. 160. Grot. ubi sup. and in 1 Samuel 8.11. and
de Imp. c. 3. n. 6.
they had no lawful power of redressing themselves by force, but only must
apply themselves to God. This Grotius in his Annotat. upon that place thus
expresses, si peccarent (reges) graviter in Dei legem, ad Deum ultio
pertinebat, non ad singulos, ac ne ad populum quidem. And de Imperio summarum
potestatum circa sacra, he says, Jus regis vocatur, quia ita agenti nemini
liceret vim ullam opponere. And to the like sense Salmasius, Defens. Reg. c. 2.

2. Solomon persuading to that duty and reverence, which Subjects owe to
Princes, Eccl. 8.2, 3. declares v. 4. where the word of a King is, there is
power, and who may say unto him What do thou? and speaks of the King against
whom there is no rising up, Prove. 30.31. which words give a fair intimation,
that the dignity of the King of Israel was such, that no opposition or
resistance might be made against him by inferiors. And when David declared,
Ps. 51.4. Against thee only have I sinned, Ambr. Apol. Dav. c. 10.
S. Ambrose gives this sense thereof, That David being King, was not subject to
the penalties of any humane Laws, but the whole punishment of his sin was in
the hands of God alone. This is owned by Vega, Veg. in Ps. 4. Poenit. Conc. 2.
to be the sense also of S. Hierome, Austin, Chrysostom and Cassiodorus; and
he himself gives this as a kind of Paraphrase upon that expression, nullum
alium praeter te unum in terra superiorem recognosco, I acknowledge none other
besides thee alone, my superior upon earth. And this interpretation was
received in the Christian Church, as early as the time of Clemens Alexandrinus:
and though other Expositions also have been given, Strom. l. 4. p. 517.
this shows what apprehensions these Christian Writers had, of the nature of
David's Regal Authority. And this has so much evidence of truth, that when
Murder and Adultery in inferior persons, was punished by the Judges of Israel,
according to the Law of Moses; David's judgment must be according as God himself
would pronounce and execute. And though God so far pardoned David, as to spare
his life, 2 Samuel 12.13. yet his Child must die, v. 14. even by the hand of God,
v. 15, 18, 22. And God denounced against him, that the Sword should not depart
from his house, v. 10. whereby Amnon, Absalom, and Adonijah were cut off. And
the Rebellion of Absalom, as a judgment which God inflicted, was part of the
punishment of this sin, v. 11.

3. When there were any corruptions in Religion publicly tolerated, as the
worshipping in high places and Groves, the holy Scriptures lay the blame
constantly upon the King and Prince: whereas if the people and subjects had the
power of defending their Religion, and the purity thereof by the Sword, the
fault would have been equally chargeable upon them, under the Government of
their Kings. For the same pious spirit, which would engage a good Prince, must
also oblige a pious people, to make use of their just power, for the honor and
service of God: and if the Case had been lawful, it would have been a kind of
Martyrdom, to hazard or lay down their lives, for the honor of God, and
defense of Religion. But private persons were then reputed to have done their
duty, when they sighed and mourned for the abominations of others, as they did
who received the mark for their preservation, Ezekiel. 9.4. and kept themselves
unspotted from them, as was done by the seven thousand in Israel who bowed not
their knees to Baal, 1 Kin. 19.18. whom Origin, Orig. in Ep. ad Romans c. 11.
Naz. Orat. 32.
and Nazianzen, according to the manifest sense of the Scriptures, account to
have observed Gods Testimonies, and to have been accepted of him.

4. But the clearest evidence, The coninent loyalty of David.
against the lawfulness of Subjects taking Arms, under the Kingdom of Israel
or Judah, is from the behavior and spirit of David. The Government of Israel
was peculiarly Theocratical, and the fundamental Law of their Kingdom was this,
Thou shall in any wise set him King over thee, whom the Lord thy God shall
choose, Deuteronomy. 17.15. Now God had rejected Saul and his Family, from continuing
in the Government of the Kingdom of Israel, 1 Samuel 13.14. and Chapter 15.23, 26,
28. and David by Gods appointment, was anointed of Samuel to succeed him, 1 Samuel 16.12, 13. and Saul himself knew that David was to the King after him, and
that the Kingdom of Israel would be established in his hand, 1 Samuel 24.20. only
the Kingdom was not taken from Saul during his life, Chapter 26.10 (...). And upon
this account, no subject in the World can have a greater Plea, for defending
himself by Force and Arms, than David had: in whose safety the common interest
of the whole Realm of Israel, was in an especial and extraordinary manner
included.

5. Under these cicumstances, Saul unjustly persecuted David, who had done him
no injury, but rewarded him good for evil, as himself acknowledged, 1 Samuel
24.9, 11, 17, 18. and his rage was so fierce, as to resolve to take away his
life, Chapter 20.31, 33. and upon David's account, he cruelly slew fourscore and
five of the Priests of the Lord in one day, Joseph. Ant. Jud. l. 6. c. 14.
(and Josephus says, three hundred eighty five persons of the Priestly Family,
were put to death by him) and in Nob the City of the Priests, he smote with the
edge of the Sword, both Man, Woman, Infant, and Suckling; only Abiathar
escaped, Chapter 22.18, 19. And Saul forced David from the place of Gods worship,
Chapter 26.19 So that Saul was guilty of a great opposition against God, and the
violation of justice; and David's defense was that in which the Authority of
God, and Religion, Righteousness, and the common good were concerned.

6. In this Case, David who was not obliged to give up himself in a unjust
violence, endeavored to avoid this by prudent ways of escape, Hom. against
Rebel. Part. 2.
or as our Homilies express it, to save himself, not by Rebellion, nor any
resistance, but by flight, and hiding himself from the Kings sight. And when
God delivered Saul into David's hands, at two several times, 1 Samuel 24.10, 18.
Chapter 26.12. the men who were with him, were forward to have taken away Saul's
life, and pleaded that God had administered an occasion for fulfilling his
promise concerning David's succeeding Saul, Chapter 24.4, 10. Chapter 26.8. But that
which prevailed with David to the contrary, was the sense of his duty, which
God had enjoined him; Opt. cont. Parm. l. 2.
obstabat, says Optatus, divinorum memoria mandatorum. He represseth their
inclinations, and declares it to be a great evil and guilt, to stretch out an
hand against the Lords anointed, Chapter 24.6, 10, 11. and Chapter 26.9, 11. And in
those places, he used words of more than ordinary detestation, (...) Let evil
be to me from the Lord, or according to our Fuller, in his Miscellanies,
wickedness, Full. Misc. l. 2. c. 2.
or a thing abominable from the Lord will be charged upon me, if I stretch
forth my hand against the Lords anointed. When he had cut off the Skirt of
Saul's Robe, which might reflect some dishonor upon him, his heart smote him.
And at last when the Amalekite, who was one of the Army of Israel under Saul,
declared, that he did slay him, though at his own request, and when dangerously
wounded, and ready to fall into his Enemies hands; David revengeth the Death of
Saul, by shedding the blood of that Amalekite, 2 Samuel 1.15, 16. wherein he gave
an high testimony, of the great sense he had, of the unlawfulness of offering
any violence and force, to a lawful King and Sovereign.

7. Nor was this behavior of David, De Dav. and Saul. Hom. 2.
from an unnecessary scrupulousness, or timorous fearfulness; but this was so
commendable, that S. Chrysostom proposes this instance as a pattern for
Christians to imitate, and declares that David gained a greater honor hereby,
and a greater Victory, (by having a full mastery over his passions) than by his
remarkable Conquest over Goliath. And David was both a wise man, This was from
no ungrounded fears, but from a clear and certain knowledge of his duty.
wiser than all the servants of Saul, 1 Samuel 18.30. and also of undaunted
courage, and a Prophet, and therefore it is very unlikely, that he should be
guided by mistaken scruples, in that he so often considered, so earnestly
expressed, and which was his present great interest to understand. But it is
very observable, that about those very times, when he expressed his high
abhorrence of stretching out his hand against Saul, he was under the
extraordinary guidance of the Spirit of God, and then penned the fifty seventh,
and fifty fourth Psalms, (and some others much about that time) as appears from
the titles of those Psalms, compared with 1 Samuel 24.3.8. Chapter 26.1.

8. And there have been men of good note, R. Kimch. in Munst. in Ps. 57. Gr.
Nys. l. 2. de Inscr. Ps. c. 2, 6, 15, 16.
both among the Jewish Writers, and ancient Fathers, who think that those words
Al-taschith, which are in the title of the fifty seventh Psalm, (and some
others) and signify Destroy not, have respect to what David spoke, to hinder
his men from destroying Saul, which is expressed in the Hebrew, and in several
Copies of the Septuagint, 1 Samuel 26.9. by the same words, which are in the
title of that Psalm. And if this be admitted, this Psalm must express, that
David had the greater assurance, and confidence in God, for his own
preservation and safety, by reason of his eminent fidelity to Saul; and that
this was, by the guidance and inspiration of Gods spirit which directed him
herein. And the substance of this conjecture, is thus far certainly true, that
David had from his loyal demeanor unto Saul, much inward joy and peace, and
expectation of Gods blessing upon himself, as he declares, 1 Samuel 26.23, 24.
in these full and express words, The Lord render to every man his righteousness
and his faithfulness: for the Lord delivered thee into my hand to day, but I
would not stretch forth mine hand against the Lords Anointed. And behold as thy
life was much set by this day in mine eyes, so let my life be much set by in
the eyes of the Lord, and let him deliver me out of all tribulation.

9. When the seventh Psalm was penned, whose Title is, concerning the words of
Cush the Benjamite, Chald. Par. Verse. Vulg. Grot. Vatabl. Munst. in loc.
some ancient Versions expressly refer this to Saul the Son of Kish. And many
good Expositors do, with much reason, judge, that when David was accused by
Saul himself, of lying in wait against him, 1 Samuel 22.8. and by others of
seeking his hurt, Chapter 24.9. David in this Psalm under the Conduct of Gods
Infallible Spirit, declares His Abhorrence of such things as being very
wicked, and deserving severe punishment, in these words; O Lord my God, if I
have done this, if there be iniquity in my hands. If I have rewarded evil to
him that was at peace with me; Yea, I have delivered him that, without cause,
was mine Enemy. Let the Enemy persecute my Soul, and take it, etc. v. 3, 4, 5.
And even they who rather interpret the Title, to relate to the words of Shimei,
must grant the like sense to be intended in these verses.

10. And lest any should think, He here acted not the Politician, but observed
the rules of Conscience.
David's expressions, and especially his killing the Amalekite, to be the
actions of a Politician, for the better securing his own Government; though
this be sufficiently refuted in what I have said above, I further add; 1. That
he had plainly declared the Sin and Guiltiness of disloyal Acts of violence, at
such times when mere Policy, if considered as abstract from Duty, might have
prompted him to free himself, from a potent, deadly, irreconcilable Enemy, and
thereby to gain the Possession of the Crown. 2. That if David had shed the
blood of the Amalekite, without respect unto justice, and only to strike an awe
into others, whilst he believed he did not deserve death; this had been a
designedly contrived wilful murder, to gratify his own lust; and would have
been a sin, at least as deeply dyed, as the Murder of Vriah; which yet with its
attendants, is accounted the singular stain and blemish in the Life of David, 1
Kin. 15.5. And therefore David's Deportment in things toward Saul, was, Gr.
Nys. ubi sup. c. 17.
as Gr. Nyssen expresses it, because he judged it (...) an unlawful and unjust
thing to have done otherwise, and what he said and did was in the fear of God.

SECT. III.
Objections from the behavior of David, answered.
1. It may be first objected, Grot. de J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 7. Ruth. of
Civ. Pol. Qu. 31. and Qu. 10.
that David's Carriage reaches not so far, as to condemn all taking Arms
against a Sovereign Prince, but only such force, where assaults are made, or
violence offered unto his Person; and toward such a Person too, who was
particularly anointed by Gods especial Command.

Ans. 1. The words of David do indeed directly condemn hostile Acts, against
the Person of the King: But his proceeding upon this ground, because Saul was
the Lords anointed, or one appointed by Gods Authority, and invested with his
Power, David not only repressed violence against the person of Saul, but
reverenced his authority.
must also condemn acts of violence against his Power and Authority, derived
from God. 2. Forcible opposing the Kings strength, does naturally tend to
expose his Person also to violence; for if his strength be subdued, what
defense remains for his Person against the fury of his Enemies, or the rage of
Assailants, we may learn from the History of our Civil Wars, and our late good
Sovereign. But David, whose heart smote him for cutting off the lap of Readiness
Garment, whereby he might fall under some appearance of dishonor or disgrace,
would much more avoid what might bring him into real danger. And it is very
considerable, that when David had the opportunity of coming upon Saul and his
Army, when God had cast them all into a deep sleep; he not only spared Saul's
Person, but did not offer any violence to any single man in the whole Army, 1 Samuel 26.7, 8, 12, 16.

2. And 3. there could be nothing more contained under the Rite of anointing by
Gods Command, than to express, in the first fixing a Governor or Government,
that this was appointed and approved by God. Ant. Jud. l. 6. c. 7.
To which purpose, Josephus, who was well acquainted with the sense of the
Jewish Phrases, does give such Paraphrases of the Lords anointed as these,
(...), one who was by God advanced to the Kingdom, and (...), one ordained of
God; and in the Septuagint, (...) to anoint, is in 2 Samuel 3.39. rendered by
(...) to constitute. And it was not so much the use of any outward anointing by
a Prophet or any other, as the Authority ordained of God, which was chiefly to
be considered in them, who were acknowledged to be the Lords Anointed. Enxt.
Lex. Rab. in (...) Schickard de J. R. Heb. c. 1. Theor. 4. Abarb. in Ex. 30. de
Unct. c. 8.
For Cyrus was called the Lords Anointed, though no such Unction was used among
the Persians, Isai. 45.1. And in the Kingdom of Judah, Maimonides and other
Jewish Writers tell us, that no King was anointed, who was the Son of a King,
and came to the Crown by manifest and undoubted Succession; and yet these
Kings, such as Jehosaphat, Hezekiah, and Josiah, were nevertheless to be
honored. Only Solomon, Joash, and Jehoahaz were anointed, because of some
different claims of succession, or interruption of the true right, but not by
any special divine command. But all other Power and Authority, as well as that
of Saul, is ordained of God, Romans 13.1, 2.

3. But the chief thing here objected is, De jure Magis. in subdit. qu. 6.
that there are appearances of evidence, that David did take up Arms against
Saul, and undertook the defense of himself by force: and three things are
alleged in proof hereof. Grot. ubi sup. Quo nisi ad vim arcendam, si
inferretur?
The first thing produced is, that David was Captain over four hundred men, 1 Samuel 22.2. and then over six hundred, Chapter 23.13. and a far greater number came
to him to Ziklag, who were called helpers of the War, (...) Chr. 12.1. And Mr
Rutherford again and again says, Ruth. of Civ. Pol. Qu. 32.
that these Armed men who came to Ziklag, came to help David against Saul; but
the Scripture says not so. Ans. 1. David having been a person of chief
eminency both in Saul's Court, David's six hundred men not intended to make War
against Saul.
and the Armies of Israel, and being Son-in-law to the King; and especially
being next Successor to the Kingdom, by Gods peculiar appointment, might upon
Principles of Prudence, entertain a considerable retinue about him, for the
upholding his own honor and fame, for his safeguard against private assaults
and outrages, and as an useful method to prevent his being surprised by Saul
unawares, of whose motions these men could give him sufficient intelligence.
And this might also be done by Gods direction, Samuel being present with David
in the time of his flight, as both the Scripture and Josephus observe, Ant. l.
6. c. 14.
1 Samuel 19.18-22. and the Prophet Gad also, who gave him advice, 1 Samuel 22.5.
But it is also further to be considered, that when David left the Coast of
Israel, and went into the land of the Philistines, he took his six hundred men
with him, 1 Samuel 27.2. and greatly increased his numbers there, 1 Chr. 12. v
1-23. when yet there was no design of taking Arms against Achish, in whose
Kingdom he abode for his own safety. But all this was done, in part for the
ends abovementioned, and also in an especial manner, that these faithful and
valiant men might be serviceable to him and his interest, when the way should
be open for his succeeding in the Kingdom of Israel. And the increase of David's
Companies, and the constant resort to him, was the method which Gods providence
made use of, in bringing him to sit upon the Throne of Israel. And whereas
these men are called helpers of David, and helpers of the War, 1 Chr. 12.1.22.
it is manifest they were so, against the Geshurites and Amalekites, 1 Samuel
28.8. Chapter 30.17. and against the house of Saul after his death, 2 Samuel 2.8, 17.
Chapter 3.1. and the Jebusites, 2 Chr. 11.4. etc. and other Enemies with whom David
made war: but they could not be helpers in the War against Saul, with whom
David never waged war.

4. Ans. 2. As this is the true account of David's retaining such numbers about
him, so we have further evidence, that he never designed them for any War
against Saul. For whilst Saul himself was under a great consternation and fear
of David, as Josephus says, Jos. ibid. p. 195.
and the holy Scriptures intimate, and David with his six hundred men, was by
Gods assistance able to vanquish the Army of the Philistines, who had Invaded
Israel, and Besieged one of Saul's strong Towns, 1 Samuel 23.5, 13. and with his
increased number, to subdue the Host of the Amalekites, 1 Samuel 30.17. it is
hereby manifest, that it was not his inability, but his Conscience of his duty,
that kept him from his ever using his strength, against the Army of Saul. And
yet there are great appearances of proof, that David's valiant Men who
vanquished these other Armies, Verse. Sir. and Arab. in 1 Chr. 12.1.
had he been willing, would have been forward enough to have engaged against
Saul, as is expressly declared in the Syriack and Arabic versions.

5. De jur. Magistr. jbidem.
A Second thing urged is, That Abigail commended David, for his fighting the
Battles of the Lord. And not only Junius Brutus and such others, Jun. Brut.
Vind. Qu. 2.
but Grotius also in the first Editions of the Book above mentioned, Grot. ubi
sup. sine Annot. An. 1625.
will have the Wars of the Lord to be understood, not concerning his former
Battles, which he had fought against the Philistines, but of his present
gathering Forces in Judah, 1 Samuel 25.28. But to interpret this of David's
gathering of Forces against Saul, is a wonderfully strange and unreasonable
interpretation, because, 1. Daivd his fighting the Battles of the Lord, was no
acts of force against Saul.
David never fought any Battle at all, against the Armies of Saul. 2. Nor is it
imaginable, that when Abigail declared what peace David might afterward have,
in not revenging himself on Nabal by shedding blood, and disswades him from it,
lest afterward it should be grief unto him, 1 Samuel 25.26, 31. (for which advice
David blessed God who sent Abigail, and was sensible that it kept him from
doing evil) that she should at the same time applaud his shedding blood, to
avenge himself against Saul. 3. The order of the words, v. 28, 29. (...) thou
have fought the Lords Battles, and (...) and a man (or rather, yet a man) is
risen up to pursue thee, do most probably show, that this must refer to Battles
fought, before Saul did pursue David. And it is well observed by Barclay,
Barcl. adv. Mouarchom. l. 4. c. 19.
that these words ought to be referred to the Wars David undertook against the
Enemies of Israel, and of Saul, who when he became Saul's General, had this
charge given him; 1 Samuel 18.17.
Be valiant for me and fight the Lords Battles. 4. These words, v. 28. The Lord
will certainly make my Lord a sure House because my Lord fights, or has
fought the Battles of the Lord, if they should be understood of his actings
against Saul, are directly contrary to the ground of David's hope in Gods
protection abovementioned; which was not from his acting by violence against
Saul, but from his patient submission, and refusing to avenge himself. 5. Grot.
in 1 Samuel 17.47. In Cap. 25.28.
Grotius elsewhere closes with a quite different sense, and says, those were
called the Battles of the Lord, which were against the Canaanites, and such
other people as God had devoted to destruction, being populi damnati. And this
is indeed true, but withal even other Wars undertaken by the will of God,
against public Enemies to the Children of Israel, and the God of Israel, are
comprehended under the Wars of God, as may appear from 1 Chr. 5.22.2 Chr.
20.15. And Grotius also in the latter Editions of his Books, De Jure belli and
pacis, has wholly struck out that which concerned this strange interpretation,
concerning the Battles of the Lord.

6. Dejur Magistr. ibidem. Jun. Erut. ubi sup. Ruth. of Civ. Pol. p. 344.
The last thing insisted on is, that David had thoughts of continuing in
Keilah, a place of strong defense, 1 Samuel 23.7, 10, 11, 12. and therefore his
intention must have been, to have kept it as a Garrison against the Forces of
Saul. Ans. 1. Of his parpose for abiding in Keilah.
David did ordinarily reside in strong holds in the Wilderness, sometimes in
one, and sometimes in another, without any design to keep them as Garrisons
against Saul's Army; only making use of them as safe and convenient places, to
abide in for a time, till he thought fit to remove, 1 Samuel 23.14, 19, 29. 2. It
was manifestly David's aim, by his having spies abroad, to give him intelligence
of Saul's motion, and by his own frequent discamping, to keep at such distances
from Saul, and to make such escapes, that he should not find him out: and
herein Gods providence took particular care of him, 1 Samuel 23.14, 17, 22, 23,
26. Chapter 26.1, 4. Chapter 27.1.3. The truth of what appears concerning David's
intention, relating to Keilah, is this, that David purposed to have made some
stay in that place, which he had then rescued from their Besiegers the
Philistines. But understanding that Saul intended to destroy that place, if
they should harbor him and not seize on him, and that they for their own
security would hinder his further escape, if he should continue there, and
would lay hold on him, and deliver him up to Saul, he timely prevented this
danger, by a speedy removal, Chapter 23.7-12.

SECT. IV.
Diverse Objections from the Maccabees, Zealots, Jehu, and others answered.
1. Among other Objections, I shall not need to take notice in this place, of
the pretenses for a constant power among the Jews, superior to the Regal. The
Romanists indeed are sometimes forward to assert, the Priest to have been above
the King, as Bellarmine affirms, Bellarm. do Offic. Princ. c. 4.
that after Moses, semper praepositus erat Pontifex Principi. And others
besides those I have before mentioned, speak the like of the Synedrial power:
insomuch that when Grotius did in his Book, de Imperio, assert some of the
pretended Synedrial Authority, to have been in truth fixed in the King, saying,
hoc ipsum Synedrii jus, regni tempore videtur fuisse penes Reges; Blondel in
his Scholia upon that place, on the contrary asserts, Sch. ad Grot. de Imp. S.
p. c. 10. n. 17.
that this Sanhedrim did judge the King, imo de Regibus Synedrium judicavit.
And if either of these pretenses were true, it must also be granted, that a
superior authority may lawfully make use of force, toward an inferior power,
when it be necessary so to do. B. 1. Chapter 3.
But these things are sufficiently refuted in the former Book, to which I remit
the Reader,

2. Obj. 1. It is urged, Of the wars of the Maccabees.
that in the Jewish Church Arms might lawfully be taken, in the defense of
their Religion against their Sovereign, from the instance of the Wars of the
Maccabees. The Maccabees are generally commended, and very probably by the
Apostle, Heb. 11.34, 35, 37. and by some of the Prophets. When Antiochus
Epiphanes polluted the Temple, and did prostitute the Jewish Religion and Laws,
and commanded the Jews to offer Sacrifice after the manner of the Heathen,
Mattathias and his Sons being zealous for the Law, took up arms against him, 1
Mac. Chapter 1. and Chapter 2. which were chiefly managed, after the Fathers Death, by
Judas Maccabaeus. Brut. Vin^^ Qu. 2. p. 61. Qu. 3. p. 199. Grot. de J. B. and
P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 7. Right of Church. chapter 5. p. 306.
This instance is produced by Junius Brutus, and Grotius, as a lawful War
against their lawful Sovereign. And of this Case Mr Thornedike has these
words, It is manifest that the Arms which the Maccabees took up against
Antiochus Epiphanes, their lawful Sovereign, are approved by God; not only as
foretold by Daniel and Ezekiel, and other Prophets; but also because the
Apostle manifestly commends their faith: on the other side it is manifest,
that they justified their Arms upon the title of Religion. Now it is obvious,
that as this Case stands thus represented, it is the very same in which the
Primitive Christians refused to make resistance, and which Mr Thorndike will
not allow under Christianity.

3. Answ. Antiochus Epiphanes against whom the Maccabees fought, was no lawful
Sovereign in Judea, Grot. ibid.
but an invader. This assertion is indeed rejected by Grotius, pretending that
he had the right of succession from the Macedonian power: says he, quod quidem
haec arma eo titulo defendunt, quasi Antiochus non Rex sed invasor fuerit,
vanum puto. But though there is some difference amongst Historians, concerning
the division of the Grecian Empire after the death of Alexander, I see no
reason to doubt, of the account given by Josephus concerning Judea. He tells us
that then Egypt, Jos. Ant. l. 12. c. 1. Cont. Apion. l. 1.
and also Judea, was under Ptolomaeus the Son of Lagus, (not Seleucus, from
whom Antiochus Epiphanes did descend) who giving the Jews ample privileges,
took of them an Oath of Fidelity to him and his Posterity; and that they were
then under Ptolomaeus, he cites the Testimony also of Agatharcides Cnidius an
ancient Historian, who wrote the Acts of the Successors of Alexander. Antiq. l.
12. c. 3.
And Judea continued under the Egyptian Ptolomyes above an hundred years, until
Antiochus Magnus gained it by Conquest, but enjoyed it a little time, restoring
it as part of the Portion of Cleopatra his Daughter, whom he gave in Marriage
to Ptolomaeus Epiphanes. But this Ptolomy dying, Antiochus Epiphanes in the
Minority of his son Ptolomaeus Philometor, overcame him, and being invited by a
Seditious party, invadeth Judea, takes Jerusalem, and exercises himself there
in cruelty and impiety, Josep. l. 12. c. 6, 7. and Prol. de Bell. Jud. And under
these circumstances Mattathias and his Son resisted him by War, Josep. Ant. l.
12. c. 8. de Bell. Jud. l. 1. c. 1, 2.

4. Now a violent possession of what he had no just claim to, was far from
being a Title of right. And therefore the Jews might very lawfully endeavor by
Arms to recover their rights, their Country, and the liberty of Religious
Worship, from the forceable violence of an open Enemy, and an invader, who had
cruelly oppressed them about three years. Indeed he is sometime styled the
King, being truly King of Syria, but by no right King of Judea; but other times
in the Book of the Maccabees he and his Forces are styled Enemies, 1 Mac. 2.7,
9. Chapter 13.51. and the like in Josephus, who against Apion declares, that
Antiochus came as an Enemy, against them who were his Friends and Confederates,
Cont. Apion. l. 2.
nos socios and amicos aggressus est, says the Latin Translation, the
ordinary Greek being there defective.

5. The Wars of the Judges.
Of the same nature also were the Wars of Barak, against Jabin King of Canaan,
of Gideon, against the Midianites, and of Othniel against Cushan Rishathaim
King of Mesopotamia; and also the acting of Sampson against the Philistines,
and of Ehud against Eglon. For none of these Princes against whom these Judges
took Arms, or toward whom they did acts of violence, had any just right of
Superiority and Sovereignty over Israel, but they had injuriously invaded and
oppressed them: and it is very usual with Scholastic Writers to give the
instance of Eglon, D. Sot. de Just. and jure l. 5. Qu. 1. Art. 3.
for one who was Tyrannus titulo, or an Usurper, having no just Title. And
besides this, since God reserved the disposal of the Government of Israel
peculiarly in his own hand; Lessius de Just. l. 2. c. 9. dub. 4.
and he raised up and sent all these Judges, Jud. 3.9, 15. Chapter 4.6. Chapter 6.14.
Chapter 13.25. 1 Samuel 12.11. and signified this to Barak by a Prophetess, and to
Gideon by an Angel; by this means the Sovereign power, so far as concerned the
undertaking committed to them, was placed in them.

6. But it may be further objected, The right of Zealots examined.
that it is declared by very good Authors and men well acquainted with the
Jewish State, and their Writers, that in some cases, especially against the
practicers of Idolatry, private persons out of a zeal for God and Religion,
might make use of the power of the Sword, jure zelotarum, following the example
of Phinehas. Grot. de J. B. and P. L 2. c. 20. n. 9. Seld. de Jur. not. and
Gent. l. 4. c. 3, 4, 5. de Syned. l. 2. c. 14. n. 3. Dr. Ham. Tract of Zealots.
Right of Chapter Chapter 5.
And they who embrace this Notion, do not confine this to private cases, as if
any of the Jews might lawfully kill an Idolater, as other persons may do him
who makes an actual assault against their King, or is an aggressor to design
their murder: But Grotius, Seldom, Dr Hammond, and Mr Thorndike, Seem to allow
the undertaking of the Maccabees, to be grounded upon this right of Zealots.
And then it must be granted, that it might also be lawful for other private
persons to take Arms in like cases. And there are such instances as these
produced, to prove this right of Zealots, in Phinehas killing Zimri and Cozbi,
Elijah slaying Baals Priests, and calling fire from Heaven on the Captains of
the Fifties, our Saviors driving the Money Changers out of the Temple, and
such like, besides the actings of the Maccabees. Now it might be sufficient to
say, that if the right of Zealots should be allowed, provided it extended it
self only to private cases, which is as much as any probability of proof can
reach, the duties of Subjection, and the Authority of Government, might still
possibly remain inviolable. But because I am further prone to think that the
grounds and instances upon which this whole notion is built are mistaken, I
shall offer to the Readers consideration these three things with respect
thereto.

7. First, that it must needs be a great disorder in Government, and a
foundation of much disturbance and evil, if every earnest spirited man were
allowed, in the heat of his zeal, to put himself into the place of a
Magistrate, and to execute judgment of death, upon whomsoever he accounted an
offender against God and his Religion. I acknowledge that in the declining time
of the Jewish Government many actions were undertaken, only under the pretense
of such a zeal, which were in truth, acts of fury; and they were so far from
being warrantable, that they did abundantly manifest the dangerousness of
admitting such pretenses. Grot. and Ham. ubi sup. and in Act. 7.57.
Both Grotius and Dr Hammond account the stoning of St. Steven, and the
conspiracy of more than forty Jews, not to eat or drink till they had slain
Paul, to be done by the spirit of the Zealots, which were things riotous and
outrageous, which may not be justified, nor may the like be tolerated under any
Government. Dr. Ham. in Mat. 10. c.
And by the prevalency of this sort of men who were called Zealots, there was
very much cruelty exercised in Judea, many of their Nobles and chief persons
were slain, Jos. de Bell. Jud. l. 6. c. 1.
and by Josephus they are accounted to have contributed much to occasion the
destruction of Jerusalem. But these practices were not regular or guided by any
accountable rules, but were greatly exorbitant. And if private persons taking
the Sword, and killing those who depraved Religious Worship, had been a thing
lawful and commendable in the Jewish State, upon this right of Zealots; It may
well be wondered that none of the Prophets did ever put the people upon
vindicating their Religion by this Method, under those had Kings of Israel or
Judah, in whose days the worshipping of Baal was openly practiced.

8. Secondly, several worthy actions, pretended to be undertaken by the right
of Zealots, were warranted, according to the ordinary rules of Government, by
other sufficient Authority; though a zeal for the Honor of God, made the
persons more forward and active. Such I suppose was the action of Phinehas,
Numb. 25.7, 8. in pursuance of Moses his sentence of judgment, v. 5. as also
the War undertaken by Mattathias and his Sons, and Mattathias his killing the
Jew, who, in obedience to the command of Antiochus, openly sacrificed according
to the manner of the Heathen, 1 Mac. 2.23, 24, 25. For by the same right
whereby he might take Arms for his Country and Religion, against Antiochus, he
might also act against those who took part with Antiochus against them.

9. Thirdly, In the Jewish Commonwealth which was peculiarly ordered by God,
some Prophets, and men extraordinarily inspired, not other zealous men at
large, were empowered by Gods Authority, to do some extraordinary actions,
which otherwise had not been warrantable; and it is be this special authority
of God, not by their own zeal only, that such things were allowable. To this
Head may be reduced, Samuels and Elijahs sacrificing, though they were not
Priests, Samuels anointing Saul, and David; and the young Prophet who was sent
by Elisha, his anointing Jehu, 2 Kin. 9.3, 6. And of this nature were the
actions of Elijah abovementioned, Samuel hewing Agag in pieces, and our
Saviors driving out of the Temple them who sold Sheep, L'Empereur in Midd. c.
2. sect. 3. and in sciagraphia Templ.
Oxen and Doves, and over-throwing the Tables of the Mony-changers, Joh.
2.14.17. Mar. 11.15. For though these things were only done in the remote parts
of the utmost Court, and with respect to the Sacrifices and Offerings of the
Temple; they were a profanation of the Temple, being managed by the undertakers
in that place as a Trade. And of this nature was Moses his killing the
Egyptian, as appears, Act. 7.24, 25.

10. The instance of Athaliah, Of Athaliah.
being rejected from being Queen over Judah, and slain by the direction of
Jehoiadah, is frequently urged by diverse Romish writers, Bell. de Romans p. l.
5. c. 8.
to prove the Superiority of the Jewish High Priest over the Prince: and it is
also urged more generally by some others, to show that the People did
warrantable deprive her of Princely power. But Jehoiadah, J. Brut. Qu. 2. Ruth.
Civ. Pol. Qu. 28. p. 264.
as a good Subject, acted by the Authority of Joash, the true and rightful
King, against her who was a plain Usurper. And that Jehoiadah was not the High
Priest may appear somewhat probable, because he is not mentioned in the
Catalogue of the High Priests in the Chronicles, Ant. Jud. l. 10. c. 11. Of
Jehu conspiring against Joram.
1 Chr. 6.11-15. nor in that of Josephus.

11. Whereas Jehu took Arms against Joram, and slew him, 2 Kin. 9.24. and cut
off Ahabs House, for which God commended him, 2 Kin. 10.30. this was no taking
Arms against a Sovereign King, For God reserved to himself the right of
disposing the Sovereignty of the Kingdom of Israel, and by his particular
direction were Saul, and David and Jeroboam, made Kings. But none of Ahabs
Family, whose Son Joram was, ever had any such designation by Gods appointment:
but Jehu before he took Arms, was by the command of God anointed to be King,
and commanded to cut off the House of Ahab, 1 Kin. 19.16. 2 Kin. 9.6, 7. So
that Jehu his taking Arms, was by a true Regal Authority, against him who
either never had a right to the Kingdom, or at least was now totally deprived
thereof, by Gods special Declaration. And this makes the Case of Jehu toward
Joram, to differ much from that of David toward Saul.

12. Of the people saving Jonathans life.
It has also been urged, That when Saul resolved that Jonathan should dye, the
people rescued him, as our Translation renders it, 1 Samuel 14.45. But the
Septuagint express it by (...), the people prayed or worshipped for Jonathan.
And the true state of this affair was this. Saul desirous to prosecute his
victory against the Philistines to the utmost, Rutherf. ibid. qu. 32. p. 348.
adjureth the people of Israel, that no man eat any food until the evening, and
threatens death to him who shall do otherwise, v. 24, 39. Jonathan who
wonderfully gained that victory being absent, and not hearing this adjuration,
tasted a little Honey, v. 27. Hereupon Saul's vow or Oath being not performed,
and God being offended therewith, and search made after the transgression, v.
37, 38. Jonathan was taken, whom Saul condemns to dye, for the expiation of
this Transgression, v. 43,44. Now here Jonathans life became due to God by a
single vow, and not that of Cherem; and therefore his case did admit of
Redemption according to the Law, Lev. 27.2. And upon this account it is said of
the People (...) and they redeemed him, (which our Translation calls they
rescued him) i. e. substituted with a general consent, and desire of the
People, an Offering for the vow, which Josephus expresses thus, they did
(...), Jose ph. Ant. l. 6. c. 7.
offered Offerings to God for the vow: which Offerings for a Vow, are usually
called (...) in the Septuagint, as in Lev. 7.16. Deuteronomy. 12.6. And by this means
was Jonathan rescued or delivered from Death, not by any Act of Hostile
violence which the people offered to Saul, but by an Act of Religion which they
performed unto God. B. 2. C. 4.
And since it was God who required the performance of the Vow, this Offering
was the way to appease him, and thereby secure Jonathan, which the use of
violence against Saul could never have done.

13. Of Azariah withstanding Uzziah.
The instance of Azariah the Priest, and eighty other Priests, who being men of
courage, withstand Vzziah the King, when he undertook to Offer Incense, 2 Chr
163 17, 18, 19, 20. is by some persons both Romanists and others insisted upon.
But their proceedings were not managed with weapons of War, but with sharp
reproofs and admonitions. And whereas it is said in our Translation, v. 20.
they thrust him out; the Heb ew word (...) may properly be rendered they
hastened him, and no more can be proved from it; and it is so expressed in this
Text, by the best Copies of the Septuagint, (...), and by several other
Translations: and the same word is used for hastening, but without any offering
violence, Est. 6.14. Josephus also expresses this action of the Priests to
this purpose, Ant. l. 9.11.
that they requared or charged him to go out of the City, being smitten with
Leprosy, (...) And this is nothing like making War.

14. Some other things have been objected, but of so little weight or
appearance of evidence, that it is needless to mention or refute them, or to
add any thing more, for the vindicating that part of Sovereignty to the Kings
under the Old Testament, that it was not then lawful for subjects to take Arms
against them.

CHAP. IV.
The Rules and Precepts delivered by Christ, and his Apostles, concerning
Resistance, and the Practice of the primitive Christians declared.
SECT. I.
The Doctrine delivered by our Savior himself.
1. The Rights of Princes upheld by Christianity.
FRom the foregoing Chapters, which have showed, that non-resistance of
Subjects against their Sovereign, is a duty according to the principles of
common equity, and which did take place in the political Constitutions, under
the time of the Old Testament; we might make a reasonable inference, that the
same must abide and continue a duty under the times of Christianity: For our
Savior intended to promote and establish righteousness, goodness and peace;
and therefore would never give liberty to violate the great duties of
Subjection, by which violation the peace of the World would be much disturbed,
the duties of meekness banished, and the practice of humility and obedience
rejected, which are so much aimed at in his Doctrine, Sect. I.
which commands his Followers to take up the Cross.

2. That he took care of the preservation of the just Royalty and Right of
Princes, and did not intend to debase, lessen or diminish that Sovereignty and
Authority, which they had a right before to enjoy, is well observed by Grotius,
Gr. de J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 4.
to be included in those words of his, Mat. 22.21. Render unto Caesar the
things which are Caesar's, and from other expressions of the Scripture, which
can have no less import. And this Text will appear the more considerable, if we
take notice, that it was Tiberius who was then Caesar, when our Savior
delivered this Precept. From our Saviors Precept in the time of Tiberius.
For Tiberius was a man, whose cruelty even to his nearest Relations, and his
drunkenness rendered him infamous; and his Lusts were so excessive, that
Suetonius says, Suet. in Tib. n. 44.
vix ut referri audirive, nedum credit fas est, it is scarce to be allowed that
this should be related, heard or believed. He was so far from being a friend to
the Jews, that he would not allow them the exercise of their Religion at Rome,
Ibid. n. 36. Jos. de Bell. Jud. l. 2. c. 14. gr. Ant. Jud. l. 18. c. 4.5.
inflicted on them great penalties, and dispersed the youth of Judea into other
less noble Provinces. Under his Government, to the great offense of the Jews,
the Images of Caesar were brought into Jerusalem by Pilate, and the Treasures
of the Temple in their Corban were taken out. And in his time also, was the
Jewish Sanhedrim deprived of their Power, of inflicting capital punishments,
Joh. 18.31. And his Government was so far from defending, and maintaining the
true Christian Religion, that under it, and by the sentence of his President,
the Holy Jesus was crucified, and St. James killed with the Sword: And yet out
Savior in his days required the rights of Sovereignty to be preserved. And
this was commanded, though the Jews were tributary to Caesar, whose right over
them was founded upon the Roman Conquest, and the Submission which they had
thereupon for many years yielded; and the very tribute-money, upon sight of
which our Savior gave this Precept, is related by some Writers to have had
upon it an Inscription expressing the years from the Roman Conquest over Judea,
and consequently of the Jews being subdued into Subjection; whereas free
Subjects toward their natural Prince, Dr. Ham. Annot. on Mat. 22.20.
have greater motives and obligations to honor and obedience.

3. From the Reproof given to St. Peter.
But the clearest account of the Doctrine, and Practice also of our Savior,
against Subjects taking Arms, may be had from what he declared to this purpose,
when himself was seized on by the Soldiers, the night before he was crucified.
Where when Peter drew his Sword, and smote a Servant of the High Priest, and
cut off his ear, Jesus says unto him, Mat. 26.52. Put up again thy Sword into
its place; for all they that take the Sword, shall perish by the Sword. By
which words, the making use of the Sword against the Authority of Superiors is
sharply condemned. Musc. in Mat. 26.
This is, as Musculus said well, locus not and us omnibus subditis, a place to
be marked by all Subjects; and what Peter did, says he, was therefore
unlawful, because the Power against which he made use of the Sword, was ordered
by the Command of their Rulers, whereas the Magistrates Power, though used
against an innocent person, may not forcibly be repelled by Subjects. Thus also
Aegidius Hunnius; Peter, says he, took the Sword of his own private pleasure,
and that unlawfully, whilst he rose up against his Governors, and fount with
the Sword against their Ministers. Aegid. Hun. in Romans 1, 1. and in Mat. 26.
Par. 4.
Petrus privato arbitrio (says he on the Epistle to the Romans) rapuit
Gladium, and quidem illegitime, dum contra Magistratum suum in surgit, and
contra ministros eorum Gladio dimicat. To the same purpose also he speaks
upon 3. Mat. and Melancthon from this Text, urges the unlawfulness of those
persons taking the Sword, Melancth. Loc. Com. de Vindicta, and de Magistr. Civ.
who have it not committed to them by the Law, and their Governor.

4. And the true and natural sense of these words is, that as the Laws given to
Noah and his Sons, condemned homicide, Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by
man shall his blood be shed; so as with some respect thereto, our Savior here
condemns the making Resistance, even for defense, by a private person against
public Authority. And as the rules of his Doctrine forbid and blame it as
evil; so this further censure he passes upon it, that it is an undertaking
that deserves death, or to perish by the Sword. And this has a general
respect to all private persons, Munst. in Loc.
hoc dicitur (says Munster) contra privatos quosque, qui nullo jure
permittuntur uti Gladio, non autem contra Magistratum qui jussa Dei perficit,
etc. And the circumstances of this case are very remarkable.

5. 1. In a case in which Religion and Civil Rights were interested.
For first this was a cause, wherein both Religion, and civil Rights were
greatly concerned. For the Jews were now pursuing their design to put Jesus to
death; and never was there an higher violation of justice upon earth, than in
the contrivances managed, and the cruelties exercised toward him. And this was
such an opposition of Religion, that in the highest and most impudent manner,
they rejected and set at naught the Messiah, whom God had sent, and bad
defiance to the mighty evidence of his miracles, and intended utterly to have
extirpated his holy and divine Doctrine. Yet he himself here took up the Cross,
and became an admirable Pattern of meekness; and when his Disciples had
proposed the Question, Luke 22.29. Shall we smite with the Sword? he severely
forbad any such thing, and checks St. Peter's hasty use thereof, before Christ
had returned an Answer to their Question. And, Chr. Hom. 85. in Mat.
as St. Chrysostom observes, St. Peter who was reprehended even with sharp
threatenings, for what he had done; did so no more. And when our Lord declared,
that his Kingdom was not of this World, he did thereby so much design to show,
that he denied his Subjects, who were private persons, any power to fight for
their Religion, and that neither himself, nor his Gospel gave them any
authority to use the Sword; that he adds, if my Kingdom were of this World,
then would my Subjects fight, that I should not be delivered to the Jews, John
18.36. Such therefore are the rules of the Christian Doctrine, Fer. enarrat. in
Mat. 26.
that when Ferus had propounded the case, if Magistrates neglect their Duty,
and become injurious, as was done with respect to our Lord and Master, an
privato Gladii arripiendi jus est, whether a Subject may take Arms; he justly
answers it with an Absit, or a Detestation of any such thing.

6. 2. With respect to Officers commissionated.
The Persons who came to take Jesus, were a Band of Men and Officers, John
18.3. no supreme Governors themselves, but only persons commissionated by
them. And they were not sent immediately by Caesar, or by Herod or Pilate, who
then had under the Romans, the chief Jurisdiction in Jewry; but by the Chief
Priests, and Elders of the Jews, (some of whom did accompany the Soldiers,
Luke 22.52.) who were allowed to exercise some governing power, under the
Romans. And the time when these Soldiers were sent, was, in all probability,
after the chief Synedrial Power was taken away from the Jews, that they might
not judge any capital Causes, or put any man to death, by their authority, John
18.31. and therefore from Annas and Caiaphas, Jesus was brought to Pilate. The
Talmud says, that this Power was taken away forty years before the destruction
of Jerusalem, which must be three or four year before our Saviors passions,
Buxt. Lex. Rab. in (...) Hor. Heb. in Mat. 26.3.
and about the time he did begin to preach. Now though this stroke of St. Peter
was not at any of the Chief Priests or Elders themselves, but at an Officer of
theirs, and when their power was under its great decay and declination, the
Doctrine of Christ does here condemn it.

7. Thirdly, 3. For mere defense.
if the intention of the person be considered, this action was desensive, or an
endeavor to deliver his Master, and with a kind of zeal, for the preserving
his safety, as is sufficiently intimated in the following verses, Mat. 26.53,
54. And it cannot well enter into any man's thoughts, that there were any
designs laid, by any of the Apostles, for destroying the Elders of the Jews, or
turning Caesar out of his Dominions, by these attempts. And though this defense
proceeded no further than to cut off an ear, our Lord not only disliked it, but
his action in forthwith healing the ear by a miracle, may seem to intimate,
that he thought fit to take upon himself to make restitution, and to repair the
injury done, by the rash action of one of his followers. C. 23. Qu. 8. in
Capite.
Thus Gratian observed, that when Peter took the material Sword to defend his
Master from the injury of the Jews, he then received this check.

8. 4. To St. Peter and therefore to his Successors.
Fourthly, if we consider the Person who here drew the Sword, which St. John
declares to be Simon Peter, it may well be wondered, that any sort of men should
believe, that Christ gave this Apostle, and others by virtue of succession from
him, a power to authorize subjects, to take Arms against their Princes, in a
case where they shall judge the Church and Religion concerned; and to deprive
them of their Crowns and Dominions; when himself in person was not allowed,
though he was then an Apostle, to make such resistance as has been declared.
From this instance Gratian concludes, Ibidem.
that no bishop, nor any of the Clergy whosoever, have any power, either by
their own authority, or by the authority of the Pope of Rome, to take Arms:
and then they can have as little authority to commissionate others to take
them. Nor can this be evaded by saying, that St. Peter was not as yet possessed
with the supreme sovereign Authority; For as it no where appears, that he ever
received any such thing; so if our Savior had ever intended to convery to him
the supreme power of the Temporal sword, he would never have used particularly
to him, so general a threatening against the use of it. And therefore some
Romish Writers have put themselves upon undertaking another method, and that is
by a very bad attempt, to defend or applaud this action of St. Peter, which our
Lord rebuked. Bar. An. 34. n. 67.
Baronius when he gives us the relation of it, does it without any manner of
censure, but not without an Encomium, declaring, quid generoso accensus amoris
ardore, fortiter gesserit. In Concord. Evang. Tom. 4. l. 6. c. 17.
And Barradius proposing the question, whether St. Peter did amiss in this
action, resolves it as most probable, that he did not; verosimilius puto, says
he, non peccasse. And Stella says, Stell. in Luc. 22.
St. Peter did not sin herein, and he compares this action with the zeal of
Phinebas, whereby he obtained the High Priesthood; and so, since he, did St.
Peter.

9. Severalreasons why St. Peter was rebuked.
And there are some who would evade the argument, from these words of our
Savior, by saying that our Lord did prohibit St. Peter's using the Sword for
his defense, only because he did now intend to law down his life, according to
his Fathers will. But it must be observed, that our Savior lays down three
several grounds, upon which he checks this act of his Apostle, and commands him
to put up his Sword; and we must not so assert the validity of any one of them,
as to deny or enervate the force of the others. 1. From the sin and
unwarrantableness of such actions, where persons act out of their own sphere,
and what they have not authority to undertake; and this is that I have now
discoursed of in v. 52. 2. Because he himself knew, how he could sufficiently
procure his own defense, by lawful means, whereas this action was neither a
necessary, nor a proper undertaking for that purpose. Had the Holy Jesus
intended, to have his person rescued out of the hands of the Jews, he could
have effected this by Legions of Angels, who are under no obligation of
subjection to men, v. 53. But Gods Providence can never be so at a loss as to
need the help of any unlawful means. 3. Because the thing St. Peter aimed at,
to hinder his Master from suffering, was no good design, but savoured somewhat
of the same spirit, by which he had formerly rebuked his Lord, when he spoke of
his being killed, Mat. 16.22. For the Scriptures must be fulfilled, v. 54. and
the Cup (says our Savior) which my Father gives me to drink, shall I not
drink it? Joh. 18.11. And every one of these are parts of Christ's Doctrine, and
the first as much as the other, and is that also which our blessed Lord thought
fit to mention before the other.

10. With respect to this Text, Mauritius, This Text anciently used to their
purpose. Eucher. Lugdunens. Epist. ad Sylv.
who commanded the Thebaean Legion, which being all Christians, yielded
themselves to Martyrdom, under Maximianus, told them how much he feared, lest
they being in Arms, should have resisted the Emperor, under the color of
defnce, when this was forbidden by Christ, who by the command of his own mouth,
would have that Sword which his Apostle had drawn, to be put up. And St. Austin
who sometimes extenuated St. Peter's fault, as proceeding from his love, Aug. de
Agon. Christ c. 29, 30.
and not from any cruel disposition, that he did, a more peacare sed non
saevitia, in his Books against Faustus, gives this account of the sense hereof.
The Lord did with sufficient threatening check the fact of Peter, saying, Put up
the Sword, Contr. Faust. l. 22. c. 70. and in Epist. 48.
for he that uses the Sword shall fall by the Sword; but he uses the Sword,
who, when no Superior and lawful Power does either command or allow, uses
Arms against the blood of another. And from this Text also Gratian infers
this general rule, Great. Decubi sup.
that every one who besides him, or without his authority, who uses the lawful
power, who bears not the Sword in vain, and to whom every Soul ought to be
subject, I say every one who without such authority takes the Sword, shall
perish by the Sword.

11. Assemb. Annot. in Luke 22.51.
And even the Annotations under the name of the Assemblies Annotations, do
interpret these words to condemn Subjects taking the Sword, especially against
their Superiors. Neither Peter, say they, nor any other private person or
persons, might take up the Sword, to defend the cause of Christ. 1. Becaue the
Jus gladii belongs not to any private person, but to public authority, Romans
13.4. much less to Ministers. 2. Because they who smite with the Sword, shall
perish with the Sword. Gr. de Imp. c. 3. n. 6.
And Grotius de Imperio, asserteth, that when Christ said, He that takes the
Sword shall perish by the Sword, he does expressly condemn that defense, which
is made by violence, against unjust force from public authority, contra vim
injustissimam, sed publico nomine illatam. To which I shall subjoin the
Paraphrase of Dr Hammond, All that draw and use the Sword, without authority
from those which bear the Sword, shall fall themselves by it, incur the
punishment of death.

12. Grot. in Mat. 26.52. and de J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 3. n. 3.
Indeed Grotius does sometimes interpret this Text to this purpose, as if it
intended to declare, that God would punish them who are bloody, as the jews who
came against our Savior, though S. Peter let them alone; and this sense is
embraced by some other Writers, even of the ancients. But since these words
were spoken by Christ, soon after his Disciples had asked, shall we smite with
the Sword? and immediately upon the act of Peter, the natural and direct sense
of them must relate thereto. And it is a forced interpretation, to carry them
off from the occasion, on which they were spoken, Orig. in Mat. Tract. 35.
Tert. de Patient. c. 3.
and to which they were applied by other ancient Writers, besides them
abovenamed, and to account them only to contain a threatening against the
actions of the Jews. And even Grotius upon S. Matthew, Grot. ibid.
does from these words conclude, that Christians ought to lay down their lives,
in the profession of Christianity, without resistance, and objecting the
natural right of self defense, he tells us we must distinguish between the
using that right, against thieves and private persons, against whom it may be
used by the authority of the laws; and the designing any violence against the
rule and command of the sovereign power.

13. Our Savior indeed advised his Disciples, Luke 22.36. He that has no
Sword, let him sell his Garment and buy one: which words were spoken the same
night with the other abovementioned, and before he went out to the Mount of
Olives, v. 39. And hereby he gave liberty to his Disciples, to use the Sword
for their self-defence, against private violence and Robbers, who were at that
time as Josephus relates, very numerous. But that no Christians might think
themselves to have any liberty granted, of resisting authority, he gave this
sharp rebuke to S. Peter, after he was come into the Mount of Olives. And
against all those who would from these expressions of Christ, or any other,
plead for the lawfulness of resisting a Sovereign power, Erasm. in Luc. 22.36.
the words of Erasmus are very argumentative, as well as earnest and vehement.
Nulla haeresis perniciostor, says he, reclamantibus Christi praeceptis,
reclamante tota ipsius vita, reclamante doctrina Apostolica, refragantibus tot
Martyrum millibus, repugnantibus vetustis interpretibus. There is no Heresy
more pernicious, the Precepts of Christ decrying this, the whole life of Christ
being opposite to it, the Apostolical doctrine testifying against it; it being
also rejected by so many thousands of Martyrs, and contradicted by the ancient
Interpreters.

SECT. II.
Of the Apostolical Doctrine against resistance: with a reflection on contrary
practices.
The Apostolical Doctrine against resistance.
From the doctrine delivered by our Savior himself, I now descend to that
which was declared by his Apostles, which we shall find to keep an exact
harmony with the former. And here I shall chiefly consider that remarkable
place, Romans 13.2. whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of
God, and they that resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Where the
(...), which we translate resist, does enclude all practicing out of a spirit
of averseness, opposition and contradiction, and whatsoever is contrary to the
(...), or being subject, v. 1. as may appear by the use of this word, Act.
18.6. And to this sense Grotius observes, Gr. de Imp. c. 3. n.6.
resistitur dupliciter aut contra imperium agendo, aut vim vi reprimendo, there
are two ways of resisting; either by acting contrary to authority, or by using
force against it. But the resistance by violence, which is the highest manner
of opposition, is therefore principally condemned. And such actions are
declared to be a resisting the Ordinance of God, and therefore highly sinful;
and to be so dangerous, that they who are guilty thereof, shall receive to
themselves (...), judgment or damnation.

2. That it deserves punishment both from God and Man.
And I suppose it may be made manifest, that the Apostle here by (...), does
both understand the judgment of man, or punishment by the hand of justice by
the Magistrate, and also the judgment of God, or the sentence of his
condemnation. This appears from the Apostles Conclusion, which he makes with a
very forcible illative expression, (...), wherefore ye must needs be subject,
not only for wrath, i. e. outward humane punishment, but also for Conscience
sake, or fear of the divine judgment, v. 5. And that they who resist, deserve
heavy punishment by the temporal Sword, is according to the Doctrine of Christ
himself in the former Section, and of Solomon, Prove. 20.2. To this sense do
Vatablus and Grotius most incline, In loc.
in expounding this Text. And this sense must be encluded in the intention of
the Apostle, because this practice being declared evil, in the former part of
v. 2. it is added, that Rulers are a terror to the evil, v. 3. and if thou do
that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the Sword in vain, v. 4. And
in such Cases as these, the sentence and punishment inflicted by the
Magistrate, is the more considerable and dreadful, because he is herein
appointed by God, to act as from him, and by his authority, being the Minister
of God, a Revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does evil, v. 4. But this
word must also enclude, the judgment of God and his condemnation. For since
this resistance is a sin, and against the Ordinance of God, v. 2. that person
who puts himself upon breaking his Commands, and opposing his Authority, must
thereby render himself guilty before God; or in S. Chrysostom's expression
concerning this Text, he does (...), Chrysostom. in Ep. ad Romans
provoke God, and must expect from him, (...), heavy judgment.

3. And these assertions of the Apostle, Resistance not allowed in persecution.
will appear the more considerable, if some circumstances be observed, 1. What
condition of the Christian Church, was then coming on, when these Rules were
delivered to the Christians. It is very probable, Baron. an. 58. n. 46. and an.
66. n. 9, 10.
that this Epistle was written, some few years before the beginning of the
persecution against the Christians, under Nero. But the Holy Ghost, who then
foresaw and foretold the troubles, which were shortly to come upon them by the
Roman power, though fit to give them these directions, to be observed as their
Rules, in their approaching calamities.

4. Nor against wicked Rulers.
Secondly, who was then possessed of the highest power at Rome, unto whom the
Apostle commands subjection, and against whom he condemns all resistance: Now
this is commonly acknowledged to have been written under the Reign of Nero, who
was a man of excessive intemperance and lust, and prodigious cruelty, even to
that height, as to cast off natural affection to his nearest relations. In his
time Suetonius tells us, Suet. in Ner. n. 16.
punishments were inflicted upon the Christians, and according to Tacitus, Tac.
Annal. l. 15. Tertul. Apol. c. 6. and in Scorpiac. c. 15.
poenis quaesitissimis, by the most exquisite pains; and he is noted by
Tertullian, to be the first of the Roman Emperors, who undertook fiercely to
persecute Christianity; and under him S. Peter, and S. Paul, and diverse other
Christians were cruelly put to death. And yet in this Case, and under that
Emperor, whom the Roman Spirit would not endure, without taking Arms against
him, and whom their Senate declared to be an Enemy, Suet. in Ner. n. 49. Tacit.
Hist. l. 1. Aur. Vict. in Ner.
and to be punished, more majorum, by an infamous Death, S. Paul would not
allow the Christians to resist, and take Arms against this higher power. And
this was the Christian temper and Spirit, that they kept themselves free from
all those tumults and Seditions, which other persons in the Empire were many
times engaged in. Tert. ad Scap. c. 2.
And this is that which gave Tertullian occasion to say, nunquam Albiniani, vel
Nigriani, vel Cassiani, inveniri potuerunt Christiani.

5. And since the Church of Rome was founded in the beginning of the Government
of Claudius, and S. Paul was put to Death in the end of Nero's time, who was
the next Successor to Claudius in the Empire, this Epistle to the Romans must
be written in one of their Reigns. Indeed Illyricus, Illyr. Chronol. in Act.
Apost. Dr. Hammonds Annot. on the Title of the Ep. to Romans
and Dr Hammond sometimes think it, to have been written under Claudius. And
those expressions in this Epistle, which intimate that S. Paul before the
writing thereof, had never been at Rome, with this Christian Church, may
possibly seem to incline to the same sense, Chapter 1.10.-13.-15. and Chapter
15.19,-22, 23. But it was certainly written many years after the Conversion of
the Romans, Chapter 15.23. And if it should be supposed to have been sent to them
under Claudius; even he was not much a better man than Nero. For Claudius was a
debauched and vicious person, and barbarously cruel: to which purpose amongst
other expressions, Suetonius says of him, Suet. in Claud. 33, 34.
that he was libidinis profusissimae, and also saevum and sanguinarium natura
fuisse apparuit. And even he was so great an Enemy to the right worship of the
only true God, that under the name of Jews, he banished also Christians from
Rome, Act. 18.2.

6. Rutherf. of Civ. Policy. Qu. 33. The New Testament gives respect to the
Emperor above the Senate.
But because there are some who say, that these expressions of the Apostle,
have no particular mention of Nero, or any Emperor; and therefore may as well
have respect to the Roman Senate; To obviate this exception it may be observed,
that wheresoever in the New Testament, there is any notice taken of, or any
respect given to the Roman power, this is done with a principal and primary
respect to the Emperor, and subordinately to others as his Officers. This is
manifest in the Gospel, the Acts and the Epistles. The taxing or enrolling at
the Birth of our Savior, was by the Decree of Augustus; and the tribute money
had Caesar's Image and Inscription, to whom Christ commanded the Jews to render
what was his. S. Paul's appeal was made unto Caesar, and S. Peter's commanding
submission was directed to the King as supreme, and to Governors as unto them
who are sent by him. So that the Spirit of God speaks much in favor of
Monarchical power, though then Pagan, but gives no encouragement to the notion
of them, who would embrace a popular Sovereignty.

7. Now these words of S. Paul are so full, that I shall not need to add any
further evidences of Scripture in this particular. But when S. Peter and S.
Jude, 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 8.
so highly condemn the despising Dominions, and speaking evil of dignities, as
sins against which God will chiefly execute judgment, it is evident a majori,
that their doctrine cannot give allowance to that forcible resistance, whereby
the greatest contempt of dignities is expressed, and which runs higher than to
speak evil: especially when S. Jude speaks particularly against them, who
perish in the gainsaying of Core, or in the practices of Sedition. And S.
Peter also proposes the example of Christ, as that which he himself intended,
should be an example to all Christians, who when in well-doing he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered he threatened not, but committed himself to
him that judges righteously, 1 Pet. 2.19.20, 21, 22, 23.

8. Having now showed, Christianity does not infringe Sovereignty.
that the Christian Doctrine does fully provide for the safety and security of
Princes; it is matter of wonder, that any men should have the considence, to
make Christianity a foundation, for the highest resistance against Princes, to
depose them from their Crowns, and forbid Subjects to yield them obedience: and
this Authority the Pope claims upon a Christian title. Bellarm. in Resp. ad
Apol. pro Juram. fidelit. in init.
Bellarmine affirms it to be a thing agreed upon, by their Lawyers and Divines,
that the Pope may by right depose heretical Princes, and set free their
Subjects from obedience to them: for cum hac condition reges terrae ad
Ecclesiam admittuntur, etc. upon this condition the Kings of the Earth are
admitted unto the Church, that they shall subject their Scepters unto Christ,
and that they should protect and not destroy Religion: which if they will not
do, he who is over the whole Church, in the place of Christ, vice Christi, has
a right to separate them from the Communion of the faithful, and to forbid
their Subjects from giving them obedience. Indeed all persons by their Baptism,
are engaged to yield up themselves to be Subjects to Christ. But how can the
baptism of Princes, include a condition that they must yield their Scepters to
be disposed of by any Officer of the Christian Church, when they are baptized
into that Doctrine, which makes so great provision for the security of Kings,
and against all manner of resistance: This would make Christianity to be
prejudicial to the authority of Governors; to assert which is contrary to the
nature of its doctrine. And the Holy Spirit seems to have taken special care
to prevent this claim, in any person of the Romish Church, in that whosoever
resists the power, etc. being particularly directed to that Church, must deny
all power to any person therein, to oppose the authority of Rulers under the
peril of damnation.

9. Matters of fact are not here to be urged against Rules of duty.
But though the directions of our Religion be plain, History will acquaint us,
that there have been many contrary Practices, as matters of fact. But these are
no more to be urged against the rules of duty in this, than in other actions of
disobedience, and swerving from Gods Commandments. It was worthily said of
Grotius, Gr. de Imp. c. 3. n. 8.
armorum in Reges sumptorum exempla, -- qui non precario, sed proprio jure
imperabant, laudari salva pietate non possunt, quemcunque tandem praetextum aut
eventum habuerint. The Examples of Arms taken against Kings who governed, not
by a precarious but by their own proper right, cannot be commended without
violating piety, whatsoever pretense or success they had.

10. But because some have pretended, Though attended with success.
that where such attempts have met with success, this success was a testimony
of Gods providence approving them, such Pleas are of a very dangerous and evil
nature; especially because, 1. They are in some degree blasphemous; as if the
holy God who hates all evil, and has given strict commands against it, were
to be esteemed an approver of all that wickedness in the World, where he does
not either forcibly restrain, or immediately destroy the Offender. 2. This
pretense is greatly opposite to the principles of Christianity, both in
despising and abusing the patience and long-suffering of God; and in building
upon such foundations as can bear no weight, unless men overlook and disregard
the future account, and the rewards and punishments of another World.

11. There have been some instances of the most pious and worthy Princes as
well as other good men, meeting with many troubles and injuries in this life.
Besides what was done in our own Age and Nation, which cannot be forgotten, nor
yet remembered without indignation, it is observed by Baronius, Baron. Annal.
Eccl. an. 383. n. 5, 6, 7.
that the Emperor Gratian, in that very year in which he had so vigorously
endeavored the subversion of Gentilisme, and the advancement of Christianity,
was forsaken of his own Army, and died by the hands, and under the scorn of
Rebels. And in the Saxon Heptarchy in this Island, in a small compass of time
in the seventh Century, seven Christian Kings are related to have ended their
lives by violence; Full. Chapter Hist. l. 2. an. 642.
whereof four were the first Christian Kings in their Kingdoms, and the other
restorers of Christianity. But that which may be truly inferred from such
things is, that God does suffer evil actions and injuries to be done, for some
time in this World, and that Piety and Goodness has a reward beyond this life.

12. There are those also, who have had the better thoughts of rebellions
practices, Or a resolute temper in the Practisers.
because some persons who have been engaged in them dyed, as is reported of
Cassius Cherea in Josephus, Jos. Ant. Jud. l. 19. c. 3.
without any sense of remorse, and with an undaunted courage, and obstinate
resolution. But the measures of good and evil must be taken from the rules of
Duty and Conscience, and the Will of God, and not from the temper and
expressions of Offenders and Transgressors. It is too ease a thing to produce
examples of the Practicers of the several sorts of sins, who have gone on
therein without relenting; which speaks their case the more doleful, and
themselves the more hardened. Such was the case of the generality of the Jews in
their perverse opposition against the Holy Jesus, and of the Conspirators with
Corah against Moses. And when Julian the Apostate from, Ammian. Marc. l. 25.
and great Enemy to Christianity, had received his deadly wound, Ammianus
Marcellinus relates him to have spoken to this purpose to his Soldiers; that
he was not grieved but rather rejoiced at the appearance of death; and that
from his past life and actions he found nothing therein to repent of, or that
was any trouble to his mind to reflect upon, non me gestorum poenitet, aut
gravis flagitii recordatio stringit. And Maximus the Philosopher, Bar. Annal.
an. 364. n. 16, 17.
who was the Instructor of Julian in Gentilism and its impieties, and the
Incentive of all that opposition which Christianity met with under his Reign,
as Baronius notes, did in his defiance of Christianity endure exquisite
punishments, with such an erect and resolute mind, as made his spirit to be
admired, which Eunapius declared, with the flourishes of many oratorical
expressions.

13. Divine judgments against seditious persons.
But though the full declaration of the righteous Judgment of God, is reserved
chiefly to the great day, yet his severe proceedings in some special cases,
have sufficiently testified his displeasure against the Actors of Sedition.
Could any thing be more remarkable than that the Earth should swallow up Corah
and his Company, immediately upon Moses his pronouncing that sentence upon
them, and that the fire from the Lord should consume two hundred and fifty that
offered incense, Numb. 16.30, 31, 35. and a dreadful Plague should presently
destroy fourteen thousand and seven hundred of their Abetters? And that these
sad judgments had a particular respect to their rebellion against Moses and his
Government, as well as to their insolency against Aaron, is manifest from Psalm.
106.16, 17. and Numb. 16.3, 13, 14. Suet. in Jul. n. 89.
And when Julius Caesar was slain in the Senate, the Roman Histories acquaint
us, that scarce any of the Conspirators outlived him above three years, or dyed
a natural death; and that some of them became their own Murderers, and slew
themselves with the same weapons, with which they had assaulted Caesar. Val.
Max. l. 1. c. 8.
And Valerius Maximus relates, that Cassius, who was one of them, being hotly
engaged in the Philippian Army, Julius Caesar appeared before him with
greatness and majesty; and in his imperial Habit, upon a swift Horse, and with
a terrible Countenance, rushed upon him; at which apparition he being
affrighted, and expressing his troubled reflections upon the death of Julius,
turned his back upon his Enemies. And many other instances of this nature, are
mentioned by Rabanus Maurus, Rab. Maur. de Reveren. c. 3.
and other Authors.

14. Remarkable Providence in preserving Princes.
And Ecclesiastical Historians give us an account of strange Acts of
Providence, for the preservation of many Princes against their Conspirators. As
that the Army of Magnentius, when they designed acclamations to him as Caesar,
who made an insurrection against Constantius, their voices against their own
intention were so overruled, that instead of Magnentius, they named
Constantius, and expressed honor to him. And soon after Magnentius being
defeated, Soz. l. 4. c. 6.
made a present escape by flight, and then murdered first his Mother, and his
Brother, and then himself. And the attempts of Gainas, who rose up against
Arcadius, are related by Socrates to have been expressed, Socr. l. 6. c. 6.
by the appearance of an Army of Angels, as a Guard about his Palace, which so
astonished them who were with Gainas, that they gave over their attempt. Theod.
Hist. l. 5. c. 24.
And when the small Army of Theodosius was engaged against the formidable
Forces of Eugenius, who rebelled against him, the Enemies Darts and Arrows are
related to have been forced back upon themselves, by the rising of a violent
Wind. To these I shall add that late relation concerning King James, Agnes
Sampson had undertaken to kill by Witchcraft, Spotsw. Hist. of SC. B. 6. an.
1509.
her Familiar Spirit which She employed to effect it, came to her and told her
it could not perform it, adding these words which She did not understand, Il
est Homme de Dieu, He is a Man of God. And though all these things deserve
consideration, the plain Rules of Conscience and Religion give the most full
and unexceptionable testimony of the great displeasure of God, against all
actings of Treason and Sedition.

SECT. III.
The practice and sense of the Primitive Church concerning resistance.
1. The loyal spirit of the Primitive Christians.
Above the examples of any other sort of men, the spirit of the Primitive
Christians, deserves to be reverenced and regarded. Whilst they lived under
Pagan Emperors, before the time of Constantine there was no such thing heard
of, as their undertaking to depose their Kings or Emperors, nor no pretense of
power in any Christian Bishop, to absolve them from their allegiance. And I
think that for three hundred and forty years after Christ, there can be no one
instance given of any Christians making any forcible opposition, by taking
Arms against their Governors. Con^ (...) p 115
Origin in his time tells Ce^s^s, that he could show (...), ^o undertaking of
Sedition among Christians, who were not allowed to defend themselves against
their Persecutors.

2. Under heavy sufferings.
Yet the heavy sufferings of the Christians were then very great, not only by
reason of the several cruel deaths inflicted upon diverse of them; but also
because of the great multitudes who died Martyrs, in bearing the Cross, and
following the patience and meekness of Christ. Of which I shall give three
instances, from the several parts of the World, in the end of the third, and
beginning of the fourth Centurie. Eus. Eccl. Hist. l. 8. c. 9.
Eusebius acquaints us, that in the Dioclesian Persecution, in Thebais, which
was none of the greatest Countries of Africa, there were not only for some
days, but for some whole years together, sometimes ten or twenty, often thirty,
other times about sixty, and sometimes an hundred with their Wives and
Children, in one day slain, by various Methods of cruel death. And he himself
had there seen some put to death by fire, and others the same day by the Axe,
even so many, that the Executioners were tired out, and their Axes blunted.
Such instances speak the admirable patience, hope and obedience of those holy
men, and the wonderful Power of God that preserved and propagated his Church
notwithstanding so great oppositions.

3. In Persia, Sozomen tells us, Sozom. l. 2. c. 10, 13.
that under Sapores his Reign, there were sixteen thousand Martyrs, of whom an
account could be given by name, and that besides them there were so great a
multitude, who died for the profession of Christ, that they were more than
could be numbered. And in France the Thebaean Legion of almost seven thousand
Christians, being all armed, and valiant men, became Martyrs, by the cruelty of
Maximianus the Emperor, when they refused to join in the Pagan worship, the
Emperor commanded twice that every tenth man should be put to death, but after
both these executions, the remainder persisting in the same resolution, were
all commanded to be slain. But they according to the counsel of Mauritius and
Exuperius, their Commanders, tell the Emperor, that they submitted their
Bodies to his power, that they could never be charged with cowardice or
deserting his Wars, but in this utmost peril where desperate circumstances
might make men more resolute, they would not take Arms against him, yea, said
they, though we have Arms in our hands, we will not use them for resistance;
Ban. an. 297. n. 10, 11, 12. Grot. de J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 7. and de
Imp. c. 3. n. 14. Cent. 4. c. 12. col. 1420.
tenemus Arma, and non resistemus. This famous Story related by Eucherius and
the Martyrology, is thence insisted on by Baronius and Grotius, as also from
Crantzius, and others. And a like account is given by the Magdeburgenses from
P. de Natalibus, Simeon Metaphrastes, and Vincentius.

4. And the chief Guides of the Christian Church, who lived under the Arian
Princes, and Julian the Apostate, retained the same spirit and sense of their
duty. Among other slanders, Bar. an. 351. n. 34.
with which Athanasius was charged, he was accused before Constantius, Athan.
Apolog. ad Constable.
of conspiring with, and stirring up Magnentius against him. But Athanasius not
only denies the fact, and declares how he had openly prayed for the success
of Constantius; but he utterly disclaimeth such things, as not consistent with
Christian Principles, affirming, that if there was any appearance of any such
thing in him, he would condemn himself to myriads of deaths. And he entreats
the Emperor, that he would have no such suspicion against the Church, as if
any right Christian, and especially a Bishop, would advise or write any such
thing. And much more is in the same Apology, in detestation of resistance,
though Constantius was an Arian, and a Persecutor, and Athanasius had in his
Reign been ejected from Alexandria.

5. Under Julian, Naz. Orat. 4.
Nazianzen declared that the Christians only arms, fortress and defense, was
their hope in God. And when under Valentinian the younger, St. Ambr. Orat. in
Auxent.
Ambrose was required to yield up his Church to Auxentius, he tells his people,
I shall not leave you willingly, if I be compelled, I know not how to
withstand. I can grieve, I can weep, I can groan, aliter nec debeo, nec possum
resistere, by other means I neither ought, nor can resist. And the language
that he, and the other sound Christians then used, was, Rogamus, Auguste, non
pugnamus, we ask, O Emperor, we fight not; Id. in Epist. 33. a^ Marcellin.
and tradere basilicam non possum, sed pugnare non debeo, I cannot yield up the
Church, but I ought not to fight. The result of all these testimonies is, that
when the authority, laws, and rules of Government they lived under, did oppose
the Christian Profession, or the truth and purity of its Doctrine; they thought
it their duty patiently to suffer, and not in opposition to those laws which
were then established to take up Arms against their Governors. But against the
force of this Argument from the primitive practice, there are two Objections
which must be answered.

6 Obj. 1. The ancient Christians did not want strength.
Many do assert, that the reason why the Ancient Christians did not resist or
depose their Emperors, was, because they wanted sufficient strength to carry
on such an undertaking. To this purpose speaks Card. Bell. de Romans Pont. l. 5.
c. 7.2. 2ae. qu. 12 art. 2. Azor. Instit. Mor. Part. 2. l. 10. c. 2. qu. 2.
Bellarmine, Quod Christiani olim non deposuerunt Neronem, and Diocletianum,
and Julianum Apostatam, and similes, id fuit quia vires temporales deerant
Christianis. And to the same purpose write Aquinas, Azorius, and others. But if
this had been a method which God had accounted fit for them to undertake, he
who wrought so many miracles for the propagating Christianity, and enabled the
Apostles, and other Christians to prevail against the power of Satan in the
World; could have made the undertaking of a few Christians, to have been
successful against the power of the Empire, as well as he did the Army of
Gideon against the Midianites, and Jonathan and his armor-bearer against the
Philistines. But that I may further detect the falsehood of this slander,
invented to stain the Honor and Loyalty of the Primitive Martyrs; I shall note
four things.

7. First I note, That this suggestion does cast an high disparagement upon the
Precepts of Christianity. For this must speak the Apostles to dissemble, and
deal hypocritically, when they command obedience even for the Lords sake, and
forbid resisting the Power, as incurring damnation, and opposing the Ordinance
of God; if notwithstanding all this, they would allow the Christians to take
Arms against their Rulers, whenever they should have strength enough to
carry on such an enterprise. What is this but to undermine the simplicity of
the Gospel, and to suppose the Apostles, under a disguise, to pretend God and
Religion, where they had really no regard to them, but to the carrying on a
politic design, and a contrivance of craftiness? And upon this account,
Blackwells Examine. Sect. 3.50, 51.
F. Blackwell-declared his great dislike of this suggestion on calumny. And
certainly it is as much against the nature of our Holy Religion, to assert that
the Precepts of Obedience, Subjection, and Meekness, should be restrained to
those times, when they were in no capacity of doing many great actions, which
are contrary to these virtues; as that the commands against fleshly lusts, and
pride did only belong to that time, when Christianity was persecuted, and the
Professors thereof were in a low and mean estate.

8. Secondly I note, That this is contradictory to the Spirit and temper, which
the ancient Writers declare, concerning the Christians of their time. For
besides the frequent Profession they made, of their acknowledging the
Governors they lived under, to be constituted by God, and that therefore it
was their duty to be subject to them, and honor them: It is not possible that
those Christians should forbear Resistance only for want of strength to effect
it, who thought it their duty to pray for those Pagan Emperors that their Life
and Government might be preserved. Tertul. Apol. c. 30.
So Tertullian declared under the persecution of Severus, Precantes sumus
semper pro omnibus Imperatoribus, vitam illis prolixam, imperium securum, etc.
We ever pray for all Emperors, their long life, and the safety of their
Empire. And Dionysius of Alexandria, Eus. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 11. gr.
under the persecution of Valerian and Galienus, averteth that the Christians
constantly prayed, that their Kingdom might remain unshaken. Aug. in Psalm. 124.
And St. Austin says, that though Julian was an Apostate, an Idolater, and a
wicked man the Christian Soldiers were subject to him, their temporal Lord,
out of respect to their eternal Lord.

9. Thirdly I note, That there is no truth in that Plea, that the Christians in
the Primitive Times, always wanted strength. For though at the first planting
Christianity their numbers were small, yet they did in a short time increase,
to great and vast multitudes. Apol. c. 37.
Tertullian would never have had the confidence, to make so plain a profession
of the strength, and number of the Christians to the Roman Emperor and Senate,
if it had not been truth. Says he, if we would act the part of open Enemies,
could we want Numbers or Armies? -- we have filled your Cities, Isles, Castles,
Camps, etc. for what War should we be unsit, though our numbers were unequal,
who can so readily lay down our lives, if our Religion did not require us
rather to dye, than to draw our Swords to kill others? Tertul. ad Scap. c. 2.
etc. 5.
And among other expressions which he uses to Scapula, the Governor of the
African Province, concerning the great multitude of Christians, he tells him,
they were pars pene major Civitatis cujusque, almost the greatest part of every
City. Had the numbers of Christians been small in St. Cyprian's time, Cypr. ad
Demetrian.
he would never have written to the Proconsul of Africa, quamvis nimius and
copiosus sit populus noster, that though the company of Christians were very
great and numerous, yet they would not revenge themselves against the unjust
violence of their Persecutors.

10. But if any persons should groundlessly imagine, that these Christian
Writers did either mistake their own numbers or were willing to represent them
as more considerable than they really were, for the honor of their Profession,
and to make them the more regarded by their Opposers; There can be no such
Objection against the testimony of the Emperor Maximus. He was one of the
fiercest enemies that Christianity ever had; Naz. Orat. 3.
who, as Nazianzen testified, was a greater Persecutor than either Diocletian
or Maximianus, and yet in his Epistle to Sabinus, recorded by Eusebius, he
speaks it to have been a thing, generally and universally known among men, that
in the entrance of Diocletian, Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 9. c. 9. gr.
(...), almost all men had left the heathen worship, and had joined themselves
to the Society of the Christians. And in the time of Julian, Theodor. Hist.
Eccl. l. 4. c. 1.
not only the greatest part of the Empire was Christian, but even of his Army
also; who did so profess themselves, when they had chosen Jovian, to succeed
him upon his death.

11. Fourthly, I note also, That it was truly observed by Barclay, G. Barcl. de
Potest. Papae, c. 8.
that Valentinian the younger, who was an Arian, might as easily have been
resisted, and deposed by the Catholic Christians, as any King or Emperor
whatsoever, if they would have undertaken any such thing. For the strength of
the Eastern part of the Empire, was then in the hands of Theodosius, who was a
zealous promoter of the true Faith; and the main part of the Western Empire was
then overrun by Maximus, who continued his power for some years, was an Enemy
to the Arians, Ambr. Epist. 33. ad Marcellin.
and expressed great respect for S. Ambrose. The Army also of Valentinian,
whose residence was then at Millan, where S. Ambrose was Bishop, was so
disaffected to the Emperor, that they declared as S. Ambrose informs us, that
they would go over to those, to whom S. Ambrose should direct them, unless the
Emperor would communicate with them, who embraced the true Faith. But in this
Case Theodosius protected and assisted Valentinian, and S. Ambrose disclaimed
all resistance against him, and espoused his interest to the utmost against
Maximus.

12. Against this instance Bellarmine alleges, that it was not a fit Case for
the Church to make use of her power toward Valentinian, Bellarm. de excus.
Barclaii. c. 8.
because he was then but young, and what he acted was by the contrivance of his
Mother Justina, who was an Arian; and there might be hopes, that he might
afterward be converted to the right Faith, as indeed he was. But this is but a
very week exception. For if any Christian Bishop was entrusted with any
superiority over the Crowns of Princes, in order to the Churches good, he would
but ill discharge his duty, if he will suffer the Church to be harassed, and
persecuted, all the time of their minority, when it was in him to help and
prevent this, by the regular exercise of his power. Surely if there was any
such authority, which God had placed over the temporal power of Princes, it
would have been the most proper time, to have undertaken to rule them in those
tender years, in which they are most apt to be imposed upon, and to be led
aside by others. Had there been any superior authority, to chastise erring
Sovereign Princes, by temporal punishments, it had been most reasonable to
begin the exercise thereof in their younger years, that by their timely
submission and repentance, the Church might have the greater advantage by their
whole future life. And because he was then led by his Mother, it would have
been then, if ever, seasonable to have let him understand, that he was bound
with respect to the right of his Crown, to please the Bishop of Rome, rather
than to be guided by her. But neither in this, nor in any other Case, for many
hundred years before and after it, did ever the Romish Bishops, either claim or
make use of such authority, though many of them in those ancient times, wanted
not zeal, to undertake any thing, even Martyrdom, for the advancement of the
Christian profession.

13. Obj. 2. Some instances are urged, Blond. in Sch. ad Grot. de Imp. c. 3. n.
14.
to prove that the Primitive Christians in some Cases, did take Arms against
the Sovereign power. When Grotius had urged this argument, from their general
submission, without any forcible resistance: Primitive Christians vindicated
from all appearance of Sedition.
the Scholia annexed in the Margent, under the name of Blondell, mention two
stories, within three hundred and forty years after Christ, and some others of
an after date, as instances of resistance in those Christians. Now if all this
were true, the primitive rule in this Case, is rather to be measured by the
doctrine, and declared sense of the most eminent men in the Church, than by a
few contrary practices. Even in those times there were some evil actions,
committed by them who professed the doctrine of our Savior; the Church was not
then free from Heresies, Schisms, and other Crimes, which administered matter
for Canonical censures. Yet from what appears, I see not but that the duty of
peaceable submission was so universally practiced by Christians, unto their
secular Governors, for above three hundred years, that they cannot be taxed
with any one instance of seditious insurrections.

14. In the first instance there mentioned it is said, that the Christians by a
forcible and perilous assault, did rescue Dionysius of Alexandria from those
infidels, who carried him away, in the year 235. Now as I find nothing about
that time, concerning any suffering of Dionysius, and because he was not Bishop
of Alexandria, Eus. Hist. Eccl. l. 6. c. 35. gr.
till about the year 246. or the third year of Philippus the Emperor, as
Eusebius testifyeth; and also because what he suffered, was under the
persecution of Decius, who began his Reign about 250. years after Christ, I
must suppose the year to be misprinted. The story to which this has respect, I
suppose to be this, which is mentioned in Eusebius from one of Dionysius his
own Letters. Ibid. c. 40. gr.
Before the open persecution of Decius brake forth, Dionysius was seized on,
and carried out of Alexandria, and was kept under the Guard of some Soldiers.
But a Country man who was going to spend all the night in jollity, banqueting
and revelling, according to their custom at Weddings, hearing thereof, declares
this to all the rest of the Guests. They with one consent arose, and violently
ran to the place, where Dionysius was, and coming thither gave a great shout.
The Soldiers flying, they entered the House, and forced him against his own
desire and entreaty, to rise out of his bed; and taking him by his hands and
his feet, they drew and haled him out of the House, and set him upon a bare
Asses back, and carried him away: and it seems probable that in the
consequence, Dionysius had hereby an opportunity to make an escape. this action
is by Baronius placed in the year 253. Annal. Eccl. an. 253. n. 100
which by an easy mistake might be altered into 235. But it is not manifest
that here was any sighting at all; and which is most considerable, there is not
any expression in this whole relation, which so much as intimates, that they
who undertook this action were Christians. The perusal of the whole story, will
persuade an indifferent Reader, that this was a wild exploit and frolic of a
Company of rude spirited men in that place, Val. in Eus. l. 6. c. 40.
whom Valesius calls rusticos and temulentos convivas, drunken
Countrey-Companions. Nor is it probable, that the Christians of those times,
would behave themselves after such a manner as this, either among themselves,
or toward so eminent a Bishop And such a charge as this may not be fastened
upon them, where there is no evidence at all for the proof thereof.

15. Blond. ubi sup.
the second instance there given, is of the Armenians ( i. e. of the greater
Armenia) whom when Maximinus the Emperor, would by force have turned from
Christianity, they defended themselves by War against him in the year 310. and
are commended for it. An. 311. n. 22, and 57.
This action is also observed and related by Baronius, who places it in the
years 311. and 312. but this was no War against their Sovereign, but against a
Foreign Prince, who would have violently forced upon them a false Religion.
Sozom. l. 2. c. 7.
For this Armenia was a tthat time no part of the Roman empire, but was a
Nation bordering upon the Empire, who then had a distinct King of their own,
but acknowledged a subjection to the Persians, Evag. Hist. Eccles. l. 5. c. 7.
and thereupon this Country was called Persarmenia. But for diverse years before
and after this War, they were not under the Roman power; and Eusebius who
relates this action, Eus. Hist. l. 9. c. 7. gr.
declares they were friends and Confederates, till by this undertaking of
Maximinus, they became his Enemies.

16. I confess some years after the Reign of Constantine was ended, This loyalt
afterward declined.
there were among the Christians some attempts and enterprises undertaken, of
another spirit and nature. Socr. Hist. Eccl. l. 2^ c. 12. gr.
By reason of the great opposition between the Arians, and the Orthodox
Christians; there were in Constantinople and in other places, (...), frequent
seditions and tumults, as Socrates expresses it; and these took place from
about the year 340. Ibid. c. 134
then among other things, Hermogenes the Emperors commander, whom he sent to
Constantinople, to dispossess Paulus from being Bishop there, was opposed with
force, the House in which he was, being fired upon him, and himself slain in
the year 342. Not long after this also, Baron. a^. 350. n. 1, 2, 4.
began the more open and contrived rebellion of Magnentius, and though this was
undertaken out of ambition and unchristian disloyalty, yet he carried on his
designs under a pretense for Religion. He first engaged against Constans the
Emperor, who was slain by him, for which abominable Parricide, Athan. Apol. ad
Constant. Baron. an. 353. n. 5.
Athanasius inveighed greatly against him; and then managed a War against
Constantius. And this according to Baronius, was the first time, that the
Banner of the Cross appeared in the Field on both sides; one against another:
and this was indeed a Rebellious Insurrection, against a Sovereign Prince. But
the true primitive and genuine spirit of Christianity, was wholly averse from
and unacquainted with such proceedings: and when the Christian temper did in
diverse persons degenerate in this particular, such exorbitant and evil
practices were always contrary to the judgment of the chief guides, and Bishops
of the Church.

CHAP. V.
Of the extent of the duty, and obligation of non-resistance.
SECT. I.
Resistance by force is not only sinful in particular private persons, but also
in the whole body of the people, and in subordinate and inferior Magistrates
and Governors.
unlawfulness of taking Arms against a Sovereign Prince, to be a geneal rule
for ordinary circumstances; but yet they pretend, there are some great and
extraordinary cases, in which it must admit of exceptions. And the proposal of
these Cases, as they are by them managed, is like the Pharisaical Corban, an
Engine and method to make void the duties of the fifth Commandment, concerning
obedience, and submission to superiors. Wherefore in this Chapter, I shall
undertake the defense of that assertion of Barclay, G. Barcl. cont.
Monarchomach. l. 3. c. 16. p. 212.
who proposes the Question, Nulline casus, etc. may there no Cases fall out,
in which the people by their authority may take Arms against their King? B. 2.
C. 5.
and his answer is, Certainly none, so long as he is King, or unless, ipso jure
Rex esse desinat.

2. The whole Community have no Authority to take Arms against their Sovereign.
Now the first Question and pretense, has respect to the whole body of the
people. Whether if the whole or principal part thereof, do account themselves
injured, and oppressed by their Sovereign, and judge it needful for their own
defense and security, and the common good, to take Arms, and make use of force
against him; this authority of the Community, be not a sufficient Warrant for
such resistance. This is asserted by the seditious Positions of Mariana,
Marian. de Reg and Reg. Institut. l. 1. c. 6.
who not only gives a large allowance to Commonwealths, and the generality of
the people to divest their Kings of their Government, and take away their
lives; but he also grants the same liberty and power, to any members of the
Commonwealth, if learned and grave men be consulted, and where there is
Publica vox Populi, the common voice of the people inclining that way. And this
notion also though not in the same exorbitant degree, is embraced by
Bellarmine, and many of the Jesuits, and other men of disloyal Antimonarchical
Spirits. But because what I have said in the former Chapters, is both of
sufficient force, and clear enough for the refuting hereof, I shall only
superadd these brief considerations.

3. First, That the agreement of the whole body of the people, or the chief and
greater part thereof, can give no sufficient authority to such an enterprise;
because the whole community are Subjects, as well as the particular persons
thereof. And with especial respect to this Kingdom, I above observed, that our
Laws declare it unlawful, for the two Houses of Parliament though jointly, to
take Arms against the King. The same has been also acknowledged, by men of
understanding in Foreign Countries. As Bodinus, Bodin. de Repub. l. 2. c. 5.
concerning England, and other places where the Kings have jura majestatis,
concludes, singulis civibus nec universis fas est summi Principis vitam, famam
aut fortunas in discrimen vocare; it is not lawful for the Subjects, either
singly, or all of them together, to bring into danger the life, honor, or
possessions of the Prince. Secondly, this would open a gap to great confusions,
since the body of the people are apt to be imposed upon, and to be led by their
passions, as the experience of these latter Ages, as well as the Cases of Corah
and Absalom do testify. And the same appears from the whole Congregation of
Israel, being forward to cast off Moses, and to make them another Captain,
Numb. 14. 2, 4. Thirdly, This liberty may as reasonably be given to a few
private persons, as to the whole people; because in such enterprises of the
people, they are counseled by, and are generally influenced and led, according
to the motions of a few private persons. Fourothly, The Laws of God against any
evil actions, and consequently against resistance, do not become void, by any
great numbers joining together, in practicing what is contrary unto them. When
the primitive Christians were the chief part of the Roman Empire, they durst
not take up Arms against the Emperor, out of the fear of God, as has been
showed. No sin is to be esteemed the less but the greater when a multitude
shall be actors in it. If any violence be offered to a Father or Master, this
is not the more allowable if all his Children or Servants join in the
Confederacy. And when great multitudes engage in open insurrections, the
consequents thereof may be much more dreadful, and calamitious to Mankind:
whereas the embodying of small numbers, are the less to be feared, because the
more easy to be suppressed.

4. The next pretense is, that subordinate Governors being also Gods Officers,
may defend the properties of the Subjects and the exercise of true Religion,
Brut. Vind. qu. 2. p. 56. and qu. 3. p. 93. edit. 1589. De sur. Mag. Qu. 6.
even by taking Arms against their King. This has been asserted by such
Writers as Junius Brutus, the Anonymous discourse de jure Magistratuum in
subditos, others in England in our late intestine Broils, Ruth. Qu. 20. and 36.
J. Sleid. Com. l. 22. an. 1550.
and Rutherford, of Civil Policy. And Sleidan in his Commentaries reports, that
the same was declared in the Magdeburgh Confession. And for the supporting of
this assertion it is urged, that all Governors even subordinate as well as
supreme, are in the use of their power to serve God, and do justice, and defend
the innocent, and do act by Gods Authority. As also, that if any person in
Ecclesiastical power, how high soever he be, shall oppose the Christian
Doctrine, his subordinate Clergy lawfully may, and ought to withstand him. And
that saying of Trajan, In Vit. Trajan.
mentioned by Dion Cassius, is usually noted to this purpose, who delivering
the Sword to an inferior Commander, bad him use this for him, if he should
govern well; but against him, if he governed or commanded ill.

5. Subordina^t Governors may not resist the supreme.
But such Positions would undermine the peace of the World, and lay Foundations
for great disturbances: and thereby the Commands of God would be broken, with
the greater force and violence, if those who are invested with some part of the
Kings Authority, should account themselves thereby empowered, to make use
thereof against him. And if this were admitted, the state of Kingdoms must be
in danger, whenever inferior Governors shall be imposed upon, by the
subtilty of others, or puffed up by ambition. But this is as far from truth as
from peace: though Corah had 250 Princes who joynen with him, and Absalom was
assisted by the Elders of Israel, besides Ahitoph^l the great Counselor of
State; this did not justify their Treasonable Conspiracies. And though David
was a great Officer at Court, General of the Army of Israel, and the anointed
Successor to the Crown, by Gods special appointment, and no subordinate Ruler
in other Dominions, could have so much to plead for himself in this case, as
David had; yet it was not lawful for him to stretch out his hand against Saul.
And in the account of the Thebean Legion above mentioned, Mauritius was a great
Officer and Commander of the Roman Army, and then in Arms at the head of his
Legion, and yet according to the Primitive Christian principles, professed a
detestation of making resistance. And therefore this pretense is justly
rejected, De J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 6. and de Imper. c. 3.
with some vehemence by Grotius, as being against Scripture, reason and the
sense of Antiquity.

6. Indeed all persons in Authority are bound to do justice, but this must only
be in their Sphere, and according to the proportion of their power: but they
cannot be allowed to set themselves over their Superiors, to usurp upon their
Authority, or to deny Subjection unto them. And with respect to their
Sovereign, Officers both by Charter and Commission, have their Authority
depending upon him, and are as much his Subjects as other men are; and besides
the common bonds of Subjection, do all with us take the Oath of Supremacy, and
Allegiance. Now as a Servant may not put himself into the place of a Ruler or
Judge, over his Master, to force him to what he thinks equal; no more may an
inferior ruler do to his Prince. To this purpose it is observed by Sleidan,
Sleidan. Comment. l. 17. An. 1546.
that the Elector of Saxony, who was then the chief person against the
Emperor, in the German Wars, under Charles the fifth, did openly declare, that
if Charles the fifth was owned to be Caesar, or a proper Sovereign, with
respect to those great Princes of the Empire, it must then be granted, cum eo
belligerari non licere: that it was not lawful to make War with him. And
whereas subordinate Rulers are to be submitted unto, and rever^^^d, in the
regular use of their Authority ^^^et if they shall oppose the Superior ^^^^r,
they are to be deserted and the acting against them, in discharge of duty to
the Sovereign, is no disobedience. Thus S. Austin, Aug. de Verb. Dom. Sermon. 6.
ipsos humanarum rerum gradus advertite; consider the orders, steps and degrees
of human affairs. If the Curator command one thing, and the Proconsul another,
must not the greater power be obeyed? and so also where the Proconsul commands
one thing, and the Emperor the contrary. And St. Peter in commanding
submission to inferior Governors, makes use of these bounds of Subjection, as
unto them who are sent by him, i. e. the King.

7. Disparity between secular and Ecclesiastical Governors.
The objection from the comparing the case of Ecclesiastical and Civil Rulers,
is of no weight, because of the great disparity that is between them. The
withstanding an Heretical Bishop, who would impose corrupt Doctrines upon the
Church, if this be certain and manifest, may lawfully be undertaken, not only
by the inferior Clergy, but by other Christians: and herein they only do their
own business, of keeping the Faith, holding to the truth, and rejecting what is
contrary thereto. Cyp. Epist. 68.
And S. Cyprian when Basilides and Martialis Spanish bishops had closed with
Pagan Idolatry, accounted that ordinary Christians ought to separate themselves
from such guides. And though in our age, too many causelessly reject communion
with those Officers whom Christ has set over them, which is a sin of no low
degree: yet it must be acknowledged, that there may be just causes for such
withdrawing from Communion, in obedience to the Christian Doctrine. But it can
never be lawful for private Christians, to usurp to themselves Episcopal power,
which would be unaccountable and Sacrilegious. Aug. ubi sup.
And if a Sovereign power should command any to embrace Heresy, or reject the
true Religion, or to become unjust to others; to refuse such evil practices, is
their duty they owe to God, who is the Supreme Governor, and so far they act
in their own Sphere: but if they take Arms, they then take to themselves the
power of the public Sword, which is the Sovereigns right, and are thereby
guilty of invading what is not their own. Besides this, there is no
Ecclesiastical Officer whosoever, but his Authority is inferior to the
Authority of the Universal Church, of which he is a member; and this
principally takes in the Apostolical and Primitive Church: and all Christians
are bound to hold to the doctrine and unity of this Church, against any bishop
or Officer whomsoever, who departs fromit; whereas Sovereign Princes are
subject to God alone, and not to any other upon earth. And therefore the
comparison would be more equal between a secular Sovereign, and the Catholic
Church, as to the Supremacy of their Authority under God alone.

8. Of the words of Trajan.
The words of Trajan, which some have urged, seem to have been a popular, and
somewhat unadvised expression, calculated for the obtaining the applause of the
people; somewhat like that of Marcus Antoninus to the Senate, Xiphilin. ex Dion.
who said to them, we have so far nothing our own, that the very House we dwell
in is yours. Or they may also be intimations of a strong confidence, that he
should never himself decline to evil ways, or put any of his Officers upon
unworthy actions. But the argument from these words is weak and inconsiderable,
and the determining the true sense of them is not material, unless it could be
proved, that this saying of Trajan, is that which all the World ought to
observe as their rule, rather than the Principles of equity, the directiions of
Scripture, and the sense of the primitive Church.

SECT. II.
Some Cases which have respect to the Prince himself, reflected upon.
Grotius, De J. B. and P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 8, 14, 15.
of the lawfulness of taking Arms against such a Prince, who has no supreme
power, or who has no just and warrantable right and title, or who receives
his Government upon express condition, that in some special circumstances, it
shall be lawful to make resistance against him, or relinquish obedience to him.
For such Princes as these are supposed to be, have no complete Sovereign right,
and the consideration of such things is of no concernment to our English
Government.

2. Ibid. n. 9.
Another question has been proposed concerning Princes, who voluntarily and
freely relinquish, and lay aside their Crown and Government. And there have
been several instances of this nature, as in the Emperor charles the Fifth,
Christina of Sweden of late, Bambas of Spain, which is expressed in one of the
Councils of Toledo; Conc. Tolet. 12.
and in the space of two hundred years; nine Saxon Kings have been observed to
have done the like in England. Fullers Chapter Hist. l. 2. an. 718.
And if such persons should act against the settled Government of their
respective Kingdoms, after they are fixed in the next Heir, in an hereditary
Kingdom, or in another King, according to the constitution of elective
Principalities, the resisting any of them, is not the taking Arms against the
King, but against him who now is a private person.

3. Barcl. cont. Monarchom. l. 3. c. 16. p. 213.
The Question concerning a Prince, who shall undertake to alienate his
Kingdom, or to give it up into the hands of another Sovereign Power, against
the mind of his Subjects, has been considered by Barclay, Grot. ubi sup.
Grotius, and before them both was reflected on by Bishop Bilson. And I think
them truly to assert, Bills. of Christian subject. l. 3. p. 479. and 520.
that such an act of alienation, or of acknowledged subjection, especially if
obtained by evil methods, as was done in the case of King John, is null and
void; and therefore can neither give any right of Sovereignty to another, nor
dispossess the Prince himself thereof, as was said in the former Book. But if
any such Prince shall actually, and forcibly undertake, to bring his Subjects
under a new supreme power, who have no right thereto, and shall deliver up his
Kingdom, to be thereby possessed, Ibidem.
Grotius doubts not, but he may be resisted in this undertaking; but then
this resolution must proceed upon this ground, that this action encludeth his
devesting himself of his Sovereignty, together with his injurious proceeding
against those, who were his Subjects. Barcl. ubi sup.
And Barclay who allows only two cases, in which a Prince may be divested of
his royal Dignity, does account this to be one of them. But concerning this I
think it chiefly necessary to add, that a disquisition of this nature, has
much in it of the needless niceties of many disputes of the Schoolmen, wherein
they contend about empty Notions, and exercise themselves in speculations,
which are not like to be of concernment to Mankind. For men's ordinary duties do
not depend on such extraordinary, unlikely, and merely imaginary suppositions.
And therefore this case might well enough have been omitted, were it not that
some might account it a defect, to take no notice of what other men thought fit
to propose; and possibly some may account such things to be of more weight,
than they really are.

4. The last case which I shall take notice of, as mentioned by these and other
Writers, is expressed in high words, which yet are of no great weight, when
thoroughly examined; to wit, whether if a Sovereign Prince should actually
undertake to destroy his whole Kingdom, or any considerable part thereof, they
may not in these circumstances, have liberty of defending themselves by taking
Arms. This Question is started and urged by Junius Brutus, Vindic. cont. Tyr.
Qu. 3. p. 184. etc.
and insisted on by other subverters of Sovereign Power; and is needful to be
discoursed, because here such men take sanctuary who would undermine the duties
of submission. It is not reasonable to imagine a King to undertake to destroy
his whole Kingdom.
But good men ought to be cautious, even of admitting any such uncharitable
suppositions to enter into their hearts, concerning their own Rulers, whom God
has commanded them to honor and reverence: and much more ought they to be
wary, that they do not account themselves, to have ever the more liberty to
evade Gods Commands, and their ordinary duty of subjection and allegiance, by
the putting such general and more than extraordinary cases. Wherefore I shall
first take notice of what is proposed, concerning the whole Dominions of a
Prince, or a whole Kingdom; and then concerning any considerable part thereof.

5. The suggestion of a Sovereign Prince, out of mere will or passion,
undertaking to cut off, or to ruin and destroy the whole Body of his People,
are expressions which make a great noise, and have a terrible sound and dismal
aspect; but like a Spectrum though they may affright, they have little of
substance under them. Adv. ^^^ narch. l. ^ c. (...) 212.
I acknowledge that this is the other only case in which Barclay esteems a
Sovereign Prince of forfeit his right of Government, and that thereupon it may
be lawful to resist him. l. 3.^ ^. p 159. l. 6. c. 23. p. 503. etc. 24. p. 513.
And the comparing several places in that Book, will necessitate the
interpreting those expressions, to extend only to this case, which allow the
people under the fiercest and highest tyranny to resist, provided they exceed
not the bounds of mere defense, without any attempts of invading or revenging.
But then withal he will not allow in this case or any other, the taking Arms
against the Sovereign Power, but says, a Prince by such an undertaking as
this, loses his Royal Authority, and is no longer King; se omni dominatu and
principatu exuit, atque ipso jure, sive ipso facto, Rex esse desinit, Cont.
Monarchomachos l. 6. c. 23. And Grotius also agreeing with Barclay, whom he
here cites, grants that the People may in such a case as this resist by
force, De Jur. Bell. and P. l. 1. c. 4. n. 11.
si Rexvere hostili animo in totius populi exitium feratur. And he also
proceeds upon the like foundation, that this is not to resist a Sovereign
King, but him who cease to be such; consistere simul non possunt volunt as
imperandi, and voluntas perdendi: quare qui se hostem populi totitus
profitatur, eo ipso abdicat regnum.

6. Now the design of these learned men, is thus far herein to be much
approved, that they though it necessary to take care, that whilst the Right and
Authority of Princes was asserted, the safety of the people and the common good
should still be provided for. Yet because I conceive these answers to leave
things too loosely, and afford overmuch occasion for unquiet spirits to lay
hold on, I shall endeavor to speak a little more closely to this matter.
Wherefore I assert, 1. That there is a great difference, between the
discoursing of such things as mere notional suppositions, and the considering
them as matters of practice and reality. In the former way there may be
suppositions made, of things which actually are not, never were, nor are ever
like to be; and there may also be supposed such evidence as is clear, and
beyond all possibility of mistake, when there is no such thing in reality. And
only upon the yielding such suppositions, I shall grant the answer given to be
true. Thus the River Thames may be granted to be hurtful and pernicious, upon
supposition that it should overflow and drown the whole Kingdom: but though
such a thing may be imagined in speculation, men of common understanding cannot
much fear any such actual danger. Now the taking Arms is not a notion but a
matter of fact; and therefore the reason and ground of such undertakeings, must
be from things as they actually and really are in the World.

7. I assert Secondly, That if we consider this as a Case of practice, which is
that to which our public acknowledgments also must be referred, this pretense
is no sufficient Plea for Subjects to take Arms; upon these two reasons.

1. From the unreasonableness of the thing supposed, and the great unlikelyhood
of its ever being true. though it may be so pretended. For such a thing
probably never was actually in the World: and Grotius acknowledges, Grot. ubi
sup.
that this can scarce seem possible to happen, in a King who is compos mentis
toward his whole Dominions. Adv. Monarchomach. l. 3. to c. 16.
Indeed Barclay gives instance in Nero, whom Aurelius Victor relates, to have
talked of destroying Rome and the Senate, with Fire and Sword, and placeing his
residence elsewhere: Sueton. in Calig. n. 30. and 49.
and much to the same purpose is declared concerning Caligula. Now though these
were Monsters of men, and it may be hoped, that no Princes like to them, will
ever live under Christianity especially: yet these expressions had not respect
to the whole Empire, but only to Rome; and furious speeches even of such men,
whose actions spoke them savagely cruel, might probably vent much more, than
would ever be enterprised and attempted. And it seems considerable, that S.
Paul's Prohibition against resistance, was written to the Romans, within a few
years after the end of Caligula his Reign, and about the entrance of Nero, and
therefore was a firm rule and binding obligation, even under their Government.

8. I know it is not simply impossible, that such a Case should be in act. If
Antiochus had been really King of Judea, while he resolved to destroy all
persons, of the whole Nation of the Jews, who observed the Law of Moses, this
had been a Case of somewhat like nature, and upon this Foundation Barclay also
goes, Ibid. l. 6. c. 24.
to justify the Wars of the Maccabees, of which I have given another account.
But though it be not utterly impossible, yet there is as much or more reason,
for those Children who maintain and support their Parents by their industry, to
fear the these Parents do design to poison them (because there have been some
unnatural and Saturnine Parents) than that Subjects should fear any such design
of their Prince, against his whole Realm. And such Children might with as much
justice attempt the murdering of these Parents, upon such suspicions, which
would be horrid and inhumane; and Subjects upon the mentioned pretense, take
Arms against their King; both having equal appearance of self-preservation and
being defensive; and both being impious and opposite to Righteouseness and
Christianity.

9. 2. The other reason is from the dangerous effects, and great mischief, that
has been, and still may be in the World, by proceeding upon such pretenses.
For he who does observe, that Moses who was so great a deliverer of Israel, was
charged by them in their murmurings, as one who intended to ruin and destroy
them, and that this was done not only once, but frequently, Ex. 16.3. Ex. 17.3.
Numb. 16.13, 14. and that they spoke to like purpose concerning God himself,
Number. 14.2. Numb. 21.5. Deuteronomy. 1.27. may discern, that upon small or no occasions
the suspicions of discontented spirits, carried on by plausible insinuations,
will easily pretend to certain evidence of the design of ruining the people, in
the best Governors, to the neglect of their duty, and the disturbance of peace
and quiet. It is manifest both in our own and other Nations, that much
Christian blood has been shed, by giving way to such false surmises against
truth and Christian Charity. And it is to be expected that male-contented
persons, if they have any ill enterprises, will shell them over with the
fairest pretenses they can take up, as a disguise for themselves, Duct. Dubit.
b. 3. c. 3. rule 3. n. 15.
and a way to inveigle others. But as Bishop Tailor asserting the unlawfulness
of resistance, well observed, such wild Cases as this, of a King endeavoring
to destory his Kingdom, are not to be pretended, against that which Religion
and natural reason has established.

10. But I come now to consider the other part of this Question, Of a Prince or
Sovereign power undertaking to cut off a considerable number of Subjects.
if a Sovereign Power undertake to destroy any great or considerable part of
the people. Such things in some Cases, have often happened in the World: but
herein the English constitution does afford peculiar advantages, and securities
to the Subjects of this Realm, above what is in many other Soveraignties. But
these Cases may be best judged of, by ranking them in several Orders, and by
observing particular instances of fact, which have happened under other
different Governments.

11. Wherefore 1. Sovereign Powers have sometimes undertaken to destroy a part
of the people, Where this is a proceeding according to the Laws and Rules of
the Government, and upon great crimes.
upon account of some great or enormous crime charged upon them, and by virtue
of such a public sentence, which may be called Judiciary and legal
proceedings. Amongst the Israelites when they had no King or Judge, the chief
power was in the heads of the Tribes; in which time that horrid wickedness was
committed by the men of Gibeah, upon the Levites Concubine, Judge. 19. But the
Benjamites standing in defense of these wicked men, Antiquit. Jud. l. 5. c. 2.
that they might not suffer deserved justice, that whole Congregation of Israel
set themselves against the Tribe of Benjamin, Chapter 20. And they bound themselves
by Oath, says Josephus, to act more fiercely against them, than their Fathers
had done against the Canaanites. And when this whole Tribe, Men, Women and
Children were utterly destroyed, except six hundred men, the same Author tells
us, that both the Israelites, and these surviving Benjamites, acknowledge that
this execution was just. Ibid.
And indeed those Benjamites, who undertook the defense of that heinous wicked
action, did thereby entitle themselves to the guilt thereof: Ambr. Ep. 65. ad
Syagr.
for S. Ambrose rightly declares, non minoris esse criminis tantum facinus
defendisse, quam exercuisse; it is a matter of no less crime to defend so great
a villainy, than to commit it. And about the same time, the Inhabitants of
Jabesh Gilead were utterly destroyed by the Congregation of Israel, except four
hundred Virgins, because they were so far Favorers of this wickedness of the
Gibeathites, that they would not join with the rest of the Israelites to punish
it. Oros. l. 7. c. 12.


12. The Jews also after their Commonwealth was destroyed, and themselves
dispersed in many places of the Empire, rose up in rebellion in Reign of Trajan
and also of Adrain, when they were headed by the pretended Messiah called
Barchocab, or the Son of a Star, with respect to that prophecy of the Star of
Jacob, Numb. 24.17. (though the Jews found sufficient reason to call him
Barcozib, the Son of a Lie) and proceeded with that fury, that they laid many
places utterly wast, both about Egypt and Libya, Buxt. Lex. Rab. in (...) Dio.
cit. a Scldeno.
and other Parts of Africa and Cyprus. And both the. Jewish Chronicle Tzemach
David, and other Historians, account two hundred thousand, or a greater number,
to have been then slain by them, about Alexandria, and the Parts of Egypt. Eus.
Hist. Eccl. l. 4. c. 2, 6.
To prevent the like sad effects in Judea and Mesopotamia, where Orosius
relates them to have been in Arms also, in the time of Trajan, the Emperor
determined the destroying all the Jews there, as a stop to the Enthusiastic
Fury of that people. And upon this account, great multitudes of the Jews were
destroyed by him, and Adrian his successor, in several Countries; especially
in and near Judea, in the Expedition of Qu. Lucius, and the taking the City
Bitter. What the Jews themselves express, Buxt. Lex. Rab. in (...)
concerning the vast numbers who were then destroyed, is indeed utterly
incredible; but Eusebius mentions infinite multitudes cut off, and Dion
speaks of five hundred thousand slain by the Sword. All which was the sad
effect of the seditious outrages of the Jewish Nation, when they might have
otherwise enjoyed safety.

13. To these I add the instance of Thessalonica, in the Reign of Theodosius
the Emperor. Theod. Hist. l. 5. c. 17.
When there had been a great tumultuous in surrection in that City, wherein
some of the Magistrates were stoned to death; the Emperor highly incensed at
the hearing thereof, gave sentence for the destroying the Inhabitants of that
City, which was the Chief City of that part of the Roman Empire, Sozom. l. 7.
c. 24.
under the Praefectus Illyriae. And accordingly seven thousand men were slain,
even the innocent with the guilty, all cut off together as Corn by the Sickle.
For which Fact, proceeding from great unadvised passion, that Emperor upon St.
Ambrose's reproof, manifested great repentance.

14. Now the destroying innocent persons can never be just, and the killing
Infants among others, though allowed and sometimes enjoined, under the Mosaical
Dispensation, is certainly so contrary to the Spirit of Christian meekness,
that under the Gospel it may in no case be defended. Yet forasmuch as the
Sovereign Power in Judea, The Subjects under the English Government have great
advantages above many others.
and many other Eastern Nations, and also in the Roman Empire, as their Laws
declare, had such an authority that the particular Rescripts and Edicts of the
Emperors, were accounted law, and what they determined, was esteemed a legal
decision or sentence, and a judicial way of proceeding: From these
Considerations, I suppose it was not lawful for any of the persons in the
instances abovementioned, (though some of them were unjustly sentenced) to have
taken Arms in their own defense. But they were in this case to commit
themselves to him that judges righteously, as our Lord and Savior has lest
us an example to do. For if it were lawful for persons condemned without just
cause, to resist by force the proceedings of a judicial Sentence pronounced by
the greatest authority, according to the Constitution of that Government, then
were they not in subjection to that Government and Authority. And they who were
guilty of Capital Crimes, were upon account of their offenses, so much the more
obliged to submit themselves and their lives, either to the justice or mercy of
their Sovereign, and not to add to their former crimes a continued resisting
just Authority. But the excellent Constitution of our English Government has
this advantage among others, that it gives sufficient security to the English
Subjects, that there is no way of judiciary and legal proceedings, by the King
himself or any other, against the life or property of any person, Magn. Chart.
c. 30.
who lives peaceably and orderly, but according to the established Laws of the
Land, and upon a fair trial of his case: Nor will our Laws allow any such
general sentence, which may take in innocent persons.

15. And secondly, there have also been cases in World, where a Sovereign Power
has engaged, in the destroying a great part of their Subjects, who were guilty
of no real Crime, Where the Laws of a Government condemn innocent persons, who
dye Martyrs, they may not take Arms.
either out of great averseness to some good or lawful thing which they
embrace, or out of favor and kindness to their Enemies; and yet where this is
done according to the public laws under which they live, it is unquestionably
no sufficient Plea to take Arms. Of this nature were the Persecutions, and all
the sufferings of the Christians, under the Pagan and Heretical Emperors, when
the Laws of the Empire were against Christianity, and the true profession
thereof. And from the History of the Book of Esther, it seems clear, that
when at Hamans Request, Ahasuerus had granted, that all the Jews should be
destroyed, they had no resolution of defending their lives by Arms, till they
had liberty to that purpose granted by Ahasuerus: And the obtaining this
libery, was part of the benefit they received by the interecession of Esther,
and the advice of Mordecai, Grot. in Esth. 8.11.
Esth. 8.11. Chapter 9.2. And though Grotius thinks that they might have done this,
by the right of laws of nature; yet the Constitution of the Persian Monarchy,
placing so large a power of life and death in their Kings (of which the hanging
Haman, v. Dan. 6.24.
Esth. 7.8, 10. and the casting Daniels Accusers into the Lions Den, is
sufficient evidence) no resistance could have been made, but against the
authority of the Laws and Government, under which they lived. And there is so
great an agreement between the condition of these Jews and of the Primitive
Christians under their persecutions, that if the laws of nature would have
allowed these Jews to resist, it must also have been lawful for the Christians
to have done the same, which is contrary to their general Profession and
universal practice; or else it must be said, that the Christians were
prohibited this, by such a peculiar Christian-Law, as is contrary to the Law of
Nature, which would be a great slander and calumny upon our Religion.

16. Upon this account the Novatians were to be blamed, Socr. Hist. l. 2. c.
38. gr.
who when the Soldiers of Constantius the Arian Emperor, were by his Command,
sent to force them to become Arians, they took Arms in defense of their
Profession of Religion; especially because the secular laws of the Empire
concerning Religion, were directed by the particular Edicts of the Emperor,
who was then a fierce Arian. And in such cases, though men were able against
the Laws and Government to defend their Bodies by resistance, they might better
defend their Souls and their Religion, by suffering as Christians; otherwise
the spirit of a Jewish Zealot (of whom there were great numbers in Jewry, among
the unbelieving Jews, after our Saviors death) must be preferred before that
of a Christian Martyr. Yet where the Laws of any Realm condemn any persons
though underservedly, they may flee, or use any lawful means of escape, but not
take Arms for their own defense. But with respect to such proceedings as
these, The advantage of the English Laws.
our English Government gives us this advantage, above what diverse ancient and
modern nations had, that the true Religion is established by our Laws, and that
no Law can be repealed or altered to the prejudice of English Subjects, by the
pleasure of any Prince alone, and without the Consent of the Peers, For a
Sovereign Power against law and right to resolve to ruin great numbers of
Subjects, is so inhuman and unlikely, that it ought not to be supposed against
our ordinary duty.
and the representatives of the Commons of England.

17. The only thing which in this case can farther be proposed is, whether if a
supreme Governor should according to his own pleasure, and contrary to the
established Laws, and his Subject Property, actually engage upon the destroying
and ruining a considerable part of his People, they might not defend themselves
by taking Arms? And it is to be heedfully considered, that this Question is
much notional and speculative, and is of small concernment to practice, because
notwithstanding suspicions and jealousies, which may be unreasonably fomented,
there has never been in this Kingdom (or in most others, if not all) any such
enterprise, by the true Sovereign Prince, against peaceable and innocent
Subjects, during our Histories, for many hundred years. And it is hard to find
any such instance of a lawful Prince undertaking to ruin a great part of his
People, against the plain declarations of the established Laws of the Realm.

18. Had Antiochus Epiphanes been the true Sovereign of the Jews, his
attempting to destroy all those who would observe Circumcision, and the Worship
of the true God, which the Political Laws in Judea established by God, and
unrepealeable by Antiochus, did enjoin them to perform; this had then been much
to this purpose. But he was none of their lawful King, but an Enemy, and yet
died under the dismal lashes of a tormenting Conscience, for these and such
like wicked actions, as I above showed. Jos. An. l. 12. c. 6. Live. Dec. 5. l. 5.
And when he invaded Judea, he was as a Lion bereaved of his Prey, being forced
to return from his designed attempts upon Egypt, Justin. l. 34.
by the resolute denunciation of Popilius the Ambassador from Rome. The Paris
Massacre was also of somewhat a like kind, with respect to the greatest numbers
who were therein murdered. For though I acknowledge the practice of some of
them, being in Arms about that time, was not defensible (and toward them this
might possibly be intended as an Artifice and stratagem of War, or else perhaps
it had never been) yet that so great numbers as about an hundred thousand,
should in cold blood be-cruelly assassinated and murdered, and most of them
manifestly innocent persons, without ever being judicially accused, Tried,
Convicted or Condemned by the Law, was such a piece of barbarous savage
Cruelty, as can scarce be paralleled, as some have noted, under Mahometanism.

19. But if ever any such strange Case as is proposed, should really happen in
the World, I confess it would have its great difficulties. De. J.B. and P. l.
1. c. 4. n. 7.
Grotius thinks that in this utmost extremity, the use of such defense as a
last refuge, ultimo necessitatis praesidio, is not to be condemned, provided
the care of the common good be preserved. And if this be true, it must be upon
this ground, that such attempts of ruining, do ipso facto enclude a disclaiming
the governing those persons as subjects, and consequently of being their Prince
or King. And then the expressions of our public Declaration and acknowledgment
would still be secured, that it is not lawful upon any pretense whatsoever to
take Arms against the King. Christian subjection and Vnchrist. Rebel. Part. 3.
p. 519. edit. 1585.
But Bishop Bilson speaking of such Popish Cruelties, as that I lately
mentioned, says, they are able to set grave men and good men at their wits
end; and make them justly doubt, since you refuse the course of all divine and
humane laws with them, whether by the law of nature they may not defend them
selves against such barbarous Bloodsuckers. And then he adds, Yet we stand not
on that: if the laws of the land where they converse, do not permit them to
guard their lives, when they are assaulted with unjust force against Law, or if
they take Arms as you do to depose princes, we will never excuse them from
Rebellion.

20. But in truth the Case abovementioned, ought not at all to be supposed, or
taken into consideration, either with respect to this public acknowledgment,
or any thing else. For there is greater hurt to be feared from the making such
suppositions, than from the thing supposed; since it is much more likely, that
such designs should be imagined, and believed to be true, when they are false
(as they were in the unjust outcryes against our late Gracious Sovereign) than
that they should be certainly true. And every good man, yea every reasonable
man may have as great confidence, that no such case will really happen, as can
be had concerning the future state and condition of any thing in this World.
The princes main interest is to preserve the just Rights of his Subjects.
For though it should be supposed that some princes may be tempted to think,
that by such means they might carry on some present design which might please
themselves, or some other persons who flatter them into it; yet this will
appear to be against their grand interest. And the constant preservation of our
Fundamental legal rights by our Kings, does manifest that they well understood,
how much their interest and their subjects were linked together: and withal the
confidering this, is of great use to quiet and satisfy the minds of subjects;
and therefore I shall take some notice thereof.

21. First with respect to Christianity, 1. As to Christianity and the
otherworld.
and the interest of another World. For though Princes bear not the Sword in
vain, but may and must use severity, where it is necessary, against evil doers;
yet the precepts of Righteousness, Meekness and Love, and the laws of Nature,
and of Christianity, do as much oblige the greatest persons upon Earth, as
other men. And since they have a righteous Lord and Governor in Heaven,
thereupon the dying words of David, spoken by divine inspiration, are to them a
necessary Rule, He that rules over men must be just, ruling in the fear of
God, 2 Samuel 23.3. And they are also as much concerned as others, in the
threatenings against the disobedience of these divine Precepts. And the Holy
Scriptures speak much, of the sad estate of all persons whomsoever, who
practice Oppression, Cruelty and Unmercifulness. And the future tortures in
another World, of the greatest persons who were evil and injurious here, is
also plainly expressed by Plato. Plat. in Gorg. fin. and de Repub. l. 10.
Indeed Christianity allows repentance; but that repentance which is
available, in Cases of wrong and injury, must enclude a necessary care of
restitution, and reparation.

22. Secondly with respect to their honor and esteem. 2. Their honor.
As a good name is useful to all men, so an high and honorable reputation of
Princes, gains them that reverence and respect in the World, which is of great
moment to themselves, and their Kingdoms. But whilst it is their honor to
secure the welfare of their Subjects, the open violating their Rights will
expose them to be accounted persons of no Fidelity and Integrity. And every man
accounts his own interest to be maintained and upheld, in the establishing
Righteousness and Justice, but when men calmly consider things, they account
Injustice and Oppression to be injurious to the general state of Mankind. To
this purpose any ordinary man who invaded what was another right, was
accounted by Philo to be, Phil. de Decal.
(...), a Common Enemy of humane Society. What was it that made this Kingdom so
uneasy and weary, under those who commanded it, before his Majesty's Happy
Restoration, but that the just Rights of his Majesty, and others, were then
prostrated, and the Laws of the Realm, and the established Religion subverted?
And the methods of unrighteousness are the more distastful to all men, because
he who is unjust to one, if he have opportunity, and can propose to himself an
advantage thereby, is like to be so to another.

23. Thirdly with respect to their safety. Solomon observed, 3. Their safety.
Prove. 16.12. that the Throne is established by Righteousness. And it must
needs be so because this with other acts of goodness, is the way to obtain the
blessing of God, and also to engage the good affections, and hearts of the
Subjects, which are the great security and defense of Princes. But where
unrighteousness has manifestly prevailed, though not in the highest degree, to
contrive utter destruction, it has often been of fatal consequence. Cicero
observed, Cic. de Offic. l. 2. prope fin.
that when in the Lacedemonian Government, Rights were frequently invaded
against Justice, this occasioned first the ruin of the Governors, and then of
the Commonwealth, and brought great troubles also upon the neighboring parts
of Greece. And when the Cruelties, Suet. in Domit. n. 10, 11, 14.
Extortions and Impiety of Domitian, made him to be feared and hated of all,
his own Friends and Intimates, and his nearest Relations, who knew not how to
think themselves secure, were the persons who contrived and effected his Death.

24. Fourthly, 4. Their inward satisfaction.
with respect to the quiet peace and serenity of their own minds. How much
inward perplexity attends the greatest men, who are most guilty of Cruelly
and Oppression, especially when their Consciences are awakened, by the sense of
any approaching dangers, is evident from the great terror and fearfulness,
which surprised Caligula, Nero, and others of the like spirit. To this purpose
the account given by Philip de Comines, Comin. l. 7. c. 2.
concerning Ferdinand and Alphonso, Kings of Naples and Sicily, is very
remarkable. When Ferdinand through his Cruelty and Oppression, was hated at
home, and could by no means procure Peace with the French, his mere grief for
his miserable condition brake his heart, and ended his days. His Son Alphonso
who equalled at least the miscarriages of his Father, though he seemed before
to be a man of an high spirit, and great Courage, was now perpetually possessed
with such amazement, that in the night in his sleep he ordinarily cried out of
the approach of his Enemies, and thought that not only men, but even Trees and
Stones, were the appearance of the French coming against him. In this his
consternation, he resigned his Kingdom, fled from Naples into Sicily, and soon
died. And though his Son Ferdinand was of a better temper, the Subjects being
disgusted, by these former Kings, and not being hearty in his defense, he was
overcome by his Enemies, lost his Kingdom, and a little after left the World.

25. Thus severe punishments (from the dirae ultrices, Aurel. Vict. in
Caracalla.
as Aurelius Victor noted, or rather) from the justice of the righteous God,
often attend and torment the greatest Potentates, for their unrighteous actions,
and therefore the doing justice, which God particularly enjoins, must needs be
their interest as well as their duty. And as all these things I have mentioned
are useful considerations against all injuriousness, so are they of especial
weight against the highest oppression and designs of ruin. And besides what I
have here discoursed, Chapter 2. Sect. 2. n. 3, 4, etc.
I also refer the Reader to what I have said in a former Chapter, concerning
the security which Subjects have of their interest and property, though they
may not take Arms against their Sovereign. And these things may be sufficient
to quell, and suppress uncharitable and unreasonable and unchristian
jealousies, and suspicions, if they be impartially and calmly pondered.

26. Wherefore since our Religion enjoins us to fear God, and honor the King,
let no evil imaginations be entertained to hinder this duty. For as we by the
mercy of God, live under a Prince of great Clemency and Justice, so there is
little cause to fear, that any Sovereign who stands so much concer^^d from the
most solemn obligations, and his own interest every way, to maintain and
preserve the Laws, and the good of his people, should ever endeavor against
these established Laws, to contrive the ruin of them: nor can there be any
pretense that lesser inconveniences should be a foundation for Warlike
Insurrections. And let every Christian practice that Obedience and submission
to Superiors, which the Rules of Equity, the nature of Civil Society, and
especially the Laws of our Christian profession do require. But let that unruly
and turbulent spirit be utterly rejected, unto which ungoverned passions
provoke evil men. Joseph. Ant. l. 17. c. 3.
This was one part of the bad temper of the Pharisees, that they were (...),
such who had a special faculty of opposing and going counter unto Kings: but no
such thing was in the Life or Doctrine of our Savior, nor ought to be in any,
who own themselves to be his Disciples.

27. And now I shall conclude, with an humble and hearty Supplication to
Almighty God, in which I entreat the Reader to join also. That he would bless
and preserve our present Sovereign, and that he and his Successors may always
Rule in Prosperity and Peace, and in a constant exercise of Piety, Justice and
Mercy: That they may ever effectually maintain, and promote the true profession
and practice of Religion, and the welfare of the Church of God: That these
Kingdoms may flourish, and be under the continual blessing of God, and his
Protection and Care, and that the Inhabitants thereof may faithfully serve him:
And that no Unchristian Jealousies and Suspicions, or any evil Seeds of
Discord, may take Root amongst us, and that our Holy Religion may never
henceforth be evil spoken of, through any Unchristian practices of Rebellion,
which are opposite to true Christian Loyalty. Amen.

FINIS.

