RICHARDUS II ANGLIAE ET FRANCIAE REX, DOMINUS HIBERNIAE, ETC.



The true pourtraie ture of Richard the 2. King of England, and France, Lord of
Ireland* and Prince of Chester he reigned 22 years, was deposed and murdered
at Pomfraict Cast: at the age of 33 years. Buried first at Langley* and 14
years after by K Henry the ^th (...) to Westminster, and their was honorably
interred.

A TRVE RELATION OF THAT MEMORABLE PARLIAMENT, which wrought Wonders.

Begun at Westminster, in the tenth year of the Reign of K. RICHARD the
second.

Whereunto is added an Abstract of those Memorable matters, before and since
the said Kings Reign, done by Parliaments.

TOGETHER With a Character of the said amiable, but unhappy King, and a brief
Story of his Life and lamentable Death.

Printed in the Year, 1641.

AN HISTOIRCAL NARRATION of that Memorable Parliament, begun at Westminster,
1386, in the tenth year of the Reign of King RICHARD the Second.
THis present occasion so opportunely be fitting me, I am resolved to treat of
that which has been omitted, and slipped out of memory long since, concerning
diverse and sundry changes and alterations in England, in former times: Nor will
it be any way burdensome to write of that, whereby every good and careful
Reader may learn to avoid diversities of miseries, and the danger and fear of
cruel death. I will therefore speak of that which has lain hid in the
darksome shade of forgetfulness, concerning men who have been led away by the
deceitful path of Covetousness, and have come to a most shameful and
ignominious death: a famous example, to deter all men from practicing those or
the like courses.

ABout the year of Christ, 1386, at such time as Richard, the second of that
name, then in prime of his youth, swayed the Imperial Scepter of our Realm,
there flourished famous in his Court certain Peers, though some of them not of
any honorable descent, yet favored by fortune; by name, Alexander Nevill,
Archbishop of York; Robert Vere, D. of Ireland; Michael de la Pool, Earl of
Suffolk, then Lord Chancellor; Robert Tresilian, Lord Chief Justice of England;
and Nicholas Brambre, sometimes Major of London.

These men being raised from mean estates by the special favor of the King,
and advanced to the degree of Privy Counselors, were the men who had the
only rule of the Commonwealth which they, under the King, governed for some
small space with careful diligence, meriting thereby deserved commendations.
But not long did they thus steer the Ship of the Kingdom; for many of them
being of inferior rank by birth, not having their veins dignified with the
streams of noble blood, they were the sooner enticed with the libidinous baits
of voluptuousness, and infected with insatiable itch of avarice: insomuch,
that despising the authority of the King, and neglecting the commodity of the
Realm, but only desiring to keep up the Revennes of the Kingdom, so
wrought, that by their policy the King is impoverished, the Treasure
exhausted; the Commons murmr at the multiplicity of Tenths, Levies, and
Subsidies; the Peers repine to see themselves disgraced, and their inferiors
honored; and in a word, the whole Kingdom endures an universal misery.

The nobility seeing the miserable estate wherein the Kingdom lay, bleeding as
it were to death, urged their King to summon a Parliament; which was done
shortly after. In which amongst many other acts, the aforementioned Michaell de la
Poole is dismissed of his Chancelourship; and being accused of diverse and many
points of injustice, as briberie, Extortion and the like, he was sone after
cast into the Castle of Windsor, and all his Lands, which were of no small
Revenue, were confiscated to the King. Neither did the Parliament here give
over, but provided further for the whole state; by the mutual consent of the
King and Prelates, Barons, and Commons, with an unanimous conjunction, they
constitute and give plenarie and absolute power to certain Commissioners, as
well of the Spiritualty as of the Temporalty; for the ordering and disposing of
the public affairs, according as shall seem best and most necessary for the
desperate estate of the Commonwealth to depresse civil dissentions, and to
pacify and appease the grudgings of the people.

Of the Spiritualty, were chosen the Arch Bishop of Canterbury, the aforementioned
Bishop of York, the Bishop of Ely, lately made Chancellor of England, the
Bishop of Winchester, Bishop of Hereford, Lord Treasurer; Bishop of Exeter,
Abbot of Waleham, and the Lord John of Waltham.

Of the Layty were elected the Duke of York, the Earl of Arundel, the Lord
Coltham, the Lord scroope, and John Devoureux Knight: these, as men eminent in
virtue, were chosen by the general Suffrage, and sworn to carry themselves as
dutiful and obedient subjects in all their actions. And it was further
enacted, That if any should refuse or disobey the Ordinances so made for
public good, the punishment of his first offense, should be the confiscation
of his goods; and for the second, the loss of life. Thus disposing all things
for the best, the Parliament being dissolved, every man returned to his own
house.

Soon after, the aforementioned Chancellor, with others of their Confederates,
being moved with implacable fury against the Statute of the late Parliament,
they buzzed into the Kings ears, That the Statutes lately enacted, were very
prejudicial to the honor of his Crown, and much derogatory to his Princely
Prerogative: insomuch, that he should not have power, without the consent of
the new appointed Commissioners, to do any thing befitting a King, no, not so
much as to bestow a Largess; a principal means to gain the peoples love upon
any, though never so well deserving.

By these and other the like impious instigations, with which the Devil (as
never unmindfull of the end of those, who by their lives do prove themselves)
did continually supply them, they practiced to annihilate and disanull these
Acts of the Parliament, which seemed any ways to abbreviate or curb their
usurped authority.

And first, by their serpentine tongues, ambitious projects, flattery painted
out with glosing discourses, and covered over with the shadow of vigilancie for
the good of the Kingdom, they so bewitched the Noble inclination of the
youthful King, whom they induced to believe, that all the ill they did was a
general good; that he began to distaste, and at last to abhor the last
passed Acts, as treacherous Plots and most wicked Devices.

Next, they studied how to ingrosse all or the most part of the Wealth and
Riches of the Kingdom into their own Coffers; and to the same end, dealt so
cunningly, yet pleasingly, with the King, that he gave to the D. of Ireland,
John of Bloys, the Heir of the Duchy of Britain, and his Ransom; to others,
Towns; to others, Cities; to others, Lands; to others, Money, amounting to the
sum of 100000 Marks, to the great impoverishment both of King and Kingdom:
Neither did these King-eaters and Realme-devourers any thing regard it, but
setting unskilful and insufficient Captains and Governors over Towns and
Forts so obtained, gave occasion to the Enemies of the Crown to surprise them,
and dispossess the King of them.

Thirdly, vilifying the dignity of the King, contrary to their allegiance, they
drew the King to swear, That with all his power, during his life, he should
maintain and defend them from all their Enemies, whether foraine or domestic.

Fourthly, whereas it was enacted by the last Parliament, That the King at
certain seasonable times, and when his leisure would permit him, should sit at
Westminster, with his Council there, to consult of the public Affairs;
through the persuasions of the aforesaid Conspirators, he was drawn into the
most remotest parts of the Realm, to the great disparagement of the fidelity
of those Honorable, grave, and faithful Peers, late made joint
Commissioners, in whose hands the whole safety and prosperity of the
Commonwealth did reside.

And when as the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Treasurer, Keeper of the Privy
Seal, or any other of the Privy Council, came to relate any of their own
actions, or the state of the Realm, they could not be granted access, unless
they related the business in the presence and hearing of the Conspirators, who
were always ready to upbraid them if they uttered any thing that displeased
them, and to commend them for any thing (though most nefarious) that did
content them, for thus could they the sooner learn and dive into the acts of
the Commissioners, and the better find evasions for their accusations:
Furthermore, when as the King in company of the Conspirators went in progress
toward the parts of Cheshire, Wales, and Lancashire, they made Proclamation in
the Kings Name throughout the Shires as they journyed, That all Barons,
Knights, Esquires, with the greatest part of the Commonalty able to bear
Arms, should speedily repair to the King for his defense against the power of
the Commissioners, chiefly of the Duke of Gloucester, and the Earl of
Arundell, because they above the rest, did with their chiefest endeavors, study
to suppress and quell the devices of the Conspirators.

Fifthly, contrary to the aforesaid Acts, they caused the D. of Ireland to be
created Chief Justice of Chester, thereby selling Justice as they listed,
condemning the guiltless, and remitting the guilty, never respecting or
looking unto the equal balance of Justice, but poyzing down the Scales with
heaps of Bribery.

Sixthly, by the procurement of the Confederates, they caused certain honest
persons, who would not consent to their extortions, to be called and summoned
to their Court, and there to answer to certain false accusations, wherewith
they were unjustly charged by perjured hirelings; of which men so accused, some
were put to death, some cast into prison, all were vexed and troubled with
delays, length of their journey to and fro, and excessive charges; neither
were they eased of any of these burdens, unless they would part with round
sums of money to the D. and his Accomplices.

Seventhly, they gave pardons under the broad Scale, to Felons, Murderers, and
such like, only with this condition, that they should murder any whomsoever
they thought did mislike their Exaction.

Eighthly, they taught the Country of Ireland to look to its pristine estate, I
mean, of having a King; for they plotted to have the Duke created King of
Ireland: and for the confirmation of which their designed, they allured the
King to send his Letters to the Pope.

Ninthly, the aforesaid Nicholas Brambre, in the time of his Maioraltie, caused
two and twenty to be falsely accused of Felonies, and laid into Newgate, under
pretext and color of diverse Crimes, and in the silent and dead time of the
night to be fast bound, and by a strong hand to be carried into Kent, to a
place commonly called Fawlocks, and then to have their heads struck off, except
one, who being favored by the murderers, safely escaped; the blood of the
rest dyed the streams of a small Rivelet adjoining.

Tenthly, soon after, to add one mischief to another, they sent Letters
under the Kings Signet, to the Mayor of London, by John Rippon Clerk, with a
certain Libell or Schedule enclosed in the said Letters, the tenor of which is
as follows.

That the aforementioned three Commisioners, viz. the Duke of Gloucester, the
Earls of Arundel and Warwick, and other of the Council, were to be arrested,
indicted, condemned, and put to lamentable death, as being such as had
conspired against the King, against his Prerogative, and against his Crown and
Imperial Dignity; and to this, they did in a manner constrain the King to
assent unto. Upon receipt of these Letters, the Major and Aldermen of the City
of London, called a Common Council, wherein they consulted what course were
best to be taken in this matter; and after long debate pro and con, it was on
all sides agreed, to deny and not to suffer that cruel and unheard of
Tragical Complot to be executed.

It ever happens one wicked Act draws on a second, and that second a third,
and so forwards, till the weight cracks the Supporter.

Therefore the said Conspiratours being blinded with rashness, principally
sent Letters by John Godfrey knight to the King of France, the Kings adversary,
to conclude a five years Truce, should come over to Callis, and from thence
should send for the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, and
for some other of the Commissioners, as though the King were unwilling to
determine of any thing without their advice; and being thus circumvented,
should be condemned as Traitors, and so put to an ignominious and cruel death.

And for the doing and performing of these things, the King of France was to
recover all the Castles, Towns, and Lands lying in these Countries, and
belonging to the King of England: To prove these things to be true, there were
certain Writings produced by the Commissioners, wherein were contained Letters
from the King of France to the King of England, and from the Conspirators in
the King of Englands Name, to the King of France.

Moreover, there were other Letters intercepted directed to the said King of
France; the substance whereof, was to incite the King of France to levy a
puissant power both horse and foot, and to draw them down to Bulloigne, and
thence to transport them into England, against the Duke of Gloucester, the
Earls of Arundel and Warwick, and the rest of the Commissioners, and all those
that did either countenance or favor the said Statute and Commissioners; which
as they falsely alleged, was made in derogation of the Kings Prerogative, and
the aforesaid Commissioners to vanquish, oppress, and put to death, and
consequently, the whole Nation and Language utterly to ruin.

Not here concluding their devilish Conspiracy, the five aforesaid
Conspiratours departed from Westminster to the Castle of Nottingham, and sent a
writ for Robert Beale, Lord chief Justice of the Common Pleas, John Holt,
Roger Fulthorp, and William Burleigh, Judges of the said court, and for John
Locton, the Kings Sergeant at Law: who being come into the Council Chamber, not
knowing what they were sent for, the aforesaid Conspirators caused the Gates
and Doors of the Castle to be shut, and then propounded these Questions
following unto them.

First Whether those Statutes, Ordinances, and Commission made in the late
Parliament at Westminster, were derogatory to the Kings Dignity and Kingly
prerogative; and because they were to be punished who did procure those
Constitutions, and did incite and move the King to consent unto them, and did
as much as in them lay to hinder the King from exercising his Royal
Prerogative.

To these and other the like questions, with a joint consent they answered,
That they were to suffer death as Traitors, or else to endure some capital
punishment: in witness of which assertion, being terrified with the fear of
present death, the aforesaid Judges, together with John Carey, Lord Chief Baron
of the Exchequer, they signed and sealed a certain Writing, in manner of a
protestation, in presence of these Witnesses, Alex. Nevill, Archbishop of
York, Archbishop Bangor, Robert Duke of Ireland, Michael Earl of Suffolk,
John Rippon Clerk, and John Blake Fruiterer; dated the 19 of September, Anno
Dom. 1387, in the 11 year of the Reign of K. Richard the Second. Then were
they compelled to swear, that they should keep the passages undiscovered,
upon pain of death; and so they had license to depart. And when they had
plotted those and many other Devilish Conspiracies, they bound themselves by
an Oath, to try all ways and use all means, as far forth as lay in their
power, to disanull and utterly abrogate the Acts and Statutes of the last
Parliament.

And that which is worse, they caused the King to swear, That in his proper
person with his whole power he should take revenge of the Duke of Gloucester,
of the two Earls and their adherents, by causing them to be put to death.

The carriage of all which Actions may more easily be known, if the time and
the order of them be duly considered.

But our merciful and ever-gracious God, although there were so many Plots, so
many Conspiracies, so many Treasons wrought against our State, whereby many
miseries did accrue to our kingdom; yet unwilling to take revenge, or to
punish us for our sins, but rather according to his gracious pity, to ease
us of our burthenous calamity; inspired into the hearts of the aforesaid Duke
of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundel and Warwick, the spirit of valor and
magnanimity: who seeing the heap of ils that daily did arise by the practices
of those Conspirators; they set almost in every part of the kingdom
Intelligencers, who should apprehend all Messengers, and intercept all Letters
of the kings, or that went under the kings Name, and should send them to the
Commissioners.

And thus did they come to have intelligence of the whole plot of the
Conspirators; all their Letters being indorsed with Glory be to God on high, on
Earth peace, and good will toward men: and by coming to the knowledge of each
circumstance, they found, that the kingdom was at the point of destruction;
according to that Evangelicall saying, Every Kingdom divided against it self,
shall be dissolved: wherefore they sought for a Remedy; for by the Law of
Nature, it is tolerable to repel violence by violence: sithence it is better
to prevent them to apply a Remedy to a wound, every man according to his
ability levied a power for the preservation of the king and kingdom; all which
Forces being united, amounting to the number of 20000 fighting men, and
courageously resolving to frustrate all the intended designs of the
Conspirators, and to open the Nut by cracking the Shell; they divided their
Army, committing part of it to the Earl of Arundel: who by night marched away
with his Forces, and pitched his Tents near to London, there fortifying
himself in the Forest adjoining, until such time as he had gained more
convenient time and greater force, by the coming of his Consorts: And in the
mean time he used such discipline in his Camp, that he lacked nothing, but
all things were there sold at reasonable rates, as it had been at a Market;
and hardly could he contain the common people for joining with him, for the
overthrow of the Conspirators and their adherents.

On the other side, the Conspirators intending to prevent their purposes, by
power of a certain Spiritual Commission, and by virtue of certain Letters
Patents in the hands of the Conspirators, though nothing to the purpose; yet to
blind the people, they caused to be proclaimed throughout the whole City of
London, That none upon pain of the forfeiture of all their Goods, should
neither sell, give, or communicate privately or publicly Victual, Armor, or
any other necessaries to the Army of the Earl of Arundel, but should debar
them of sustentation, comfort, or help, as Rebels to the King and Country. But
on the other side, they began to fear when they were denied their hoped for
Aid by the Major and Commonalty of the City of London; and again, they were
troubled at the rising of the Commoners, to invade them. Wherefore they
counseled the King to absent himself from the Parliament (which was to begin
at Candlemas next, according as the King and Commissioners had appointed it)
and not consult of the Affairs of the Kingdom, nor of his own Estate, commodity
or discommodity, unless the Duke of Gloucester, the two Earls of Arundel and
Warwick, with the rest of the Commissioners, would swear, That neither they,
nor any in their name, should accuse them or urge any accusation against them.

And they caused it to be proclaimed through the City of London, That none
under pain of confiscation of all their goods, should speak any upbraiding
speeches concerning the King or the Conspiratours; which was a thing impossible
to hinder.

Not long after it happened, that the King, with the aforesaid five
Conspiratours, came from his Manor of Sheeve to Westminster, to Saint Edmonds
Tomb, for the solemnizing of a Pilgrimage. The Mayor and Aldermen of the City
of London met him on horseback sumptuously attyred, honoring him very much.
And when they came to the Mews, they descended from their Horses, and went
barefoot to the Tomb of Saint Edmond; whereas the Chaplain of the
Commissioners, with the Abbot and Covent, met them with a stately Procession.

In the mean time the three Noblemen, viz. the Duke of Gloucester, and the
Earls of Arundel and Warwick having mustered their troops on the foureteenth
of November, in the same year, at Waltham Cross, in the County of Hertford,
and from thence sent for the Commissioners that were there at Westminster in
Parliament with the King, sending an Accusation in writing to the King against
the aforesaid Conspirators, viz. the Archbishop of York, Duke of Ireland,
Earl of Suffolk, Robert Tresilian, and Nicholas Brembre; wherein they accused
them of high Treason: Which their Appellation they did offer to maintain, and
that they were willing to prosecute the same; and to prove it to be true, they
caused also the rest of the Commissioners to subscribe, as parties to their
Appellation.

When these things came to the ears of the King, he sent unto them, requiring
to know what their request was, and what they wished to have been done: They
returned answer thus; That they did desire, that the Traitors which were
always about him, filling his ears with false reports, and did daily commit
insufferable Crimes and Injuries, might be rewarded with condign punishment;
for it were better that some few should dye for the people, then the whole
Nation should perish.

And they likewise craved, that they might have safe liberty of going and
coming to his Grace.

When the King heard their Request, he gave them his Royal consent, and
commanded them to appear at Westminster; and the King sitting on his Throne in
the great Hall, the three aforesaid Peers Appellants, with a gallant Troup of
Gentlemen entered, and making three lowly obeysances on their bended knees, they
reverenced the King: and drawing near (the cause of their coming being
alleged) they there again appealed the Archbishop, Duke of Ireland, Earl
Treasurer, and Brambre of high Treason, according as they had done before at
Waltham Cross; but they betaked themselves to the private corners of the
Palace, even as Adam and Eve from the presence of God, not having the heart to
appear, to justify themselves.

The King called forth the Appellants, to prove and prosecute the Appellation,
prescribing them a day and place for the Trial, which was to be on the morrow
after Candlemas day; and in the mean time, the King commanded them upon their
Honors, not any party to molest the other, until the next Parliament.

Those things thus passed, were publicly proclaimed throughout all England,
and they departed joyfully.

The Duke of Ireland, under the guide of his Grand Captain the devil, marching
into Cheshire, Lancashire, and Wales, raised a new power, amounting to the
number of 6000 fighting men, in the Kings name, to overthrow and confound the
Appellants; from thence marched toward London with his Army, with a furious
intent and resolution to perform his bloody design. But God beholding their
foolish hearts, filled them with vain hopes, that they should accomplish their
enterprises. And whilst these Plots were laid, the Appellants being suddenly
advertised thereof, raised a power, and joining with them the Earl of Derby,
and the Earl of Nottingham, and other Commissioners, marched with long and
wearied Marches into a Field near a Village called Whitney, at a place called
Locford Bridge: In which Field the Duke of Ireland was with the Army, having a
River on the one side of them, whereas they stood ready prepared to give an
overthrow to the Appellants, and displaying the Kings Standard, contrary to the
Laws of the Land: But although they were so valiant at the beginning, yet were
they discouraged at the end; for when they saw the Army of the Appellants march
down from the Mountains like a Hive of Bees, and with such a violent fury,
fear benumbed them, and they were so amazed, that when they should give the
Assault (God not suffering the effusion of blood) they stood like a Hive of
Bees, or a flock of Cattle without a head, making no show or countenance of
resisting; but without any stroke given, they flung down their Arms, and
yielded themselves to the mercy of the Appellants; and a few being slain, and
some drowned in the River, gave an easy Victory to the Conquerors. The Duke of
Ireland himself putting spurs to his Horse, took the River, and hardly
escaped; and though he was pursued, yet he escaped through the midst of the
Troops. And thus by the mercy of God they obtained the glorious Palm of
Victory from the Hand of Heaven.

When the news of the Victory was blown to the ears of the rest of the
Conspirators, who went then stricken with fear, and careful for their
preservation, under covert of the night they fled by Water to the Tower,
drawing the king along with them.

On the other side, Nicholas Brambre with a bold and resolute courage, in the
kings Name caused all the Gates of the City to be shut against the Appellants,
and to be guarded with an able and sufficient Watch: But these worthy and
dauntlesse Members of the Commonwealth marched toward London, to confer
with the king; but when they heard that the said Nicholas Brambre had caused
the Gates of the City to be shut against them, and to be strongly guarded, and
that the whole City did purpose to keep them out, they stayed their resolution.

On the 27 day of September, in the same year, with a melodious sound of
diverse kinds of Instruments, as well of War as of Peace, they encamped
themselves in Clarkenwell, within the Liberties of the City of London; not
purposing on the one side, rashly or unadvisedly to enter the City, nor on the
other side, to make any show of fear; but with a stayed mind (as befitting
wise men) with good deliberation to conclude every thing in its due time. And
when as the Major, with the Citizens, came unto them with pleasing words,
promising unto them all that the City could afford, with reason and equity; the
Duke of Gloucester said, Now I know, that Liars speaks nothing but Lies,
neither can any man hinder them from the relating: Where upon, by a joint
consent, in the Evening they removed their tents, and pitched them before
diverse Gates of the City.

On the morrow there happened an enterview between the King and the Appellants,
so far, that they opened their minds one to the other: but because the king
loathed to speak with them, with such a rabble of men, and in regard of an
intolerable boldness, and some quarrel, which was like to arise; and on the
otherside, refusing to go out of the Tower to speak with them, and the
Apellants fearing some violence or wrong to be offered to them, would not
speak with the King without a strong guard of valiant Warriors: Therefore the
most wise of the Appellants, after diverse disputations had resolved to go and
confer with the King: but first they sent a strong troop well armed, to
search all the Corners and Caves of the Tower? and relation being made of the
safety of the place, with a selected band of valiant Cavaliers they entered the
Tower, and seizing the Gates, and placing a guard appeared before the King; and
there the third time appealed the aforesaid Conspirators, in the same sort and
form as before: which Appellation being ended, the King swore, That he would
adhere to their connsell, as a good King and a just Judge so far as the rule
of Law, Reason and Equity did require.

These things being accomplished, they departed from the Tower to their
Tenements and Lodgings: And then it was published and made known in the
presence of the King, and throughout the Dominions, That on the morrow after
Candlemas day the aforesaid Conspirators should personally appear, to answer
to the Appellation, whereby they were charged of so many Treasons.

And because the Harvest was now ripe, and time convenient to cut up those
pestiferous Cockles and Thistles, by the assent of the King, and consent of the
said Commissioners and Appellants, they expulsed diverse of the Officers of the
Household; viz. in the place of John Beauchamp, Steward of the Household, they
appointed John Devourex, Knight, one of the Commissioners; Peter Couriney,
Knight, was made Chamberlain, in the stead of Robert Duke of Ireland. And the
aforesaid John de Beauchamp, Simon de Burleigh, Vice-Chamberlaine, John
Salisbury, Thomas Trynett, James Barats, William Ellingham, and Nicholas
Nagworth, Knights; and Officers of the Clergy, (viz.) Richard Metford
Secretary, John Blake Deane of the Chapel, John Lincoln Chancelour of the
Exchequer, and John Clifford Clerk of the Chapel were kept under arrest too,
and were as partakers in the aforesaid Treason; for that they knowing and
having intelligence of the said Conspiracy, they did not discover them.

Others also as Servants of the aforesaid Conspirators, and drawn in by craft,
yet guiltless, were dismissed and sent away as men unprofitable, and good for
no use.

And thus this hideous brood of Monsters, so often shaken, was quite overthrown.

And on the Vigil of the Purification of Saint Mary, in the Privy Chamber at
Westminster, by joint consent of all the Commisioners, the aforesaid John
(...) John Holt, Roger Fulthorp, William Burleigh, John Locton, and John Carey
were displaced from their Offices, and without any further ado arrested of
Treason, and by the command of the Chancellor were clapped into the Tower; and
Roger Carleton in the place of Belknap, Walter Clapton in the place of
Tressilian, were constituted: and so for that time they departed, and went to
dinner.

And because Shrovetide was thought a fit time to punish the Delinquents,
according to their deserts; therefore the great Parliament began the second of
February following, in this manner.

All the Peers, as well of the Spiritualty as of the Temporalty, being
assembled in the great Hall at Westminster, the King soon after came and sat
down in his Throne; and after him appeared the five Noblemen Appellants, (the
fame of whose admired worth ecchoed through all the Land) entered the House in
their costly Robes, leading one another hand in hand, with an innumerable
company following them; and beholding where the King sat, all at once, with
submissive gestures, they reverenced the King. The Hall was so full of
Spectators, that the very Roofes were filled with them: and yet amongst this
infinite multitude of the people, there could not be found any of the
Conspirators, or of their Accomplices; but Brambre was taken a little before, and
cast into the Jail of Gloucester.

The Clergy then placing themselves on the right hand, and the Nobility on the
left hand of the King, according to the ancient Custom of the High Court of
Parliament; the Lord Chancellor standing with his back toward the King, by the
Kings command declared the cause of their Summons to the Parliament: Which
being ended, the five foresaid Appellants arising, declared their Appellation
by the mouth of Robert Pleasington their Speaker, who thus spoke:

Behold, the Duke of Gloucester comes to purge himself of Treasons which are
laid to his charge by the Conspirators. To whom the Lord Chancellor, by the
command of the King answered: My Lord Duke, the King conceives so honorably
of you, that he cannot be induced to believe, that you, who are of affinity to
him in a collateral Line, should attempt any Treason against his sacred
Majesty. The Duke, with his four Companions, upon their knees humbly gave
thanks to the King, for his gracious opinion of their fidelity.

Then after silence proclaimed, they arose, and delivered in certain Articles
in Writing, wherein were contained the particularity of the Treason. Which said
Articles were read by Godfrey Martin* the Clerk of the Crown, standing in the
midst of the Parliament House, by the space of two hours, with an audible
voice. At the reading of which, there was a wonderful alteration in the House:
For, whereas before the people were glad of the discovery of the Treason; at
the rehearsal of it, their hearts were so overcome with grief, that they
could not refrain from tears. When the Articles were read, the Appellants
requested the King, that sentence of condemnation might be given against the
Conspirators, and they to receive the guerdon of their deserts; which the king
promised to grant. This was the first days work. The second was ended with
variation of diverse consultations which I will not relate in particular, but
treat of the whole Parliament in general.

And when the third day came of their proceedings against the conspirators, the
Lord Chancellor in the name of the Clergy, in open Parliament made an Oration,
showing that they could not by any means by present at the proceeding, whereas
there is any censure of death to be passed. For the confirmation whereof, they
delivered in a Protestation; which being read, they spoke, That neither in
respect of any favor, nor for fear of any man's hate, nor in hope of any
reward, they did desire to absent themselves, but only, that they were bound
by the Canon, not to be present at any man's Arraignment or condemnation. They
likewise sent their Protestation to the Chapel of the Abbey, where the
Commons sat; which was allowed of. And then, when the Appellants called for
Justice against the conspirators, the Lords of the Spiritualty arose, and went
into the Kings chamber near adjoining.

But the King being moved in conscience, and in charity, perceiving that in
every work they are to remember the end; and being willing (contrary to the
rigor of the Law) to favor rather these that were guilty then the Actours in
that Treason; if they were able to allege any thing in their defense, caused
the Process to cease: but the Peers (being earnest) requested, That no
business past, present, or to come, might be debated, until this Treason were
adjudged; to which Petition, the king graciously granted his assent.

On the 11 day of February, when nothing could be alleged, nor no witness
produced, in justification of the conspiratours, but that the definitive
Sentence of condemnation must be pronounced against them; the aforesaid John
Devoreux, Marshall of the Court, and for that time the Kings Lieutenant,
adjudged them this heavy Doom; That the said Archbishop of York, Duke of
Ireland, Earl of Suffolk, Tressilian, and Brambre, should be drawn from the
Tower to Tyburne, and there to be hanged upon a Gibbet until they were dead,
and all their Lands and Goods to be confiscated, that none of their posterity
might be by them any way enriched.

On the 12 day of February, which was the first day of Shrovetide, Nicholas
Brambre appeared in Parliament; and being charged with the aforesaid Articles
of Treason, he craved favor to advise of Counsel learned, and some longer
time for his more full answer to his Accusation; but yet he desired a thing
neither usual, nor allowable by the Law, and required a thing which the rigor
of the Law, in case of that nature, would not afford. But the Judges charged
him to answer severally to every point in the Articles contained: Whereunto
Brambre answered, Whosoever has branded me with this ignominious mark, with
him I am ready to fight in the Lists, to maintain my Innocence, whenever
the King shall appoint. And this he spoke with such a fury, that his eyes
sparkled with rage, and he breathed as if an Aetna had lay hid in his breast;
choosing rather to die gloriously in the field, then disgracefully on a Gibbet.

The Appellants hearing this courageous Challenge, with resolute countenance
answered, That they would willingly accept of the Combat, and thereupon flung
down their Gages before the King; and on a sudden the whole company of
Lords, Knights, Esquires, and Commons flung down their Gages so thick, that
they seemed like Snow in a Winters day, crying out, We also will accept of the
Combat, and will prove these Articles to be true to thy head, most damnable
Traitor, and so they departed for that day.

And although the Appellants were not idle in the night, yet on the next day,
to aggravate their Appellation against the Conspirators, there came diverse
Companies of the City of London, complaining of the manifold injuries they had
suffered by Brembre, and other Extortioners and Exactions wherewith they had
been daily charged; and yet they protested, that they did not accuse him either
for hate to his person, or for love, fear, or hope of reward from his enemies,
but only they charged him with the truth.

But before they proceed with his trial, they were stayed by most unfortunate
Tressilian, who being got upon the top of an house adjoining to the Palace, and
had descended into a gutter only to look about him, he was discovered by
certain of the Peers, who presently sent some of the Guard to apprehend him,
who entering into the house where he was, and having spent long time in vain
in looking for him, at length one of the Guard stepped to the Master of the
house, and taking him by the shoulder with his Dagger drawn, thus said, Show
us where thou have hid Tressilian, or else resolve thy days are accomplished;
the Master trembled, ready to yield up the ghost, for fear answered, Yonder is
the place where he lies, and shows him a round Table covered with branches of
Bay, under which Tressilian lay close covered; when they had found him they
drew him out by the heels, wondering to see him, as vipers use, to wear his
head and beard o'r-growne, with old clowted shoes, and patched hose, more like
a miserable poor beggar, then a Judge.

When this came to the ears of the Peers, the five Appellants suddenly arose
up, and without expressing any reason, departed out of the Parliament House,
which bred great alteration in the House, insomuch that many followed them, and
when they come to the Gate of the Hall, they met the Guard leading of
Tressilian bound, crying, as they came, We have him, we have him.

Tressilian being come into the Hall, was asked what he could say for himself,
why judgment should not pass upon him for his treason so often committed, he
became as one that had been struck dumb, and his heart was as it were hardened
to the very last, and would not confess himself guilty of any thing: And for
this cause the Parliament arose, deferring Brembres trial till the next day.
But Tressilian was without delay led to the Tower, that he might suffer the
execution of the sentence passed against him, his wife and his children did
with maine tears accompany him to the Tower, but his wife was so overcome with
dolor and grief, that she fell down in a swound as if she had been dead.

Immediately Tressilian is upon a hurdle, and drawn through the streets of the
City, with a wonderful concourse of people following him, at every furlongs
end he was suffered to stand still to rest himself, and to see if he would
confess and report himself of any thing, but what he said to the Friar his
Confessor is not known, neither am I able to search it out; when he came to
the place of execution he would not climb the Ladder, until such time as
being soundly beaten with bats and staves he was forced to go up, and when he
was up, he said, So long as I do wear any thing upon me I shall not dye,
wherefore the executioner stripped him, and found certain Images painted like
to the signs of Heaven, and the head of a devil painted, and the names of
many of the devils wrote in Parchment; the exorcising toys being taken away,
he was hanged up naked, and because the spectators should be certainly assured
that he was dead, they cut his throat, and because the night approached, they
let him hang until the next morning, and then his wife having obtained a
license of the King, took down his body, and carried it to the Grey-Fryers,
where it was buried. On the morrow sentence was likewise pronounced against
Brembre, who being drawn upon a hurdle from the Tower to Tyborne through the
City, showed himself very penitent, humbly craving mercy and forgiveness at
the hands of God and men, whom he had so grievously offended, and whom he had
so injuriously wronged in time past, and did earnestly desire them all to pray
for him; when the rope was about his neck ready to be turned off, a certain
young man, the son of one Northampton, asked him if he had done justice to
his Father or not, for Northampton was sometimes Mayor of the City of London,
more wealthy and more substantial then any else in the City, him did Brembre
and Tresilian accuse of Treason and Conspiracy against the State, and
condemned him to dye, being dispoyled of his estate, he himself at length
hardly escaped, to whom Brembre answered and confessed with bitter tears, that
what he did was most vile and wicked, and with an intent only to murder and
overthrow the said Northampton, for which craving pardon of the young man being
suddenly turned off, and the Executioner cutting his throat, he dyed. Behold
how pleasant and delightful it is to climb up to honor, I suppose it is
better to live meanly at home with quietness amongst poor men, then to lord
it amongst Princes, and in the end to climb a ladder amongst Thieves, it is
even better to undergo the burden then to assume the name of honor; therefore
whosoever that does not regard the Laws, let them observe and consider the end
of these men, and with what period they finished their days.

These men being dispatched, the Parliament discontinued their proceedings
against the rest of the Conspirators till a more convenient time; and took
into their considerations other more weighty affairs of the weal public,
they made the Earl of Arundell Lord Admiral, giving him authority to resist
and to repulse either by Sea or Land the enemies of the Crown wheresoever he
should find them.

And it was further agreed on, that for the appeasing of all private
discontents (if any were) the King, and the rest of the Appellants with the
rest of the commissioners should dine together in the great Hall, which they
did, and there was great joy at this reconciliation through all the Kingdom.

When these things were concluded, they then began again this araignment of
the Traitors, whereupon John Blake and Thomas Vske were indicted on the 4. day
of March, who although they were men of inferior quality yet were they found
to be parties in the said Treason; Vske was a Sergeant at Arms, and was
indicted amongst the Conspirators, so that b^^^^ late made Sheriff of
Middlesex he had indicted the five Appellants and the Commissioners as
Traitors, and Blake was an Intelligencer of Tressilians, one that used to go
and come betweeue the Conspirators, and relate the state and success of the
treason from one to another.

And when they could say nothing to prove themselves clear, sentence was
pronounced upon them as their Masters were before them, they were carried to
the Tower, and from thence were dragged at the Horse tail to Tyborne, and
there hanged.

But Vske obtained this favor, that his head was cut off after he was hanged
and set aloft upon Newgate for Fowls of the air to take repast.

On the sixth day of March there were called to answer, Robert Belknap, John
Holt, Roger Falthorp, William Burleigh, John Locton, and John Carey Baron of
the Exchequer, for their conspiracy against the Commissioners at Nottingham,
but because it is not needful to rehearse every part of their indictment, they
were all condemned like as the rest.

Whilst the Peers were trying them, the Clergy were retired into the Kings
Chambers, but when word was brought to them of the condemnation of the Judges,
the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of Winchester, the Chancellor, the
Treasurer, Lord Keeper of the Privy Seal arose hastily and went into the
Parliament house, pouring forth their complaints before the King and the Peers
humbly upon their knees beseeching them that for the love of God, the Virgin
Mary, and of all the Saints, even as they hoped to have mercy at the day of
Judgment, they should show favor and not put to death the said Judges then
present, and bitterly bewayling their iniquities in whose hearts the very life,
soul, and spirit of our English Laws lived, flourished, and appeared, and
there appeared great sorrow both on the one part of the Complainants, and also
of the Defendants.

The Duke of Gloucester likewise with the Earls of Arundel, Warwick,
Nottingham, and Derby, whose hearts began to be mollified, and joined with them
in their lamentable Petition.

At length by intercession of the Clergy, the execution upon the persons was
ceased, and their lives were granted them, but were sent to the Tower to be
kept close prisoners.

On the 12. of March, being thursday, it happened that the aforesaid Knights,
Simon de Burleigh, John de Beauchamp, James Baroverse, and John Salisbury were
brought into the Parliament house where their accusations were read, proved,
they found guilty, and not any way able to clear themthemselves.

From this day almost till the Ascension of our Lord, the Parliament house was
only taken up with the trial of Sir Simon Burleugh, for three Appellants, viz.
The Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell and Warwick, with the whole
house of Commons, urged that execution might be performed according to the Law:
And on the other side, the King, and Queen, the Earls of Darby, and
Nottingham, and the Prior of Saint John his Uncle, with the major part of the
uper House, did labor to have him saved.

But because the Commons were tired with so long delays, and excuses in the
Parliament; and fearing, as it was most like, that all their pains would be to
little or no purpose, they humbly craved leave of the King, to go to their
habitations.

There was also some muttering amongst the Common people, and it was reported
to the Parliament, that the Commons did rise in diverse parts of the Realm,
but especially about Kent, in favor of the said Sir Simon Burleigh, which when
they heard those, that before spoke and stood for him, now flew clean from
him, and by joint consent on the fifth day of May, sentence was pronounced only
against the said Sir Simon, that he should be drawn from the Tower to
Tyborne; and then to be hanged till he were dead, and then to have his head
struck from his body. But because he was a knight of the Garter, a gallant
Courtier, powerful, and once a Favorite of the Kings, and much respected of
all the Court, the King of his special Grace, was pleased to mittigate his
doom, that he should only be led to Tower Hill, and there be beheaded.

On the twelfe of May, the Thursday before Whitsontyde, in like manner were
condemned, John Beauchamp Steward of the household to the King, James
Bereverous, and John Salsbury knights, Gentlemen of the privy Chamber, whereof
the two first, viz. John Beauchamp, and James Bereverous were beheaded on
Tower Hill, but John Salsbury was drawn from Tower Hill to Tyborne, and there
was hanged.

On the same day also, was condemned the Bishop of Chichester the Kings
Confessor, but because of his great dignity, he was pardoned. Now they began
to loath the shedding of so much Christian blood, they took into
consideration, other more weighty affairs for the good of the Realm
concerning the Wars with the Scots and French, concerning Loanes and Subsidues,
and of the customs of Wine and Wool.

And also concerning the translation of some Bishops, because Pope Urban the
sixth, after it came to his ears, that the Archbishop of York was condemned,
to avoid all hope of Irregularity, he created him Archbishop of Saint Andrews
in Scotland: which Archbishop was under the power of Scots, enemies to the
Crown; and in the gift of the Arch-Pope: and because the Pope did challenge
half the title of all England to maintain his Wars, but although he craved
it, yet he was denied: therefore he dealt warily and craftily; hoping to make
up his mouth, by the translation of Bishops: the Bishop of Ely, then Lord
Chancellor, was made Archbishop of York, the Bishop of Dublyn succeeded in
his place; the Bishop of Bathan-Wells in his place: the Bishop of Sarum in his
place, and the Lord John of Waltham, Lord Keeper of the privy Seal in his
place: And this by his translation of Bishops, he gained himself much money,
according to the Laws of the Canon; and when this came to the ears of the
Parliament, that such a sum of money should be transported out of the Land,
they strove what they could to hinder it, but could not, because the Clergy
gave their consent.

On the last day of May, the King appointed both houses to meet at Keemington,
whereas they made a conclusion of all the trials of the said treason, granting
license to Thomas Trenet, William Ellingham, and Nicholas Nagworth, Knights,
Richard Metford, John Slake, John Lincoln, Clerks, to put in bail, provided
they were sufficient, and to go into a place of England where they listed,
without any let or hindrance of any of the Kings Officers.

Moreover, the six Justices, with the Bishop of Chichester, who stood condemned
with them, were sent into Ireland, there to remain for term of life, and
thus they were to be divided, viz.

Robert Belknap and John Holt in the Village of Dromore in Ireland, not to
remain as Justices or any officers, but to live as banished offenders, not to
be out of Town above the space of two miles upon pain of death; but the King
out of his gracious bounty was pleased to give a yearly annuity of 40. pound to
Robert Belknap, of 20. marks to John Holt, during their lives; and to Roger
Fulthorpe the King allowed 40. pound, and to William Burleigh 40. pound during
life, confining them to the City of Dublin, granting Burleigh the liberty of
two miles, and to Fulthorpe three miles for their recreation, John Carey, and
John Locton with the yearly allowance of 20. pound during life, are confined
to the Tower of Waterford with the like liberty, and the like penalty; and the
Bishop of Chichester is likewise sent to Cork, there to remain with some
allowance and the like penalty.

Behold these men who feared not God, nor regarded men, but having the Laws in
their own hands, wrested them now this way, now that way, as pleased best
their appetites, wresting them at their pleasures for their own commodity,
were at the last brought down to the depth of misery from whence they were
never able to free themselves.

On the third day of June, which was the last day of the Parliament, the King,
the Queen, the Peers of both Estates with the Commons, came to the Abbey at
Westminster, whereas the Bishop of London, because it was in his Diocese sung
Mass, and the Mass being ended, the Archbishop of Canterbury made an Oration
concerning the former danger of the Oath, which being, although the Peers and
Commons had taken the Oath of Allegiance, and homage to the King, yet because
the King was young when they took the Oath a new (as at the first) at his
Coronation.

These Ceremonies being performed, the Metropolitan of England with all his
Suffragans there present, having lighted a Candle, and putting it under a
stool, put it out, thereby excommunicating all such as should seem to
distaste, dislike, or contradict any of the fore-passed Acts in the last
Parliament; And the Lord Chancellor, by the Kings appointment, caused all that
were present to swear to keep the said Statutes inviolably whole, and
undissolved, as good and faithful Liege-people of the Kings, and the form of
the Parliament was observed throughout all the Realm.

On the morrow, which was the fourth day of June, many courteous salutations
and congratulations having passed between the King, the Nobility, and
Comminalty, the Parliament was dissolved, and every man returned home.

And now let England rejoice in Christ, for that the net which was laid so
cunningly for our destruction, is broken asunder, and we are delivered. To God
be the praise for all.

FINIS.
THE Names of such as were charged and condemned of high Treason in this
aforesaid Memorable Parliament.
Alexander Nevile, Archbishop of Yorke-^^^^ de Vere, Duke of Ireland, who was
(...) into France, where he was kill.

(...)le, Earl of Suffolk, and Lord (...).

Robert Tressilian, Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench.

Sir Nichola* Bramber, sometimes Lord Major of London made a Privy Counselor.

John Blake, a Sergeant at Arms.

Thomas Vske, an Intelligencer of Tressilians.

All these except the Duke of Ireland were drawn and hanged at the Elmes, now
called Tyburne.

Robert Belknap.

John Holt.

Roger Falthorp.

William Burleigh.

John Locton.

John Carey Baron of the Exchequer.

All these former 6. named men were, as it seems Judges, and although
condemned, yet their lives were saved at the intercession of some of the
guiltless Peers, and they afterward were banished into Ireland.

Sir Simon de Burleigh was also condemned and beheaded: he was a Knight
Banneret, and of the Garter, a great and gallant Courtier, and his body lies
honorably buried and intombed in Paul's Church.

Sir John Branchamp Steward of the Household to the King, and

Sir James Beverous were also condemned and beheaded at Tower Hill.

Sir John Salisbury was condemned, drawn from Tower Hill to Tiburne, and then
hanged.

There were also detected and condemned of the aforesaid Treason.

The Bishop of Chichester, the Kings Confessor.

Sir Thomas Trinet, Knight.

Sir William Ellingham, Knight.

Sir Nicholas Nagworth, Knight.

Richard Metford, Clerk.

John Slake, Clerk.

John Lincoln, Clerk.

An Abstract of many memorable matters done by PARLIAMENTS in this Kingdom of
ENGLAND.
BY Parliament Sir Thomas Wayland chief Justice of the Common Pleas, 17. Ed.
1. was attainted of Felony for taking bribes and his lands and good forfeited,
as appears in the Pleas of Parliaments, 18. Edward 1. and he was banished the
Kingdom, as unworthy to live in that state, against which he had so much
offended.

By Parliament Sir William Thorpe chief Justice of the Kings Bench in Ed. 3.
times having of five persons received five several bribes, which in all
amounted to but one hundred pounds, was for this alone adjudged to be hanged
and all his goods and lands forfeited.

The reason of the Judgment is entered in the Roll in these words.

Because that, as much as in him lay, he had broken the Kings Oath made to the
people, which the King had entrusted him withal.

By Parliament holden Anno. 22. Hen. the second assembled at Nottingham, and by
advise thereof the King caused the Kingdom to be divided into 6* parts, and
Justices Itinerants appointed for every part with an Oath by them to be taken
for themselves, to observe and cause inviolablie to be observed of all his
subjects of England, the Assizes made at Claringdon and renewed at Northton.

By Parliament, In the 11. of Edw. the first; the Dominion of Wales was united
to the Crown of England in the Parliament in Anno 16. of Edw. the first 1289
upon the general compes made of the ill administration of Justice in the Kings
absence, by diverse great Officers and Ministers of Justices these penalties
were inflicted upon the chief Ministers thereof, whose manifest corruptions
the batred of the people to men of that profession (apt to abuse their science,
and authority, the necessity of reforming so grievous a mischief in the
Kingdom, gave easy thereunto by the Parliament then assembled, wherein upon
due examinations of their offenses they are sined to pay to the King these sums
following.

First, Sir Ralph Hengham, chief Justice of the higher Bench seven thousand
marks.

Sir John Loveton Justice of the Lower Bench, three thousand marks.

Sir William Bromton Justice, six thousand marks.

Sir Soloman Rochester, four thousand marks.

Sir Richard Boyland, four thousand marks.

Sir Thomas Sadington two thousand marks.

Sir Walter Hopton two thousand marks

These four last were Justices Itenerants.

Sir William Saham, three thousand marks Robert Lithbury Master of the R^lls
one thousand marks.

Roger Leicester, one thousand marks.

Henry Bray, Escheater and Judge for the Jews one thousand marks. But Sir
Adam Stratton chief Baron of the Exchequer was sined in four and thirty
thousand marks. These fines as the Rate of money goes now, amount to near
three hundred thousand marks, a mighty treasure to be gotten out of the hands
of so few men, which how they could a mass in those days when litigation and
Law had not spread it self into those infiuit wreathings of contention (as
since it has) may seem strange even to our greater-getting times.

In the Parliament Anno 2. of Edward the third held at Nottingham, that great
aspirer Mortimer was accused and condemned and sent up to London, and drawn,
and hanged at the Common Gallows at the Elmes now called Tiburne.

In the 50. year of the reign of Edward the third Anno Dom. 1376 was held a
Parliament at Westminster, which was called the great Parliament, where were
diverse complaints exhibited by the Parliament, charging the Kings Officers with
Fraud, and humbly craving, that the Duke of Lancaster, the Lord Latimer, then
Lord Chamberlain Dame Alice Pierce the Kings Concubine, and one Sir Richard
Sturry might be removed from Court, their complaints and desires are so
vehemently urged by their Speaker Sir Peter la Moore, that all these persons
were presently put from Court.

By Parliaments all the wholesome fundamental Laws of this Land were and are
established and confirmed.

By Act of Parliament the Popes power and Supremacy, and all superstition and
Idolatry and abrogated, abolished and banished out of this Land.

By Act of Parliament Gods true Religion, worship and service are maintained
and established.

By Act of Parliament the two famous Universities of Cambridge and Oxford, have
many wholesome and helpful Immunities.

By Parliament one Pierce Gaveston, a great favorite and notable misleader of
K. Edw. 2. was removed, banished, and afterward by the Lords executed. So were
Hugh Spencer the Father, and Hugh the Son.

By Parliament Empson and Dudley, two notorious polers of the Commonwealth, by
exacting penal Laws on the subjects, were discovered, and afterward executed.

By Parliament the damnable Gun-pouder Treason (hatched in Hell) is recorded to
be had in eternal Infamy.

By Parliament one Sir Giles Mompesson, a Modern Caterpiller and poler of the
Commonwealth, by exacting upon Inholders, etc. was discovered, degraded from
Knighthood, and banished by Proclamation.

By Parliament Sir Francis Bacon, made by King James Baron Veralam, and
Viscount St. Albanes, and Lord Chancellor of England, very grievous to the
Commonwealth, by bribery, was discovered and displaced.

By Parliament Sir John Bennit Judge of the Prerogative Court, pernicious to
the Commonwealth in his place, was discovered and displaced.

By Parliament Lyonell Cranfield (sometimes a Merchant of London) made by K.
James Earl of Middlesex, and Lord Treasurer of England: hurtful in his place
to the Commonwealth, was discovered, and displaced.

By Parliament one Sir Francis Mitchell, a jolly Justice of Peace for Middlesex
in the Suburbs of London, another notable Canker-worme of the Commonwealth,
by corruption in exacting the penal Laws upon poor Alehouse-keepers and
Victuallers, etc. was discovered, degraded from Knighthood, and utterly
disabled for being Justice of Peace.

By Parliament, Spaines late fraud was discovered, and by Act the two Treaties,
with that perfidious Nation, for the match of the Prince, our now gracious
King; and restitution of the Palatinate were dissolved and annihilated: both
which had cost the King and his Subjects much money, and much blood. We may
remember that that sage Counceller of State Sir William Cecill, Lord Burleigh
and Lord Treasurer of England, was ofttimes heard to say, He knew not what an
Act of Parliament might not do: which sage saying was approved by King James,
and by his Majesty alleged in one of his published speeches.

Which being so, now the face of Christendom being at this present so torn
and miserably (...), and the Christian World distracted; the Gospel in all
places, almost persecuted, both Church and Commonwealth, where the Gospel is
professed in all places beyond the Seas, lying a bleeding (as we may say) and
we our selves at home not without fear and danger. To conclude, what good may
we not hope and pray for, by this present and other ensuing Parliaments: the
only means to rectify and remedy matters in Church and Commonwealth much
amiss.

The Character.
RIchard Son of the valiant and vidorious Edward the black Prince, was borne
at Bordeaux, and grandchild to King Edward the third, being ^1. years old,
began his Reign the 21. day of June, in the year of our Lord, 1377. and was
crowned King at Westminster the 16. of July. In beauty, bounty, and liberality,
he ^a^re passed all his Progenitors; but was overmuch given to ease and
quietness, little regarding Military matters of Arms: and being young was
most ruled by young Counsel, regarding little the Counsel of the sage and
wise men of the Realm^, which thing turned this Land to great trouble, and
himself to extreme misery; For being first disgraced by his Cousin, Henry of
Bullingbroke Duke of Hereford, son of John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster, he was
at length by him (with the general consent of the whole Parliament) deposed
from his Crown and Kingdom the 29. of September 1399. and committed to prison,
and afterward wickedly murdered. For being sent to Pomfret Castle, to be
safely kept, and Princely maintained, he was shortly after by King Henry's
direction and commandment (who feared lest his estate might be shaken whiles
King Richard lived) wickedly assaulted in his lodging by Sir Piers of Exton,
and 8. other armed men, from one of which, with a Princely courage, he wrested
a ^rown Bill, and therewith slew 4. of them, fought with all the rest: until
coming by his own Chair (in which the base cowardly Knight himself stood
for his own safety) he was by him stricken with a Pole-Axe, in the hinder part
of his head, that presently he fell down and dyed, when he had reigned 22.
years, 14 weeks, and 2 days.

More Memorable things done by Parliaments.
BY Parliament Richard Montague (since made Bishop of Chichester, and now
Bishop of Norwich) his pernicious Book entitled Apello Caesarem, (First
confuted by Doctor Carlton then B. of Chichester, and diverse other Reverend
Orthodox Divines) was displayed, and by Proclamation dated 1628. the book was
called in and prohibited: and he the said Montague was discovered to be a
notable unorthodox man, etc.

By Parliament Roger Manwayring, D. of Divinity, and Parson of St. Giles in the
Fields, and the Kings Chaplain, was discovered to be an unorthodox man, and
brought on his knees to the Bar of the Honorable House of Parliament, and the
book of his two seditious Printed Sermons against Parliaments, entitled
Religion and Allegiance, was by Proclamation called in and prohibited: and he
the said Manwayring, was censured and deprived of his Livings, not to come
near the Court, nor to exercise or use any Ministerial Office, etc. But
notwithstanding, soon after the fatal dissolution of that Parliament, 1629.
He the said Manwayring by the power of a little great Prelate, was not only
restored to his former Livings, but soon after, he was preferred and made
Deane of Worcester, afterward a Bishop, and is now Bishop of St. David's, the
first Bishopric in Wales.

And in as much, as so many Memorable things have bin done by Parliaments,
somewhereof in former Times, have indeed done no less, than write Wonders; for
Reformation of Corruptions, and Grievances and exemplary Executions in the
State and Commonwealth: And seeing the other day, viz. 22. of February, there
was that correspondence, and happy agreement betwixt his sacred Majesty, and
both the houses of Parliament now sitting, which made the Evening of that Day,
crowned with Bone-fires and Bells-ringing for joy. Let us not cease to pray and
beseech the Lord of Hosts, still so to unite the heart of the Kings Majesty to
the Parliament (his great Counsel) that the Upper and Lower Houses may
unanimously agree, and be reciprocally united to the Kings, that many matters
now much amiss in Church and Commonwealth may be reformed, and this Year may
be accounted Annus Aureus, and that this present Parliament begun this Year
may be inscribed and engraven in Marble and in Letters of Gold;

By Parliament the Earl of Strafford Deputy of Ireland, grievous to the
Commonwealth, was discovered, and after an Honorable Trya^l, was attainted of
high Treason, for which he suffered death, May the twelfth, 1641.

SACRED TO MEMORY POSTERITY THE (LONG EXPECTED) HAPPY PARLIAMENT, Begun MDC.XL.
Ended and made a Session. Vivat Rex Floreat Regnum Been valeat Parliamentum.
Hallelujah.

FINIS.

