Veneris 19 Die Novembris, 1680.
Ordered that Segnior Francisco de Faria have the leave of the House to Print
his Narrative

William Goldesbrough Cler. Dom. Com.

By Virtue of the Order above, I do appoint, Randal Tailor, near Stationers
Hall, to Print this my Narrative, and that no other Person or Persons do Print
the same.

December 14th. 1680. Francisco de Faria

THE NARRATIVE Of SEGNIOR Francisco de Faria. Interpreter and Secretary of
Languages unto GASPER de ABREV de FREITAS.

Late Ambassador in Ordinary from the Crown of PORTUGAL, To his Most Sacred
MAJESTY of ENGLAND.

Wherein is contained the several Informations Given upon Oath before the Right
Honorable the Lords Committees, for Examinations touching the horrid Popish
Plot, and reported to the Lords Spiritual and Temporal in Parliament Assembled.

And Afterward to the Commons of England in Parliament Assembled.

LONDON, Printed by John Gain, for Randal Tailor, and to be Sold at his House
near STATIONERS' HALL, 1680.

Dedicatoria.
Ala Sacra, y Real Majestad del Serenissimo
Rey de la Gran Bretana Carlos Segundo,

SAcro Rey Soberano, y Poderoso;
aquien Dios coloco Mages tuoso
Enel trono Real (conlafirmesa,
de Vuestra Real Corona ( y Su grandesa)
Magestad tan Augusta, y tan benigna,
que es aclamada como tan Divina
Sol Britano que alumbra quanto encierra
Lo felice de toda Ingalaterra.
Monarcha tan dichoso (enlas acciones)
que todas (per lo Regio) Son blasones.
Magnanimo Senor; de quien pudiera
Alexandro aprender en Vuestra Sphera'
Exemplo de piedad (con Alma pura)
imitador de Dios (en tal Ventura')
Atlante, a Vuestros Reynos tan Lusidos;
que por Vuestros (del Orb) Son'temidos.
Glorioso en Vitorias Soblimadas;
Como Lo disen tantas celebradas.
CARLOS invicto, que Venera el Mundo;
por Ser CARLOS Segundo, Sin Segundo.
Siendo este nombre poderoso, y Solo,
Su a la bansa de Vnpolo, a otro polo:
Acuyos Reales pies Vmildemente
(of grande Rey de luz Resplandeciente
LLega Submisso; y llega arrodillado
Un Corason (Senor) todo postrado
Implorando la gracia dela mano
de Vuestra Majestad, Rey Soberano;
Conque podre' con onra tan crecida
a mano tan Real dever La Vida'
Porque Vos (como Dios) bien podeisdarla;
Como de Vmilde polvo llevantarla'
Ya esta Suerte entonces my esperansa
tendra' ma's animosa confiansa
Parapostrar a Vuestros pies rendido
este inform Leal de my nacido,
Que Dedica, Consagra my Valia
al amparo de Vuestra Hyerarchia.
Senor, en este Livro Va' compuesto
Loque en Vuestra presencia tengo expuesto;
Y por que el Mundo sepa su defensa
Sale en publico oy de exacta ymprensa
A servir; qual espejo, enque se vea
El Vasallo fiel (quando lo sea,
Con temor deque puede Vuestro a sero,
por de CARLOS Segundo, ser primero;
Sin que llege a encontrarlo elmalificio,
quando teneys per Vos a Dios propicio.
Pues este Dios (Senor) enquien seencierra
el Govierno del Cielo, y dela tierra
Que a Israel Liberto de Cauptiverio,
que a Pharao quito' Vida, y Imperio;
Que a Abraham asistio' per tantas Vias;
que a David Socorrio' contra Golias;
Que a Daniel libro' de Los Leones,
y hiso tantos milagros amillones.
Sea el que guarde a Vuestra Real Persona
para Gloria, y honor de su Corona,
Con vida tan Felice. y memorada
que enlargos Siglos Sea dilatada,
Con sucecion dichosa (que es La Gloria)
para Triumphar del tiempo (con victoria;
Con Vna pas' tan firm, ytan amable,
que En Vuestros Reynos sea perdurable,
Yassy vendreis a ser Rey Glorioso)
el Monarcha del Mundo mas famoso,
Que es to de quante puede en breue Suma
Dictar la Idea, y escrivir la pluma.
SENOR, El mas humilde Vasallo de Ueustra Sacra Real Magestad, que besa Sus
Reale pies. Francisco de Faria

THE Informations OF Francisco de Faria: Interpreter, etc.
THE Popes of Rome ever since the Loss of the British Teritories, have always
had an eager desire to reduce to their Pontifical Obedience those golden
Rivolets, and silver Streams that from thence, were wontto run into the main
Ocean of their Babilonish Treasury. England and Ireland, were those Fortunate
Islands that fed their Lazy, irreligious Monks with Fat of most fruitful
Soyles, and crammed the Papal Coffers with the Spoils of two populous and
wealthy Nations. And therefore some of those mock-show Pontiffs imediately made
it their business to recover so great a loss by force of Arms, exhorting and
animating their Slave the Spaniard, to a general Invasion; which proving
insuccesful, they have been Clandestinly restless ever since, by mysterious
Plots and Contrivances, against the Lives of several Successive Princes, to
compass that by Fraud and Secret Violence which they could not bring about by
open Force.

There is no question to be made, that this late dismal and horrid Plot,
against the Life and Government of his most sacred Majesty now Reigning, was
forged in the same Mint, and had its rise from the same Diabolical Councels at
Rome, else it would be almost impossible, that the Venom of papistical
Influence should spread it self into the Breasts of Foreign Princes, to
undertake the Support of Rebel Subjects, plotting against their Native
Sovereigns, to contribute toward the management of such Designs, and to
Authorize their Ambassadors to be the double diligent Solicitors for the Lives
of Criminals, condemned by the Law of this Land.

So that this Information of mine, seems to be altogether new, as relating to
the Person of a public Foreign Minister, who under the Covert, and Sacred
protection of the Law of Nations, rather acted as a Violator of that Law, than
in prosecution of his public Duty.

The evil Practices of this public Minister, I am now by public Warrant to
make known to the World for general Satisfaction, by the name of Francisco
Faria, particularly employed in the Service of the said Ambassador, as shall be
related in order, by which I came to the Knowledge of what I here divulge for
Sacred and Undeniable Truth.

Know then that I Francisco de Faria was born at Fernambuco in Brazile, a
Province of Southern America, under the Diminion of the King of Portugal, in
the Year 1653, from whence I was by my Parents brought into Holland, in the
tender year of my Infancy, and continued there till the year 1662, at what time
I came hither into England from hence having a desire to see the World, I
traveled through the most considerable Parts of it, and by that means attained
to the Knowledge of seven or eight Languages, returning back from Flanders into
England in the Year 1678, I was presently admitted into the Service of Don
Gasper de Abreu de Freitas, then newly arrived at London, in the quality of
Ambassador in ordinary from the Crown of Portugal, to be assistant to him as
his Interpreter and Secretary of Languages, in regard he was a Person that
understood no other Languages himself, than the Portugese, Spanish, and
Italian; In which Capacity, I continued with him, during his Excellencies Stay
in England; for the Reader is to understand, that I had been known to the said
Ambassador formerly, that is to say, when I was first in England fifteen Years
before, at what time his Excellency was also in England, but with the Title
only of Envoy extraordinary from the said Crown, and then was I a great
Companion and Friend of Don Christophoro, the Envoys Nephew, being a Youth of
the same Age with my self, and upon that Account familiarly and daily
frequented the said Envoys House. Whereupon, when the said Envoy came again
into England as Ambassador, my Father who then resided here, and was his old
Acquaintance, went according to his Obligations to kiss his Excellencies Hand.

Then it was that the Ambassador enquired of my Father for his Son Francisco,
meaning my self, to whom my Father made Answer, that I had been a great
Travellour, that I was by that means become Master of several Languages, that I
had been an Officer in the Prince of Oranges Service, and was newly arrived in
England, thereupon the Ambassador was very importunate with my Father to send
for me, as a person that he thought might be very useful to him.

When I came, the Ambassador tenderly embraced me as one that was heartily glad
to see me, and presently entertained me in the quality before mentioned, by
which means it will be no wonder, that I should have the Opportunity of being
privy to those things of which I here give public Information, as being
Occurrencies that could not escape my Knowledge, because of the confidence which
the Ambassador reposed in me, and the necessity which he had to converse and
discourse with those that did not understand his Language. In this Condition I
continued with his Excellency all the time of his abode in England, which was a
Year, or thereabouts. But before his Departure for Portugal, which was in
February 1679 / 80, I was informed by his Excellency, from his own Lips, that
there was a certain Justice of the Peace (whose Name I could never learn from
him) who was a very great Persecutor of the Roman Catholics, in the Country
where he lived; for which reason, there was a Design laid, to procure his Death
by Assassination.

After that, the Ambassador went away, and I heard no more of the Business till
the latter end of March or the beginning of April: at what time, being out of
Employment, and preparing for new Travels, a certain Person came to me by the
Name of Wyard, who took me into Greyes-Inn-Walks, and there telling me I had
now a fair Opportunity in my Hands to make my self and my Fortunes for eyer,
made me several Proposals for the cudgelling, which indeed imported no less
than the killing a Nameless Gentleman; which notwithstanding all his
Persuasions, I absolutely refused, as being an Action that I utterly detested
and abhorred; however, upon second Thoughts, I communicated the said Wyards
Proposals to a particular Friend of mine, one Monseiur Camas.

Some fourteen Days after it happened that one John Arnold Esquire; a Justice of
the Peace in the Couuty of Monmouth who was reported to have been very active
against the Papists, was really and ipso facto Assassinated in Bell-yard near
Temple Bar. Whereupon the next Day, while the Alarm was hot, my forementioned
Friend Monseir Camas came in grear have to me, and told me that I must
undoubtedly be one of the Bravos that had committed the Fact, and therefore
advised me as a Friend, to take speedy Benefit of his Majesty's Proclamation,
both as to the Reward and Pardon; but I being altogether innocent of the Crime,
by several Protestations, and by giving him a faithful Account where I had
spent my time all that Day and Night, so well cleared my self to my Friend,
that he remained fully satisfied and convinced of my Sincerity. However, being
then resolved to go for Flanders to seek Employment, and fearing lest if
Monseiur Camas should make known the Information I had given him, in reference
to Wyards Propositions, before I did it my self, I should not only be stopped
in my Journey, but that worse might befall me, being ill provided for the
Expenses of a tedious Imprisonment, I took the boldness to make my addresses to
the Earl of Clarendon, as having formerly had the Honor to wait upon his
Lordship with my Ambassador, as Interpreter between them, and gave his Lordship
a full Account under my Hand; dated the first of May 1680, being Saturday of
all that had past between the said Wyard, Mounseiur Camas and my self, this
being done, I begun to think again of my Journey, but considering better with
my self, that it would be more convenient for me to stand to my own
Justification, and upon the persuasion of a Gentlewoman to whom I had
communicated the whole Affair, who told me, I might as well be knocked o'th
Head beyond Sea as here* for what I had already declared to her, suspecting
that I might as well declare the same to others, as being a Reveng very common
among the Partugueses, I altered my Resolutions and continued in England. Upon
the Trial of Giles, who was after this apprehended for the Assassination
aforesaid, one Mr. Nathaniel Cox, my intimate Acquaintance, told me that he was
going to hear the Trial of one Giles, who had Assassinated a very good Friend
of his, one Mr. John Arnold, a Country Justice; I Answered him that I had a
great Desire to see Giles, for that I supposed, I could do the said Mr. Arnold
a considerable kindness, upon which Mr. Cox carried me to wait upon Mr. Arnold,
to whom I gave an exact Description of the said Wyard, which after I had
finished, Mr. Arnold told me that he had a very strong Suspicion of a Person
exareamly like to him whom I had so described, but his Name was not Wyard.
Thereupon I went and viewed the said Giles my self, but did not remember I had
ever seen him before, however, Mr. Arnold desired me to repair to some Justice
of the Peace, and give him an Account in Writing upon Oath, what I knew
concerning the said Wyard. Whereupon I made the following Deposition before Sr.
Phillip Matthews.

Com. midd.
The Information of Francisco de Faria of St Giles in the Fields Gent. Taken
upon Oath before Sir Phillip Matthews, Barronet, One of His Majesty's Justices
of the Peace for the said County, Assigned this Fifteenth day of July, 1680.
THis Informant on his Oath says that about the latter end of March, or the
beginning of April last past, a Gentleman who called himself Mr. Wyard, came to
this Informant at Will's Coffe-House in Covenant-Garden and spoke very kindly
to this Informant and desired this Informant to go to a Tavern and drink a
glass of Wine with him: which this Informant consented unto, and went out of
the Coffee-House with him, and desired him to go to the Rose-Tavern in
Bridges-Street: but he desired to go farther. At the Horse-Shoe Tavern this
Informant desired the said Wyard to go in thither; But he there desired to go
farther, and so drilled this Informant on into Gray's Inn Walks: Which this
Informant consented to. And in Discourse he there told this Informant, that
this Informant had his Fortune in his hand. This Informant asked him, In What?
The said Wyard replied, He knew my wants: If you will but Cudgel a man* you
shall have 200l. One Hundred in hand, and the other Hundred when the Work or
Business is done. To which this Informant replied, That that might be done by a
Porter for a Shilling. To which the said Wyard replied, You may believe, by the
sum that is offered, that there is some thing more to be done besides
Cudgelling. And when you have done, you shall have a better Reward.

To which this Informant replied, He scorned such unworthy and base Proposals;
and utterly refused to treat with him about it. Then the said Wyard desired
this Informant to go and speak with the Lord Powis in the Tower. To which this
Informant answered, That he had no business with the Lord Powis, nor the Lord
Powis any with him, as he knew of. Who then showed this Informant a letter from
the Lord Powis to this Informant: which Letter was to this effect.

Mr. de Faria, Come to me to the Tower, and speak with me: but let no body know
who you are.

The said* Mr. Wyard, when he found this Informant utterly refused to go to the
Lord Powis, or to treat in the said business any farther, the said Wyard then
told this Informant, He would meet this Informant in the same place on the
morrow; and would then bring this Informant a Letter from a Person of Quality,
whose hand this Informant did well know: and that this Informant had Papers
then in his pocket, under the said Persons hand. And on the morrow the said
Wyard did meet this Informant in the said place, and then showed him a Letter
writ in the Portugueze Language, which contained these words, being into
English Translated.

Francis,
Do what this Man bids you, for it shall be well done. Subscribed,

Gasper de Abreu de Freitas.


And this Informant farther says, That he knew the Hand, and did compare it
with some Papers he had then in his Pocket, signed by the same Hand. But
notwithstanding the said Letter, this Informant utterly refused to treat about
the said Business any farther.

The said Wyard then desired this Informant to meet him the next Day again, and
took his leave. And this Informant being desirous to know who the said Wyard
was, and where he lay, followed the said Wyard down Chancery Lane, and into
Cursitors Alley, and into several turnings, but lost sight of him. And the next
day this Informant went to the same place, to meet the said Wyard, but the said
Wyard came not; nor could this Informant ever since find the said Wyard, or
hear of him, though he had made a great and general Enquiry after him: But
says, He could know him again if he could see him. And farther, this Informant
says, That he the same day declared unto one Monsieur Camas, that he was
offered 200 l. to Cudgel a Man. And also says, That being apprehensive that he
might be called in Question after Mr. Arnold was assaulted the said Monseiur
Camas having charged him with it and with receiving of the same 200 l. This
Informant went to the Right Honorable the Earl of Clarendon, about the first
day of May, and desired his Honor to take his Information in Writing, (this
Informant being to go into Flanders) which the said Earl did; and this
Informant set his Hand to it. And farther at present says not.

Signed, Francisco de Faria.
Jurat little me, Phillip Mathews,
15 July 1680. This first Information only was sworn before Sir Phillip Mathews.

Francisco de Faria



THE INFORMATION OF FRANCISCO DE FARIA,
Born in America, Son of John de Faria, of St. Giles in the Field, Gent. Taken
upon Oath before (...) Edmond Warcupp Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of
Peace in the said County and City, in presence of John Arnold Esquire, by
Command of the Right Honorable the Lords Committees, for Discovery of the late
Popish Plot. 26. October. 1680.
THis Informant says, that being a Limner in Antwerp, in Flanders, in the year
1675, by the Persuasion of three of the Sisters of Sir George Wakeman, then in
the Nunnery of St. Teresia, and of Father Worsely a Jesuit, he became a Roman
Catholic, and often communicated at his hand. And the said Warsely then
persuaded this Informant to come into England, and he would make this Informant
happy, and then gave this Informant 35 Pistels in Gold, to bear this Informants
Charges for England. But this Informant did not immediately follow him to
England, but took up Arms, and was Captain Lieutenant under Colonel Montgomery,
in the Prince of Orange's Service; where he practiced to make and throw
hand-Granadoes, and grew to some Note for that Service; and in the Year 1678,
this Informant being in England, and well versed in seven or eight Languages,
was preferred to be Interpreter and Secretary of Languages to Gasper de Abreu
de Freitas Ambassador in Ordinary from the Prince of Portugal to the King of
England. To which Ambassador this Informant had been known for many Years
before, and the said Ambassador among other things, acquainted this Informant,
that Don Francisco de Melot, the late Ambassador that died here, was much out
of Favor with the Prince of Portugal, for that he had indiscreetly pushed on
the Promotion of the Catholic Religion before a due time, and had Caused
several Popish Books to be printed in England, which had given too great an
alarm with many other things relating to the Popish Religion, which he greatly
condemned him for; and the said Ambassador to indear this Informant, did often
give him Money and entrust him in Affairs of the greatest Moment, and carried
this Informant with him, to all or most of the great Ministers of State in
England, using him for his interpreter; and employing this Informant to resort
to several Persons for an account of the Orders and Passages in the Kings
Council, of all which the said Ambassador usually had an account within an hour
after the rising of the Council, or any Committees. And the said Ambassador,
much about the time of the Trial of the five Jesuits, expressing a great Sorrow
for the Oppression of the Catholics, did w^^^ that Oats and Bedlow were made
away; and then commanded this Informant to go to Mass and Confession, and then
told this Informant, that he might do the Catholic Cause great Service, and
might make his own Fortune, if he would join in destroying Oats and Bedlow, and
that 50000 Reales d'occi^ should be given for that Service, and that two
sufficient men should join with this Informant for the killing of Oats and
Bedlow; But the said Bedlow being about that time in Ireland, the said Murder
was deferred, and a report being spread, that Bedlow was dead in Ireland, the
said Lord Ambassador said to this Informant, What a Fool were you, had you
killed him, you had gained that Money which I promised: But afterward
understanding that Bedlow was not dead, the said Ambassador renewed his
Solicitations to this Informant to prosecute the Death of Oats and Bedlow,
assuring this Informant, that he would make good his Promise of the said Sum of
Money to them which should kill them; That he would besides, pay this
Informants Debts, and take this Informant with him into Portugal. Upon which
Discourse, this Informant took the boldness to tell the Ambassador, That the
Death of Godfrey had done much hurt to the Catholic Interest, and he much
feared, that the Death of Oats and Bedlow would bring greater hurt. To which
the Ambassador replied, he feared not that; and if Oats and Bedlow and
Shaftsbury were out of the way, the Parliament might come when they please.
whereupon this Informant asked, How shall Shaftsbury be killed? He replied, the
Lord Shaftsbury goes often into the Country, and I know you are excellent at
hand-Granadoes, you shall throw one of them into Shaftsbury's Coach, which will
destroy all that are in the Coach upon the breaking, and you and your
Companions shall have Firearms to kill, if the other do not full Execution.
And the Amabssador added, that he had provided two other Persons, Men of
Honor, to join with this Informant in that Service, but named them not; nor
the Reward that was promised to be given for it* and then ordered this
Informant to provide a Man who could speak French and Dutch to, to carry a
Letter into Flanders, Whereupon this Informant applied himself to one Salter,
who keeps a Sempsters Shop in Drury Lane, to carry the Letter: Who saying he
could not go, because he had Horses lame; which this Informant's Servant
observing, said, Sir, if you please, my Husband shall go; but this Informant
refused him, as not speaking French nor acquainted with the Country. And this
Informant did (according to the Ambassador's Order) offer the said Salter 10 l.
to undertake the Journey, because he was acquainted with the Country, etc.

February last past, the said Ambassador left England, and returned to
Portugal, leaving this Informant on a sudden with very little Money, after his
many Promises to take this Informant with him into Portugal, and to get the
Prince to provide plentifully for him in Portugal. Upon which this Informant
recollecting the said former Passages, and fearing lest he should be accused,
though Innocant, went to his own Father, declaring the Offers made to this
Informant for the killing the Persons aforesaid; but his Father and Mother
advised him to throw Ashes upon it, for none that have discovered are secure
because some are of one Mind and some of another; and this Informant then left
a Note with his Mother, signifying that if this Informant were killed it must
be by the Portugals, and he would lay his Death to them, because of the
Passages aforesaid, and did the like with Mrs. Mary Sears, who finding this
Informant in a very disturbed Condition, observing that in his Frenzy Fits he
spoke of the Death of Oats, Bedlow, and Shaftsbury; so far prevailed with this
Informant, when out of his Frenzy Fits, as to make him relate the whole Story
to her, who then persuaded this Informant to keep all secret, lest he brought
himself into Troubles. But this Informant hearing about the 16th of April last,
That a certain Gentleman of note was wounded almost to death, did recollect
that one Wyard had tempred him to Bastmado such a kind of Person, which this
Informant had before, viz.

In the beginning of March, told unto the said Mrs. Mary Searr, for an account
whereof this Informant refers himself to his Information taken before Sir
Phillip Mathews, a Copy whereof this Informant delivered this day to the said
Committee of Lords: And this Informant did also repair about the first of May
last to the Earl of Clarendon, and in writing gave the said Earl under his
hand, a paper containing the matter about the Wounding the said Gentleman, and
hopes the said Earl will produce the said Paper, to which this Informant
refers. To which this Informant added by Word of Mouth, That the Earl of
Shaftsbury was in danger of his Life: to which Earl this Informant repaired,
because he was going into Flanders, and fearing he might be accused for the
wounding of the said Gentleman, during his absence, desired that that Writing
delivered to the Earl of Clarendon might clear his Innocence; and this
Informant further says, that the Lady Abergavenny sent for this Informant
into Lincolns-Inn-Fields, this last Summer was a twelve month; and then told
this Informant, the Lord Powis would speak with him in the Tower: To which this
Informant answered, he would; but acquainted the said Ambassador therewith, His
Excellency forbid him to go: wherewith this Informant also acquainted the said
Earl of Clarendon, who seemed to know the Lady Abergavenny, saying, she was his
Neighbor; and he farther says, that a certain Person came to the Ambassador,
and in the Informant's Presence told the Ambassador, that (...) Roberts, Porter
to the Watergate at Somerset House, was apprehended, upon which this Informant
observed the Ambassador to look very pale, and thereupon asked the Ambassador,
My Lord, is he concerned in this Business with me? to which the Ambassador
replied, He is a Man of Courage, and will undertake any thing.

And in May last, this Informants's Brother, Abraham de Farid coming to London,
this Informant told the Ambassador of it; Who asked if he were a Catholic: and
being answered thereto, his Excellency asked if he were a Man of Courage.
Whereunto this Informant replied We are all well born and bred. And his
Lordship replied, I would have him in this affair with us, were I sure of him:
and commanded this Informant to send him to him. And this Informant told his
said Brother, that the Ambassador would speak with him. But this Informant was
not with him when he went to the Ambassador, nor knows, what passed between
them. And this Informant further faith, That upon the day of Sir George
Wake-Man's Trial, the Ambassador sent him in his Coach to wait upon the Lord
Chief Justice Scroggs, and sent up Word by one of his Gentlemen, That one from
the Portugal Ambassador would speak with him. The Servant brought answer,
That he could not see the Ambassador that day, because he should be engaged
upon the Trial of Sir Gorge Wakeman all the day. Which the Ambassador being
acquainted with, his Lord ship sent this Informant to hear the Trial. And this
Informant stood by Sir George all the Trial and gave him white Paper to writ
upon and employed one Mr. Cooper^a Scrivener in Drury Lane to take in writing
the Trial, and gave him 20* s* for his pains: which this Informant delivered to
the Ambassador; who immediately sent it to the Queen, then at Windsor: with
which and a Letter, this Informant should have gone to Windsor, had he not
been very weary. And that same Night this Informant was sent to Sir George
Wakemans in St. Martins-Lane, to complement him on the Ambassadors part: but he
was not then come to his Lodging in St. Martins-Lane. So this Informant went
next* Morning* and found him in Bed with his Wife,) and (as this Informant
was commanded) told him from the Ambassador. That his Fortune and Estate was
at his Service, and so was his Princes; and the Prayers of the good Catholics
have prevailed for your delivery; and we are all bound to Sir. Philip Loyd for
his Generosity to you at the Trial: and we are all bound to pray for him
Whereunto Sir. George Wakeman replied, If it had not been for him, I had not
been saved: and so we are all bound to pray for him. And I pray return my Lord
many thanks for his Offers: and that he would wait on his Excellency that very
day to give him thanks for his Favors: but that he must first go to Windsor,
to wait on the Queen: but at his Return he would wait on his Excellency. And
Sir George then took this Informant by the hand and said, I am sorry, Mr.
Faria, that I had not the happiness to speak with you before: For I am Informed
what a Man you are; and that you could do great Service for the Catholics: But
alas* it is now too late. Thence this Informant went again, by Order to the
Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, to know when my Lord Ambassador should Visit him.
The Lord Scroggs answered, That the Ambassador would do him great Honor to
Visit him, but he was that day to go out of Town by One* of the Clock Wherewith
the Ambassador being, acquainted, he went about Twelve, in his Sedan, with a
Coach of State wherein this Informant was, to the Lord Scroggs's in
Chancery Lane. The ^^mplement was, in Porugueze (and this Informant
Interpreted) to this effect: My Lord I come to Vi^^ you as you are a Minister
of State; and am sent as Ambassador from the Prince of Portugal to the King of
Great Britain, and am directed to Visit you* and am likewise to thank you for
the Justice you have done Yesterday to Sir. George Wakeman To, which the Lord
Scroggs answered, I am placed to do Justice, and will not be curbed by the
Vulgar: and so I thank your Prince, and yourself for the great Honor you have
done me. And his Informant father says, That a Portugueze came to him, when
the Earl of Ossory was to go for Tangeir, offering this Informant, that he
might go with the said Earl, as his Interpreter, and should have 300 l. per
Annum for his pains. But this Informant reflecting, That the Sum offered was
too big for that Service believed this was a Snare to take away his Life. The
same Portugueze afterward offered him to go for Planders where Monsieuer
Fonsec might prefer him to the Prince of Prama. But he looked upon that as a
Snare also, and therefore refused. And this Informant says, that about six
Months ago he was assaulted by two unknown Persons with then Swords drawn, but
he happily escaped from them. And further says not.

Francisco de Faria.

Colonel Warcupp having taken this Information, carried me a second time to the
Lords of the Committee, before whom, I again attested and Justified upon Oath,
what I had Sworn before the Justice of Peace; the (...) also observing what I
had said concerning Mr. Sauer and Mrs. Sear, Commanded the Colonel to take
(the Examinations likewise, which was accordingly done next day* and the
Depositions carried up to the Lords, who found them agreeable to my
Information, and this was n^ so (...) Confirmation of the Truth of what I had
Sworn, the Depositions Coppied from the Originals in the Hands of the Clerk of
the Lords House, are these that follow.

Midd. and Westr.
The INFORMATION of Richard Salter of St. Clement Danes, Milliner, taken this
27th. of October 1680. before me Edmund Warcupp, Esquire, one of his Majesty's
Justices of the Peace in the said County and City, by the Command of the Lords
Committee of Examination of the late Popish Plot.
THis Informant says, that Francisco de Faria, was as this Informant heard,
Interpreter to the Portugal Ambassador, about February last past, at which time
he asked this Informant, whether he would carry a Letter into Flanders,
whereunto this Informant replied he would send a Letter by the Post, but Mr.
Faria answered, he must send it by a Messenger express, and himself was
suddenly to follow after it; and he choose this Informant to carry the Letter,
because this Informant knew the Country, having been there before, and could
also speak the Language. And he proffered this Informant ten Pounds for the
Voyage, but this Informant refused to go, because he had three Horses upon his
Hand, and one of them was lame; but Mr. Faria seemed unsatisfyed with this
Informants denial, and added many Prayers and Importunities to his Proffer of
the ten Pound, but could not prevail, and this Informant well remembers that he
saw the said Mr. Faria in some kind of Frensical and Melancholy Fitts, and
threw himself upon the Floor, about the Month of March last past, and this
Informant helped to hold him up, and further says not.

Richard Salter.
Jurat Die and Anno supra dictum, coram me, Edmond Warcupp.

The INFORMATION of Mrs. Mary S^alies, taken upon Oat^ the Day aforementioned,
by the Command of the said Lords Committee.
THis informant says, That Monseiuer Francisco de Faria, about the Months of
February and March last past, came several times to his Lodgings very
Melancholy and disturbed, and sometimes was in Frenzical Fitts, and in his
Sleep and Frenzy would often cry out upon Murderers, and did sometimes call
out, naming Oats and Bedlow, and sometimes the Ambassador, and once cried,
pity my youthful Days my Lord, which Disturbance this Informant observing,
did at length prevail with him to tell her what the Matter was, and he then
told her, there was a Design to kill Oats and Bedlow and Shaftsbury and a
Country Gentleman, but who it was he could not tell, whereupon this Informant
told him, there was a great deal of danger in knowing of it, and this Informant
then persuaded him to say nothing of it, lest he fell into Danger, and if he
should discover it, he should get no Credit by it, but would be looked upon as
a Knave: as Oats and Bedlow were by the Company his Informant kept Company
with, and this Informant did really fear he would come by some Mischief, when
ever he went abroad, and therefore desired him when ever he stayed out late, to
send this Informant word where he was, which he usually did, and he charged
this Informant, to declare if he came by any Mischance, it came from the
Portugal Ambassador or some that belonged to him, and this Informant says that
the said Faria told her, that he would go that Day to the Earl of Clarendon,
and had told him of some Business, whereupon this Informant asked him who the
Earl of Clarendon was, and he answered a very honest Gentleman, and one of the
Parliament, and no notice being taken of it afterward, this Informant did
admire at the reason of it, and she further says, that he told her at another
time, that he was to go with the Earl of Ossory to Tangier, and was to have
three hundred pound a Year, and another time he told this Informant that he had
another Offer to go for Flanders and complained to this Informant, that she
hindered him from going, but this Informant answered, 'twas not in respect to
her, that he did not go, but because he was afraid of his own Life, and she
heard the said Faria often say, what unconveniences a man may be drawn into,
and yet be Innocent, And this Informant well remembers that he did once
persuade Mr. Salter to carry a Letter, but whether it was to carry a Letter to
Flanders, or carry a Letter for him when he was in Flanders, she cannot well
remember: But she says that Salter refused to go because his Horse was lame,
but had his Horse been well, he would have hired one to look to him, but being
lame he would be spoiled before he returned. And one Mrs. Rogers being present,
offered that her Husband should go if he pleased, but Mr. Faria refused him,
saying, he knew not the Language nor the Country, and none was so fit as Mr.
Salter, whereupon this Informant persuaded Mr. Salters Wife to prevail with her
Husband to go, but she refused to let him go and further says not.

her Mark, Mary Seares.
Jurat Die and Anno supra dictum, coram me, Edmund Warcupp.

As to the Lady Abergavenny mentioned in my Information, I have this to add
further, that I do very well remember, that at the time when the five Jesuits
were to be hanged, drawn and quartered, the said Lady came to the Portugal
Ambassador, and made a most dreadful Complaint to his Excellency, to this
Effect, how that we were all ruined, if the said five Jesuits should suffer,
for to be sure that the next man that should die would be Sir George Wakeman,
in regard the five Jesuits were condemned upon the same Fact, that Sir George
Wakeman was guilty of, therefore I desire your Lordship by all means to see if
your Lordship can find any way to prevent the Death of those Jesuits.

Upon which my Lord made answer to the said Lady, that he could not Imagine or
Find out any way to save their Lives, but that they must die, for said he, we
have used all our Endeavors, and made all the Interest we can, and it will
not be granted.

Then the said Lady made answer to my Lord, that then Sir. George Wakeman
would have his Trial, and would be condemned and suffer, and then all our
Plot will be discovered.

My Lord made answer in these words, No Madam, we will seek to prevent his
Death by some Friend that we shall make.

Upon which my Lady Abergavenny took her leave of my Lord: I Francisco de
Faria was Interpreter betvveen them both.

Thus far I have followed the Series of Relation without interruption, as being
Occurances that happend and depended one upon another.

I am now to repeat some passages which as they come to my Knowledge upon
Various occasions, and at Several times, require not to be so punctually
disposed in order as being complete within themselves.

In January or Febuary 1678 / 9. A Letter was sent into Portugal by a
Capuchin, belonging to the Queens Chapel at Somerset House, called by the name
of Paulenio, to a Friend of his at Lisbon, the Letter Containd Words to this
Efect.

Our affairs are very well in London, where I hope in a little time there
will be a great alteration, and our business will be at an end in a short
time, so that I hope this place will all become Catholics.

The Gentleman that recived the Letter in Lisbon, showed it to a Friend of his
that was an English Man, who by that time had intelligence of the Discovery
of the Plot in England, that Gentleman writes over immediately from Portugal
to a Friend of his in London what he had heard by a Letter from a Capuchin of
Somerset House, upon which the said Gentleman went to the King and Counsel,
and declared what News his Friend had sent him out of Portugal: presently the
King and Counsel caused the Queens Confessor to be called, and to be Examined,
who at that time denied all, protested his Innocence, that he never vvrote any
such Letter, vvhereupon the King and Counsel discharged him, but that very
Night there was private Intelligence given to the said Father Paulenio upon
which he Immediately made his Escape for Flanders, where he staid till the
Portugaal Ambssador arrived in the Downs in his passage homevvards, whom he
then met and Embarked with him for Portugal, in the Ruby Frigate, under the
Command of Captain Alum.

And now that the World may see, how this Popish Plot was carried one by
General Contributions and Collected Maintenances, either out of Devotion or
Fear, I will add one Certainty more, which is this, that while I was
Employed in the service of the said Ambassador, I was entrusted among other
things, to pay to Mr. Anderson, Alias Munson, a Secular Priest, then a Prisoner
in the Kings Bench upon the account of the Plot, fifty Shillings a Month, which
money I Constantly paid to his Sister, Mrs. Barbara Tempest, Living in Holborn
near the Kings Gate, during the whole time of the Ambassadors Residence in
England. One day I took the boldness to ask his Excellency why he gave that
Allowance to the said Monson, to which he was pleased to answer, because he had
been his Chaplain fifteen Years before, when he was but Envoy Extraordinary to
the King of England from the King of Portugal, to which when I replied, that I
supposed his Excellency did not allow it him for that reason only, but that I
belived he was concerned in the Plot, his Excellency returned this Answer, why
Francis do you think that if you were taken upon Suspicion, that I and all of
us were not bound to assist you with our Lives and Fortunes, as we do
particularly this Mr. Munson, and all others in his Condition, lest they should
discover the Plot? And at the same time among the rest of the Contributors, his
Excellency named the Lady Penalua, Sister to Don Franciso de Melo, who died
Ambassador in Ordinary in England, in the Year 1678.

A certain Sign that the Ambassador was deeply concerned, who was so profuse of
his Life and Fortune, to Strangers in a Foreign Country, where if it had been
otherwise neither his Life nor his Fortune had been in the least danger or
Jeopardy.

The further INFORMATION of Francisco de Faria upon Oath before me Edmund
Warcupp Esquire; one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace in the said County and
City, this Day of December, 1680. Mid. and West.

THis Informant being duly Sworn and Examined, says, that in the Month of
July 1679, when Sir George Wakeman Baronet, William Marshal and William Rumley,
Gentlemen; and James Corker the Priest were Tried in the Old Bailey, he employed
one Mr. Cooper by Order of his Master Gasper de Abreu de Frietas, Ambassador in
Ordinary from the Crown of Portugal, to take in Writing the said Trials, which
he did; and the said Trials were transcribed, and afterward read and
interpreted unto the said Ambassador, who seemed to be exceedingly displeased
with Mr. Marshal for so over-doing his Defense, in regard said he, the said Mr.
Marshal was well assured before hand, he should not be Condemned, and in these
long Speeches, said he, he has too much reflected on the Innocence of them
that had already Suffered, and took too much No, tree of the Blood already
shed, by which he endangered the s^oning of the whole Business, by exasperating
the Court and Jury against them all.

That some time after the said Trials, there was a report about the Court and
City, that Articles were coming out against the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs,
upon which the said Ambassador told this Informant, he would give fifty
Guinneys to have a Copy of them before they were made public.

That some time before the Ambassador acquainted this Informant, that he
intended to send to Portugal for his Lady, and that this Informant should be
her Gentleman Usher, and also continue in his present Capacity of Secretary and
Interpreter.

That the said Ambassador did in order thereto furnish his House, and one Day,
being very intent upon Work Men, who were putting up some Tapestry Hangings, a
very large Packet of Letters was brought his Excellency by Doctor Mendex, one
of the Queens Majesty's Physicians, which he had no sooner read, but he
acquainted this Informant, that he must forthwith go for Portugal, to which
this Informant answered, that he much wondered at it, and was not a little
surprised to hear it especially, in regard that his Excellency being Ambassador
in Ordinary, must then leave the Ambassadage Extraordinary behind him, a thing
unusual. But his Excellency answered this Informant, that he must go, and that
immediately, and would leave Orders to sell his Coach and Horses, and other
things after he was gone. This Informant still pressing the Reasons of so
sudden a Departure, was by the said Ambassador answered, that otherwise he
thought he should be called before the King and Counsel, upon the Lord Scroggs
his account, and added, Francis, you must then go also, but I charge you not to
say, that you went to the said Lord Scroggs from me, that Friday on which Sir
George Wakeman was Tried, but that you went on your own head, and that you went
to him from me on the Saturday after only, for God above knows, what we do is
for the Catholic Cause, and that God below (pointing to his Chapel, which was
under his Chamber, in which we then were) will pardon us, and justify us in
what we do. At which time there being a rumor that the Earl of Ossory was to
go for Madrid, to complement that King upon his Marriage, and that he would
Embarque for Lisbon, and go thence by Land to Madrid, the Ambassador said he
would go with him. But he then again further charged this Informant to say, if
he should happen to be examined before the Council, that the Ambassador sent
him, and went himself to the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs by a Mistake, as
looking on him to be a public Minister of State. Whereupon this Informant
having always great Freedom of Discourse with the said Ambassador, asked his
Lordship his reasons, and why his Lordship did direct him to say in that manner
touching the Lord Chief Justice Scroggs, and his Lordship thereupon answered
him in the Portuguese Language with a Proverb of that Country, in these words,
Chen es muy curioso, novive muto, which in English is, He that is over curious
never lives long. Whereupon this Informant thought fit to forbear any further
Questions in that Matter, promising to obey his Lordships Command about the
said Lord Chief Justice Scroggs.

And this Informant says, that he well remembers, that this Discourse was on
the last Lord Mayors Day was twelve Months.

And this Informant says, that at the time when his Majesty was ill at
Windsor, this Informant being in Discourse with the said Ambassador, did ask
his Lordship what should be done with the Queen in Case his Majesty should tben
die, which God forbid he should, who answered, that so soon as his Majesty's
Eyes were closed, the Marquess de Aronches Extraordinary Ambassador, or else
himself would immediately go with her Majesty to Calais, and her Majesty being
by one of them thus secured, the other should stay here, and then England
should be treated with, to restore Tangeir, and the rest of her Majesty's
Dowry, which he said was the reason that two Ambassadors were here at one
time, for said he, should the King die, the Queen would be imprisoned and
punished, or made a Slave in England, and we come not hither (to repeat his own
words) Nos non v^m^^ para ^nsi^ar perlos, to thread Pearl, but to take care of
her Safety. Francisco de Faria.

And this Informant further says, That the Ambassador one day asked him if he
knew Dugdale. To which he answered, That he knew none of the Witnesses. Then
the Ambassador said, Dugdale is a Rogue, because he would not accept the money
that was offered him by a Chambermaid* For if he had taken the money, he might
have gone beyond Sea, and might there have lived happy, and been adored, for
that our Church will forgive all that repent. The Ambassador further added at
that time, that Burgomanero the Spanish Ambassador was a great Friend of the
said Chambermaids, and that the said Burgomonero would be examined before the
Council about that Matter, as he thought.

And this Informant further says, That the Ambassador his Master, after he
came home one night from Court, with great Joy said, That Villain Shaftsbury is
put out of the Council, and now we must have his Blood* calling this Informant
Dunce and Blockhead, that he should be at White Hall and not hear it before.

And this Informant further says, That at one other time, discoursing of Mr.
Coleman that was Executed, he said, If ever any Man was Guilty that died,
Coleman was, and therefore could not ever be Canonized for a Saint because of
the Guilt, but he might be Absolved.

And this Informant further says, That at the time when the Duke of Monmouths
Cook accused Segnior Antonio Farnandez, belonging to the Queens Confessor, for
somewhat said by him or to him about the four Ruffians at Windsor, after he had
given directions to one of the Harbingers to provide Lodging for four Irish
Gentlemen, for which as this Informant beleives the said* Antonio Fernandez was
imprisoned in Newgate, and to be tried at Westminster before the Lord Chief
Justice Scroggs, as this Informant heard, but he being out upon Bayl, he came
to vvait upon the Ambassador, who ask him whether or no he had spoken to any of
the four Irish Gentlemen at Windsor, who replied, yes, he had to one of them,
but he was sure the Rogue, the Cook that had accused him, could not hear him
direct the said Person to see him at Night, to which the Ambassador presently
replied, Segnior Fernandez, you shall not be Canonized or suffer Martordom this
bout, for we have taken care that nothing shall appear against you, which
proved true, the Ambassador giving this Informant a Guiney that day he was to
be tried, and he did attend at Westminister and there saw him in Court, and
nothing did appear against him: and this Informant further says, that Dr.
Mendez before mentioned, was once in the absence of this Informant Interpreter
betwixt the said Ambassador and the Lady Abergavenny, and that the said Dr.
Mendez about a Month after the said Ambassador was gone for Portugal, was
passing in his Coach by the Shop of one Mr. Phillips on Ludgate Hill, where the
said Dr. Mendez espying this Informant, he took him into his Coach, and as they
rode together, this Informant complained that the Ambassador was not so kind to
him at his departure as he expected, adding, that he knew enough against the
said Ambassador, to ruin him, and should he discover it, would hurt many in
England, and the Dr. made answer, I hope you will be more honest than to
discover any thing, and this Informant believes, that if the said Dr. Mendez
were Examined he would own the same.

This Informant further says, that before the said Ambassador went out of
England, he this Informant having much trouble upon his Spirits arising from
the Knowledge of the things he has now discovered, to ease his Mind, did write
down the Heads of the same in Portuguese upon a Piece of Paper, and delivered
the same to his Mother to lay up carefully for him, and more especially what
related to the Design against the Earl of Shaftbury, Dr. Oats, and Mr. Bedlow
and a Country Justice, which Paper was Svvorn unto in the House of Peers on
Friday the 19th. of November, 1680.

Sworn by Order of the Lords Committees for Examinations, etc. the 10th. of
December, 1680. before me Edmund Warcupp, Esquire

The following INFORMATION was delivered in the Spanish Language, fairly
written by Mr. John Faria my Father, to his Majesty and the Lords, Spiritual
and Temporal in Parliament Assembled, who were pleased to Command Mr. William
Blathwaire to Translate the same into English, which was done, and the same
Sworn unto in the Lords House, his Majesty present, upon the 19th. Day of Nov.
1680.
THIS Informant says, that at the first Arrival of Gasper de Abreu de
Freitas, the last Ambassador in Ordinary from Portugal, at the Court of
England, this Informant went to visit him, as having had an old Acquaintance
with the said Ambassador, at the time when he was here before, in the Quality
of Envoy extraordinary to his Maejesty of Great Britain (whom God preserve)
And the said Ambassador asking the Informant about his Son Francisco de Faria,
whom he had a mind to make his Secretary of Languages, as being skilled in the
English, French, and Portugeze Languages; whereupon this Informant carried his
said Son to the Ambassadors House, and left him there to be his Interpreter,
and this Informant continuing often to visit the Ambassador, who used to
complain much in his Discourse of the great Persecution, which he said, the
Roman Catholics lay under in the Kingdom of England, and that all was
occasioned by Mr. Oats and Bedlow, who were base Rogues and Villains, and that
for their having caused so great Mischiefs, they deserved to be killed,
swearing by God, that he would take care to have them killed; and this
Informant hearing the Ambassador use at several times this Sort of Discourse,
this Informant told him (as he used to be very free with the Ambassador) That
his Ambassy in England was about the affair of the Kingdom of Portugal, and
that he needed not trouble himself with any Body else, and that he should let
the King of Englands Subjects live in Peace, to which the said Ambassador
replied, that for those great Mischiefs those Rascals had brought upon the
Roman Catholics, they deserved to be killed. And this Informant further
says, that a Month or five Weeks before the said Ambassador took leave of his
Majesty of Great Brittan, upon his Return to Portugal, the aforesaid Francisco
de Faria brought to the House of this Informant some Papers belonging to his
said Son, that this Informant might keep them for him, and amongst the rest
there was one which the Informant saw written with the Hand of the said
Francisco de Faria, wherein were several Memorandums written in the Portuguese
Tongue, with the Names of English Persons as may be seen by the said Paper,
which the said Francisco de Faria took away afterward out of the House of the
said Informant. And this Informant further says, that at that time when the
Book made by Mr. Oats was published in French, being a Narrative of the Plot,
the said Ambassador sent to buy one of them, which the Informant translated and
read out of the French into Portuguese unto the Ambassador, who then spoke
verily angerly of Mr. Oats, and said that the Jesuits that had suffered died
as Martyrs; whereunto this Informant replied, that if they were so Zealous of
their Religion, it had been better for them to have exercised it in Flanders
and in other Parts, since they well knew, that if they were found in England,
they were to be punished with Death, by the Laws of the Kingdom; and the
Ambassador did also say that Coleman had suffered only for endeavoring to
bring the Roman Catholic Religion again into England; and the Informant also
says, that the Paper annexed to which he has put his Hand is the same Paper
of Memorandums before mentioned, which the said Francisco de Faria brought to
the House of this Informant.

SIGNED John de Faria

Translated out of Portuguese.
TO take care to Kill Oats. To Kill Bedlow. To take care to Kill Lord
Shaftsbury. To take care to Kill the Justice of Peace that lives in the
Country. A Complement to the Queens Doctor. A Complement to the Lord Scroggs.
The Letter that I was to send to Flanders by a man. About Friar Paulino, the
Letter he wrote and sent to Portugal. About Madam Abergavenny and what she said
to the Ambassador. The Porter of Summerset-House. To take care to Kill Oats and
Bedlow. To take care to Kill Lord Shaftsbury. Madam Abergavenny what she said.
The following INFORMATION being Sworn unto at the same time, and the Matter
therein contained relating to part of my Information in Page 29, I have with
leave Inserted it at the End of this my Information. December 15th. 1680.
Francisco de Faria
I Thomas Buss of the Parish of St. Margerets Westminister, Cook and Servant to
his Majesty, in the Office of a Cook in his own Kitchen, as third Cook, called
by the Name of Groom of the Kitchen, and being Master-Cook to their Graces the
Duke and Duchess of Monmouch, and in the Year of our Lord Christ 1678, when
his Majesty was then, in the Month of September, at Windsor, I the said Thomas
Buss, then waiting on their Graces, as abovesaid, was on the 13th. or 14th. of
September, being on a Friday, about seven of the Clock in the Morning to buy in
such Provisions as was needful for his Graces Family, his Grace being then
returned from the Battle of Montz, I by chance espied Four of my Acquaintance
talking together, viz. three Portugals, and one of them an English Man, and I
having not seen the English Man of three or four Years before, then Saluted him
by the Name of Father Hankinson, not knowing his Christian Name, in these Words
of Father Hankinson, May I say by or to you, as God Almighty said to the Devil,
Whence came you? or how shall I say to you? for he and I being acquainted ever
since her Majesty's first Arrival into England at Portsmouth, he the said
Hankinson made me no other Answer, but, You will never leave your Old Drolling,
but I having him by the Hand all this while, said, Well then come prithee from
whence came you indeed? Why I came from Italy, and then two of the three
Portugals left him, and one Portugal with me, and did ask him (he saying he
came from Italy) if he had brought over any Bulls or Pardons from his Holiness
the Pope, whereunto (...) did reply, You will never leave your drolling; and I
did ask him when he arrived at the City of London, and then the other Portugal
named Segnior Anthonio Fernandez turned from our Company over to the Fishermen
that sat in the Market, which was not above a yard and a half distance from
the place where we two then stood still talking, (their Majesty's both being
then at the Castle of Windsor) I there ask't the said Father Hankison if he did
arrive at Windsor on the said Wedensday Night, or no, and he told me No, his
Horse did tire, and it was late, so he stayed in Town all Night, and came for
Windsor on Thursday the 13th. about four or five of the Clock in the Afternoon.
Then I did ask of him, if he and I and three or four more of his old
Acquaintance should not drink together before his Departure, for he was then in
a traveling Posture? He told me by no means, for he was in great have, for he
was going about ten or twelve Miles to a Lords House, naming the Lords Name to
me, but truly I did forget his Lords Name, but he told me* If he could dispatch
betimes, to get to Windsor by four or five of the Clock in the Afternoon, then
his other Acquaintances and I should Drink together, and then the said Father
Hankison called over to the aforesaid Segnior Antonio Fernandez the Portugal
aloud, and prayed him for Gods Sake to have a care of those four worthy
Gentlemen the Strangers, and then I hearing him tell me that he came from
Italy, (thinking they might be four of the Gentlemen of Italy, come over to see
the Court of England) ask't him, what these Gentlemen were? and he told me they
were four Irish Gentlemen, and called to the before mentioned Segnior Antonio
Fernandez, saying aloud as he did before, Segnior Antonio, Segnior Antonio, for
Gods Sake have a great care of those four Gentlemen, worthy Gentlemen, the
Irish Men, for they will do our Business in the Grace of God; and the said
Segnior Antonio answered, And Grace of God I will have a great Care of them, in
the Grace of God fear nothing. And so he the said Father Hankison, being about
to be gone, well said I to him, it I shall see you no more, pray when do you
leave England? Tomorrow. And then said I, whether then? For Paris, and then for
Italy again. And then I bid him remember me to his Holiness the Pope, at which
he did laugh, and told me, you will never leave your Drolling, and so we
parted, and have not seen each other never since, nor thinking nothing) of it
more, till I reading Coleman's Papers, wherein I heard the Names of four Irish
Ruffians named, should kill his Majesty, and I being his said Sworn Servant and
bound by my Oath as his Majesty's Servant, not to hear any Secret or public
Mischief, nor Treason against his most Sacred Majesty, but the same to reveal
to some of his Majesty's Officers, the which I did by Name to Sir Steven Fox,
and he did order me to acquaint the Committee of Secrecy with it, and likewise
I did acquaint Mr. Vernon, as Secretary and Steward to their Graces, the Duke
and Duchess of Monmouth, and my Superior Officer in their Family, and he liked
it very well* and told me he would inform some of the Committee of Secrecy of
it, and so he did and I went before them at Sergeants Inn in Fleet Street, and
they did like the Information very well, for then they did want some to second
Dr. Oats's Depositions, and at the Trial of Councellor Langhorn, I was fetched
by the Undersheriff from dressing their Graces Dinner, to give Evidence
against the said Prisoner at the Bar, the which Evidence was after Oath taken*
highly approved on there, and this aforenamed Segnior Antonio Fernandez sent
for to the Court at the Old Bailey, by the Undersheriff with me to the Earl of
Ossory, to Speak to their Majesty's, that the said Segnior Antonio Fernandez
might be brought before the Court at the Old-Bayly, and he being brought before
the Court, the Court ordered Sir George Jefferys, to take his Defense for
himself, he making so weak a one, he then being the Recorder of London, sent
the said Antonio by and with the Keepers to Newgate for the Matter of High
Treason against his Majesty, where he lay till the end of the next Term, and
then was Bailed out, and I was bound by Sir George Jefferys to prosecute, and
did Appear, on Summons from Windfor at Sir George Wakemans Trial, and never was
once so much as called, nor a great many more, near seventeen or eighteen, and
when the Court of Justice did rise, I asked Dr. Oats whether he or the Court
had any other Business with me, and he told me no, so I returned to Windsor the
same Night, and never heard more of it till this Sessions of Parliament.

Thomas Buss
Sworn by Order of the Lords Committees for Examinations etc. the 10th. of
December 1680, before me.

Edmund Warcupp. Esqu;



And now Reader give me leave to admire the Providence of God, that I Francisco
de Faria should be brought from almost the utmost Parts of the far distant
habitable World to be an Instrument here in England to detect, or at least more
convincingly to prove the truth of those Horrid Treasons and Conspiracies, that
have been for so long time as wickedly denied, as impiously perpetrated; but I
am answered, when I consider that the Judgments of God are Unsearchable, and
that there is no Craft or Subtilty of Man, can hide or conceal those
Impieties, and foul Conspiracies which God will bring to Light.

Francisco de Faria.

FINIS.

