Mr. FALLE's SERMON Before the Lord Mayor, April 21. 1695.

Lane, Mayor. Martis xxiiio. die Aprilis, 1695. Annoque Regis WILLELMI Tertii
Angliae, etc. Septimo.
THis Court does desire Mr. Fall to Print his SERMON, Preached on Sunday last
at the Guild Hall Chapel, before the LORD MAYOR, and ALDERMEN of this City.

Goodfellow.

IMPRIMATUR.

Guil. Lancaster.
April 25. 1695.
Of the Descent of the PARACLET.

A SERMON PREACHED Before the Right Honorable THE LORD MAYOR, AND Court of
ALDERMEN, AT THE GUILD HALL Chapel, April 21. 1695.

Being the Fourth Sunday after Easter.

By PHILIP FALL, Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty.

LONDON, Printed for John Newton, at the Three Pigeons, over against the Inner
Temple Gate, in Fleetstreet. 1695.

TO The Right Honorable Sr. Thomas Lane, LORD MAYOR OF The City of LONDON.
MY LORD,
SO many Excellent Discourses have been already written against Skepticism, and
in Defense of Christianity, that I might justly be deterred from coming after
Others, if the Command of that Honorable Court, where Your Lordship so
worthily Presides, had not called for the Publication of this Sermon. I could
not foresee, it should be longer-liv'd than many better Composures of this
Kind; which, after they have served for an Hour's Amusement, are thrown aside,
and vanish with the Breath of the Preacher: and therefore was not much
concerned to give it that Turn and Air, that is given to Things, which, from
their First Conception, are designed for the Press. Such as it is, I leave it to
God's Blessing: earnestly wishing that it may conduce to settle the Minds of
those who shall chance to read it, in an hearty Belief of that Holy Religion
which God has Revealed unto us by his Son, and confirmed by the Ministry of the
PARACLET; whose Miraculous Effusion on the Apostles, and Apostolic Men, in the
First Ages of the Church, we commemorate at this Time: And may that Blessed
Spirit guide us into all Truth Joh. xvi. 13.
. I am,

MY LORD, YOUR LORDSHIP's Most Humble, and Most Obedient Servant, Philip Fall.
Whitsun-Eve, 1695.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
SERMON sur l'Hymne Angelique and Eucharistique, Luc. ii. 14. Prononce dans
l'Eglise de St. Sauveur en l'Isle de JERSEY, le 3me jour d' Avril. 1687, Jour
de Cene.

A SERMON on Luke iii. 14. Preached at St. Helier, in the Isle of JERSEY,
before the English Garrison, April 10. 1692.

Of the Impunity of Bad Men in the World. A SERMON on Eccles. viii. 11.
Preached at White Hall, Dec. 30. 1694.

An Account of the Isle of JERSEY, the Greatest of those Islands that are now
the only Remainder of the English Dominions in France; with a New and Accurate
Map of the Island. Humbly dedicated to His Majesty.

Written by PHILIP FALL, M. A. Deputy from the States of the said Island, and
Chaplain in Ordinary to His Majesty; and Printed for John Newton in Fleetstreet.

JOHN. xvi. 7. Being part of the Gospel of the Day.

Nevertheless, I tell you the Truth; it is expedient for you that I go away:
For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you: but if I depart, I
will send him unto you.

JOHN. xvi. 8. Being part of the Gospel of the Day.

And when he is come, he will reprove the world of Sin, and of Righteousness,
and of Judgment:

JOHN. xvi. 9. Being part of the Gospel of the Day.

Of Sin, because they believe not on me;

JOHN. xvi. 10. Being part of the Gospel of the Day.

Of Righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more;

JOHN. xvi. 11. Being part of the Gospel of the Day.

Of Judgment, because the Prince of this world is judged.


THESE are the Words of our Blessed Savior to his Disciples, when he was going
to leave them, and to depart from the World. He had fulfilled all that belonged
to his Prophetic Office by a Three Years Ministry on Earth: He had revealed
the Will of God to Mankind: He had gathered a Church: He had ordained Apostles
and Teachers: Nothing remained but that he should suffer, and return to his
Father that had sent him. And now therefore, having loved his own which were in
the World unto the end Joh. xiii. 1.
, he calls them together before his Passion, eats his last Supper with them,
and in the most tender and moving Words that ever Man spoke, I mean in that
admirable Discourse contained in This and the Three foregoing Chapters,
acquaints them with his going away from them. These were sad News to the
Disciples, and their Grief was extreme on this Occasion. They had forsaken all
to follow him, and now in requital he was going to leave them: They had drawn
upon them the Hatred of the World by adhering to him, and they were sure to
meet with nothing but Persecution from it after he was gone: Which way soever
they looked, they had but a Prospect of dark and gloomy Days coming upon them:
and this mightily dejected them, and filled their Minds with melancholy
Boadings and Apprehensions of what might befall them, when they should be
deprived of the Support they now received from his Presence among them. Our
Lord bids them not to be troubled at his Departure Joh. xiv. 1.
; for he would be so far from leaving them (as they feared) helpless and alone
(...). ibid. verse. 18.
, exposed to the Fury and the Rage of the World, that he would send them the
Comforter, as soon as he was ascended unto his Father, the Glorious Spirit of
God, who would be a mighty Succor and Defense to them, and would abide and
continue for ever with them Verse. 16.
. It was this Blessed Spirit (he goes on to tell them) that was to plead and to
maintain his Cause against the World that had rejected him, but could not come
down till he was glorified Joh. vii. 39.
: Therefore it was necessary he should speedily go away to send him down on
Earth, that he might vindicate him among Men, show them their Infidelity in not
believing on him, their Cruelty and Injustice in Crucifying of him, assure them
of his Divinity and Exaltation at the Right Hand of God, and severely avenge
him on all his Enemies, the Devil especially, the chief Author of his Death and
of his Sufferings. Nevertheless, I tell you the Truth; It is expedient for you
that I go away: For if I go not away, the Comforter will not come unto you; but
if I depart, I will send him unto you. Or, I will send him down from on High
upon you, for so much the Word imports in the Original (...). Quasi ex arce
demittam. Grot.
. And when he is come, he will reprove the World of Sin, and of Righteousness,
and of Judgment: Of Sin, because they believe not on me; Of Righteousness,
because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; Of Judgment, because the
Prince of this World is judged.

I am fallen this Day on one of the most Difficult Texts of Scripture. It has
puzzled the Learned Men to find out the true Sense and Meaning of this
place. See their Annotations on the Place.
The Incomparable Grotius, and the Excellent Dr. Hammond, have, in my Judgment,
given the best Light to it, as they have done to many other Obscure Passages of
the Sacred Oracles.

The Difficulty that is in these Words lies not in the Promise which our B.
Savior makes to his Disciples of sending them the Comforter after his
Departure; for that is plain enough, and it was exactly accomplished some time
after, viz. on the Day of Pentecost: but in the Effects he tells them that
Blessed Spirit would produce in the World at his Coming. And when he is come,
he will reprove the World of Sin, and of Righteousness, and of Judgment: Of
Sin, because they believe not on me; Of Righteousness, because I go to my
Father, and ye see me no more; Of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is
judged. These are the Words which I design more particularly to treat of at
this time. I shall first briefly explain them, and then enlarge further upon
them.

You must note then that our B. Savior makes allusion here to the Jewish way
of pleading Causes, and managing Actions and Suits at Law after the mode of the
Courts, and the method of the Public Judicatories among that People in those
Days. All the Words and the Terms here used are properly Words and Terms of
Law; which seems not to have been Understood by common Expositors. There were
Three sorts of Actions usual among the Jews in our Savior's time, all which
are alluded to by him in this place. The First were those that consisted in
Condemning and Punishing Sinners and Offenders against God: as, Blasphemers of
his most Holy Name; False Prophets, that feduc'd the People, pretending they
came from God when he had not sent them; and the like: These they called
Actions concerning Sin (...).
; that is, Sin by way of Eminency, Sin that struck directly and immediately at
the Honor, Veracity, or any other of the Attributes of God. The Next were
those that consisted in protecting and defending Innocent Persons from the
Oppressions and Vexations of other Men; which therefore they called Actions
concerning Righteousness (...).
. The Last were when they demanded Vengeance, and urged the benefit of that
great Law of Retaliation, expressed in Leviticus xxiv. 20.
, and mentioned elsewhere Exodus xxi. 23. Deuteronomy. xix. 21. Matt. v. 38.
, against those that had injured them; by which Law it was ordained that
whoever wronged another, it should be repaid back to him in the same kind:
These they called Actions concerning Judgment (...).
. To me it is very evident that our B. Savior in the Text alludes to these
Three sorts of Actions (as he does frequently in the Gospel to many other Civil
and Religious Customs that were in use among the Jews in his time) and applies
them to the manner of the H. Ghost's vindicating him, and pleading his Cause
against the World at his Descent.

The word PARACLET in the Original is another Key to unlock this difficult
Text. If I go not away, (...) PAPAKLTOS (...), the PARACLET will not come unto
you. For though the Word be commonly rendered The Comforter, it signifies also an
Advocate, one that acts, sollicits, and pleads for another: and the Jews (I
mean the Jews Hellenists, for the Word in its primitive Derivation is a Greek
Word PAPAKLTOS Vox Graeca, frequens apud Judaeos in Versione Chaldaea, and apud
Thalmudicos, non pro Consolatore, sed pro eo qui causam agit alterius. Grot. in
Joan. xiv. 16. PARACLETUS Judaeorum, and PARACLETUS Samaritanorum. Juchasin.
138.2. ubi non Consolatorem significat, sed Advocatum, aut Patronum. Drus.
Praeter. Lib. IV. ad. Joan. xiv.
) used it generally in this Sense. It Is according to this known Acceptance of
the word in his time that St. John, for instance, calls our B. Savior himself
Our PARACLET 1 Ep. ii. 1.
: If any man sin, says he, PAPAKLTON (...), We have a PARACLET with the Father,
Jesus Christ the Righteous: that is, (as our own Translation renders it) We
have an Advocate with the Father, one that will plead and defend our Cause at
the Bar of Heaven, even the Lord Jesus, who for this end is gone up on High,
and sits at the Right Hand of God. And as the Jews called him that pleaded for
another, PAPAKLTOS (...)
, so him that pleaded against him, and was his adverse Party, they called (...)
(...)
, the Accuser: which is the very Name given to the Devil in the Revelation xii.
10.
; He is there called (...), the Accuser of the Brethren. These Two do very
appositely explain and illustrate each other: As it is the Part of the Infernal
Spirit to be the (...), the Accuser of Good Men, so it is the Office of the H.
Ghost to be their PAPAKLTOS, that is, their Advocate, and their Defender. The
Jews have a Saying, That he that does one Precept of the Law, gets him PARACLIT
EHAD (...)
, an Advocate, that will intercede to God for him: But he that transgresses one
Precept of the Law, gets him Katigor-Ehad (...)
, an Accuser, that will charge and impeach him before God Pirke Avoth. ceu,
Lib. Apophthegm. Hebraeor. Cap. IV. Vid. Joh. Buxtorf. Florileg. Hebraic. ad
vocem Praeceptum. p. 277.
. Our B. Savior lived among the Jews, and expressed himself as they did;
therefore I doubt not, but this is the Notion he had of the Word PARACLET in
the Text: which accordingly Beza, in his Latin Version, renders Advocatus; Nisi
abiero Advocatus ille non veniet ad vos. Grotius says the old Latin
Interpreters rendered it constantly thus Annot. ad Joan. xiv. 16.

The word frequently occurrs in the ancient Greek Classical Writers, in the
Sense wherein we now take it, of an Advocate, or Intercessor. Vid. Budaei
Comment. Ling. Graec. Edit. Paris. An. MDXLVIII. page 802, 803. Ubi multa
annotantur ex Aeschin. Demosth. Isocr. etc.

Tertull. Lib. de Monogamia. Cap. III. In hoc quoque PARACLETUM agnoscere debes
Advocaium, quod a tota Continentia infirmitatem tuam excusat.


.

Further, that which our B. Savior says the H. Ghost would do at his Coming,
proves that he intended to speak of him in this Sense, and in this Notion, of
an Advocate. And when he is come, (...), he will reprove the World. The word
(...) is of the nature of the former, and properly belongs to an Advocate
Verbum hoc responde Hebraeo (...) and Forense est, conveniens Personae causarum
actori. Grot.
, who pleads the Cause of his Client with such Force of Argument, and such
Evidence of Truth, that he confounds the (...) or Adversary, Silences him that
pleads on the opposite side. The Word is used in this Sense by St. Paul Tit. i.
9.
, when he says that the Duty of a Christian Bishop, is to hold fast the
faithful Word, as he has been taught, that he may be able by sound Doctrine,
both to Exhort, (...), and to Convince the Gainsayers. That is, so to plead the
Cause of God and Religion, that he may stop the Mouths of all that speak
against them.

These Remarks may not possibly seem so proper in a Discourse of this Nature;
but they were necessary to clear the Text. And now we may understand the words
of our B. Savior, as if he had spoke to his Disciples in this manner. The H.
Ghost, whom I must go away to send down upon Earth, besides what he will do
more immediately for you, My Friends! whom he will never leave, as I must leave
you now, will be my PARACLET, my Advocate, against the World when he comes; He
will plead and he will defend my Cause, and he will lay in Three Actions
against it in my Name. The First will be concerning Sin (...) --.
. The World, you know, has rejected me as a Blasphemer Mat. ix. 3. and xxvi. 65.
, and a Seducer, and a False Prophet, and a Sinner against God. But when the H.
Ghost comes down, he will charge the World with Infidelity at my Suit for not
Believing on me (...).
. He will demonstrate that I am the Christ, the anointed of God, promised to
the Fathers, foretold by the Scriptures, and so long expected by all the
Nations of the Earth; and therefore that it is not I, but they, viz. the World,
that is guilty of Sin and Blasphemy against God, for refusing to believe on him
whom he has sent. Another Action which the H. Ghost, my PARACLET, will put in
against the World on my behalf, will be concerning Righteousness (...) --.
. The World has treated me as the most flagitious Malefactor: I have been taxed
of some of the blackest and foulest Crimes: I have been traduced for a
Sabbath-Breaker Luke vi. 1. etc. -- xiii. 14.
, a Glutton, a Wine-Bibber, a friend of Publicans and Sinners -- vii. 34.
; and in few days ye shall see me put to Death as a Robber and a Thief Matt.
xxvi. 55, etc.
. But when the H. Ghost, my PARACLET, comes down, he will assert my Innocence
against the unjust Calumnies of the World: He will convince it of my
Righteousness: He will show the wrong that has been done me, and how
undeservedly it is that I have suffered all these things from the hands of
sinful and ungrateful Men. If you ask how the H. Ghost will do this, that
will be by publishing at his Descent how God has glorified me (...).
, raised me from the Grave where the Malice and Cruelty of the World had laid
me, restored me to a Life Glorious and Immortal, taken me up into the Mansions
of the Blessed above, so that from hence forth ye see me no more (...).
, exalted me at his Right Hand and on his own Throne, resigned the Sovereignty
and the Empire of the Universe into my hands, and given me all Power in Heaven
and in Earth Mat. xxviii. 18.
. This will be a clear Proof of my Innocence, since it is not to be supposed
that the most Holy and Just God would reward my Sufferings with so great a
Glory, if I were a wicked Man and a Sinner: He would leave me in my Grave, and
under the Power of Death, if the World had justly condemned me Fatebitur Mundus
me vere justum fuisse, qui ex hoc mundo discedens non fuerim d^mnatus a Patre.
Beza.
. Now who fitter to convince the World of this New Glorious Life of mine, and
Exaltation at the Right Hand of my Father, than the H. Ghost, who, coming down
from Heaven, ought best to know what has been done there, and is best able to
declare it to the World? One Action more which the H. Ghost, my PARACLET, will
put in against the World on my behalf, will be concerning Judgment (...) --.
. He will demand Vengeance, and urge the Great Law of Retaliation against it.
You have seen how the World has used me. It Is but just it suffer the Punishment
due to its Unbelief and Cruelty toward Me; and that it will most eminently do
when the H. Ghost comes down. For he will avenge me on all mine Enemies, those
that triumph and rejoice now in my Shame, and in my Sufferings. He will avenge
me especially on the Devil, the Prince of this World (...).
, the chief Author and contriver of my Death. He will destroy his Kingdom, and
execute so remarkable a Judgment upon him, that the whole World shall be
astonished at it, and my Name shall be glorified among Men. This will the H.
Ghost do, All these mighty Things will he bring to pass at his Coming;
Therefore when I say unto you that I go to send him, if ye loved me ye would
rejoice Joh. xiv. 28.
, and not mourn at my Departure. And when he is come, he will reprove the World
of Sin, and of Righteousness, and of Judgment: Of Sin, because they believe not
on me; Of Righteousness, because I go to my Father, and ye see me no more; Of
Judgment, because the Prince of this World is judged. This I take to be the
meaning of these Words, which I shall now apply my self to consider more
particularly.

I. The First Thing that Our B. Savior tells his Disciples, the H. Ghost, his
PARACLET, would reprove or convince the World of at his Coming, is Sin, for not
believing on him.

When the Son of God came into the World, though all the Characters that had
been given of the Messiah in the Books and Oracles of the ancient Prophets were
most exactly fulfilled in his Person, he was nevertheless rejected by the
World, as though he had been a Deceiver Matt. xxvii. 63.
, and had designed to put a Trick upon it. The Miracles which he wrought were
the great Evidences that he brought to prove the Divine Authority of his
Mission, and he frequently appeals to them in the Gospel. If I do not the Works
of my Father, believe me not: But if I do, though you believe not me, believe
the Works Joh. x. 37, 38.
. But what effect had these Miracles upon the World? Some indeed confessed that
no man could do them, except God were with him Joh. iii. 2.
: but Others turned the Argument against him, and said they were done by the
Power of Charms and Enchantments, by a Pact and Collusion with the Devil. He
casts out Devils by Beelzebub the Prince of the Devils Matthew. xii. 24. Luke xi.
15.
. Thus the World did not believe on him. Though he had done so many Miracles
before them, says the Sacred Record John xii. 37, etc.
, yet they believed not on him. That the Saying of Esaias the Prophet liii. 1.
might be fulfilled, which be spoke, Lord, who has believed our Report? These
things said Esaias, when he saw his Glory, and spoke of him.

He therefore tells his Disciples in the Text, that the H. Ghost at his Coming
would convince the World of what it would not now believe: would put the Truth
of his Mission in such an open Day, that the World should not any longer be
able to deny him. It may indeed seem a matter of just Wonder, how the H. Ghost
at his Coming should demonstrate the Truth of our Savior's Mission with
greater Force and Evidence than he had done himself. But it is most certain the
H. Ghost (the PARACLET) did it, and that especially Two ways.

First, By doing more and Greater Miracles (...), etc. D. Crysost. Hom. lxxvii.
in Joan.
on Earth, by the hands of the Apostles, after his Descent upon them, than our
Lord himself had done before in the Days of his Flesh. The wonderful Gift of
Tongues bestowed on the Apostles, on the Day of Pentecost, being One of those
Greater Miracles of the H. Ghost. That a few poor Galileans, who before spoke
only the rude Dialect of their Province, and by their uncouth Speech bewrayed
themselves Mat. xxvi. 73.
wherever they went, as Peter did to the Damsel and others in the High
Priest's House, Thou art a Galilean, thy Speech agrees thereto Mark. xiv. 70.
: That these Men, I say, should in an instant, without Study, merely through a
sudden Impulse or Inspiration of the H. Ghost, be heard to speak accurately and
elegantly all the Various and the most Learned Languages of the World, and
going to the utmost Bounds and Extremities of the Earth, should declare to
every Nation in its own proper Tongue the wonderful Works of God Acts ii. 11.
, was certainly a New and Unheard Of Miracle; such a Miracle as the World had
not been acquainted with before. Are not they which speak Galileans? say the
Multitudes: How then hear we every Man in our own Tongue wherein we were born
ibid verse. 7, 8.
? Our Blessed Lord himself, the Word and Wisdom of the Father, never spoke but
one Language only, during the whole Time that he lived among Men, viz. the
Vulgar Syro-Chaldean Matt. xxvii. 46. Mark vii. 34.
, used throughout the Region which he honored with his Residence and Ministry.
The speaking of diverse kinds of Tongues by the Spirit 1 Cor. xii. 10.
was a Miracle reserved to be the Crown and Perfection of all others wrought
under former Dispensations, and was particularly designed to make good those so
very remarkable Words of our Savior to his Disciples Joh. xiv. 12.
, He that believes on me, the Works that I do shall he do also, AND GREATER
WORKS THAN THESE SHALL HE DO (...). D. Crysost. de Sto. Paulo Apostolo Hom.
xxxii. in Ep. ad Romans prope sinem.
, because I go unto my Father. Nor does this any ways lessen the Glory of our
Savior's Miracles; because whatever the H. Ghost did by the Apostles, the
great End thereof was to corroborate our Savior's Miracles, and to bear
Testimony to the Truth of every Thing he did or spoke whilst he abode upon
Earth. When the PARACLET is come, whom I will send from the Father, he shall
testify of me Joh. xv. 26.
: And in the Words after the Text, He shall glorify me -- xvi. 14.
. It was indeed that admirable Knowledge of Tongues and Languages which the
Apostles received from the H. Ghost, that enabled them to propagate as they did
the Gospel of Christ, that taught every Mouth to Confess him, that got him
Proselytes from all Nations under the Sun, and that in very little time made
the Glory and Reputation of his Name fly over all parts of the Universe.

Secondly, The Coming of the PARACLET made it impossible for the World any
longer to deny our Savior, another way: And that was by his very Coming down,
abstracting from the Miracles which he wrought afterward. Thus. Our Savior
pleaded that he was a true Prophet, sent from God, and he foretold many things
that should come to pass, whereof this was one: That as soon as he was ascended
unto his Father, the H. Ghost should come down, and the Effects of it should be
seen visibly in the World. He bad his Apostles not to depart from Jerusalem,
until they were endued with Power from on High Luke xxiv. 49. Acts i. 4.
. The H. Ghost therefore coming down as he had foretold, descending on the
Apostles, and exerting his mighty Power in them immediately upon it, what was
this but a most Signal Testimony that our Savior was a true Prophet, and that
consequently they were guilty of very great Sin that did not believe on him?

But now to discourse particularly of this Glorious Descent of the H. Ghost, to
relate the Manner of it, the Circumstances that attended it, is neither the
Business of the Text nor of the Day. It Is a Subject proper for the Great
Solemnity that is approaching, upon which I shall not Anticipate. But I must
crave your Attention to the Matters now before us.

II. The Next Thing that our B. Savior tells his Disciples the H. Ghost, his
PARACLET, would reprove or convince the World of at his Coming, is
Righteousness: that is, His Righteousness, our Savior's Righteousness; because
(says he) I go to my Father, and ye see me no more.

The World not only rejected our Savior, as to his Office; but likewise
aspersed his Innocence, as to his Life and Conversation among Men. False
Witnesses did rise up, they laid to my charge things that I knew not, says
David Ps. xxxv. 11. Matt. xxvi. 59.
, speaking Prophetically of him. He was the Lamb of God, without blemish, and
without spot 1 Pet. i. 19.
. Who did no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth -- ii. 22. Isa. liii. 9.
. And yet how barbarously was he used by the Tongues of Men? His very best
Actions were censured, and cavil'd at. He was reckoned among the Transgressors
Luke xxii. 37. Isa. liii. 12.
: He bare the Sins and Iniquities of us all Ibid. verse. 6. and 12.
: He had his Grave with the Wicked Verse. 9.
: and he was at last cut off from the Earth, as though he had been guilty of
Crimes which nothing but his Blood could expiate.

Our Lord then tells his Disciples in the Text, that the H. Ghost at his Coming
would Convince the World of his Righteousness, or Innocence, which was then
Eclipsed, as it were, by the Calumnies and the Obloquies of Men; but would be
clearly manifested to all, and would shine out again to a perfect day, at the
Coming of the H. Ghost. But how should the H. Ghost Convince the World of our
Savior's Innocence? Because (says he) I go to my Father, and ye see me no
more. That is (...). D. Crysost. in loc.
, by publishing at his Descent, how that our Savior was ascended unto his
Father, so as we see him now no more on Earth, and urging This as the great
Argument of his most Righteous and Holy Life. And this the H. Ghost should do
by the Ministry of the Apostles, and the Mighty Power with which he should go
along with them in the whole Course of it; giving them full Evidence of the
Truth of these Things, and enabling them to convince others of them; and the
World should not be able to stand out against the Force of their Testimony.

How this was performed by the Apostles, at the Descent of the H. Ghost, we
have an ample Account in Scripture. This was so remarkably fulfilled, that on
the very Day on which the Spirit of God descended upon these Holy Men, viz. the
Day of Pentecost, the First Thing they did, was to Vindicate our Savior's
Innocence against the Jews, by these same Arguments of his Resurrection from
the Dead, and Exaltation at the Right Hand of God. For when great Multitudes
flock't to the place where they were assembled, it is said that Peter standing
up with the Eleven, spoke in this manner Acts ii. 22.
. Ye Men of Israel, hear these words; Jesus of Nazareth, a Man approved of God
among you, by Miracles, and Wonders, and Signs, which God did by him in the
midst of you, as ye your selves also know: Him being delivered by the
determinate Counsel and Foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, -- 23.
and by wicked hands have Crucified and Slain: -- 24.
Whom God has raised up, having loosed the pains of Death; because it was not
possible that he should be holden of it. -- 32.
This Jesus has God raised up, whereof we are all Witnesses. And being by the
Right Hand of God exalted, -- 33.
and having received of the Father the Promise of the H. Ghost, he has shed
forth this which ye now see and hear. Therefore let all the House of Israel
know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom ye have Crucified, both
Lord and Christ. Now, -- 36.
what was the Effect of this Discourse? Was any body convinced of our Savior's
Innocence by it? Read what follows Verse. 37.
, When they heard this, they were pricked in their hearts, and said unto Peter,
and to the rest of the Apostles, Men and Brethren, what shall we do? O the
Mighty Power of the Spirit of God! which brought the very Murderers of our
Lord, those who but few days before had so bitterly reviled him, and
persecuted him to the Death, to acknowledge his Innocence and their Guilt, and
come trembling and crying at the feet of his Apostles, Men and Brethren, what
shall we do?

Here indeed it was that the Blessed Apostles Conquered and overcame the World!
Wherever they went, this was the thing they constantly Preached, and enforced
on the Belief of Mankind: That it was no strange thing that a Good Man should
Suffer; That Jesus was a Righteous, and an Innocent Person; That the
Ignominious Death he had been put to, was no Argument at all of his Guilt, but
of the implacable Malice of his Enemies, whose horrible Hypocrisy drew from him
those sharp but just Reproofs that in Revenge made them seek his Destruction.
If any doubted it, they bade him consider how God had glorified him after
Death, crowned him with Honor in the Highest Heavens, who had been so ill
entreated, and so shamefully reproached upon Earth: Seated him on his own
Throne, far above all Angels, and Principalities, and Powers, and Mights, and
Dominions, and every Name Ephesians. i. 21.
, who had been despised and rejected of Men Isa. liii. 3.
. For it was most certain God had raised him from the Dead. They saw him, spoke
with him, eat and drank with him after his Resurrection many days Luke xxiv.
30.42. Joh. xxi. 12, etc.
: They touched him, and handled him Luke xxiv. 29. Matt. xxviii. 9.
: They thrust their hands into his Side, and they put their fingers into his
very Wounds Joh. xx. 25.27.
: So that they were sure it was a Real Body which they beheld and felt, and not
a Spirit or a Phantasm that deluded them; and that it was the very self-same
Body which had been dead and breathless before, that was now quick and alive
again; for another Body could not have had the Prints, and the Marks, and the
Scars upon it which they saw. As for his Ascension into Heaven, and his Session
at the Right Hand of God, it was as Certain and Undoubted as his Resurrection
from the Dead. For after he had remained on Earth forty days Acts i. 1, etc.
Luke xxiv. 50.
, both to assure them by many infallible Proofs that he was indeed risen, and
to instruct them in the Things pertaining to the Kingdom of God, he assembled
them on the Mount of Olives, where, after he had blessed them, whilst he was
yet speaking unto them, and they beheld him, he was taken up, and a Cloud
received him out of their sight. They saw him visibly mount up, and take his
Flight toward the Mansions of Eternal and Immortal Bliss. And though he was able
in a moment, in the twinkling of an Eye, to have passed from the Earth to the
Highest Heaven, he set out at first and marched up but slowly, so that they
stood gazing up a long while after him as he went up Acts i. 10, 11.
, that they might the better observe his Ascending. And lest it should be
thought that he had been only carried up in the Air So some Ancient Heretics
thought.
, and there left in some of those Wild and Unknown Regions, two Angels came
down in bright and shining Apparel (...). ibid.
, who most expressly assured them, that our Everlasting High Priest was entered
into the Holiest of all Heb. ix 8, 11, 12, 24.
, the Third and Inmost Heaven, where is the Throne of God on which he was to
sit, and that they should see him one day come down from thence in like manner
as they had now seen him taken up Acts i. 11.
, namely, when he should return to Judge the World. Thus did these Holy Men, by
the mighty Power of the Spirit of God, which strengthened them in an
extraordinary manner, upbraid the World with its Cruelty and Injustice to their
Lord, by showing how God had Justified him, tho Men had Condemned him. He was
indeed for a while of no reputation, says St. Paul Phil. ii. 7.
, and took upon him the form of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of Men:
And being found in fashion as a Man, -- 8.
he humbled himself, and became Obedient unto Death, even the Death of the
Cross. -- 9.
Wherefore God also has highly Exalted him, and given him a Name which is
above every Name: That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in
Heaven, and things in Earth, -- 10.
and things under the Earth; And that every Tongue should confess, that Jesus
Christ is the Lord, -- 11.
to the Glory of God the Father.

III. The Third and Last Thing that our B. Savior tells his Disciples the H.
Ghost, his PARACLET, would reprove or convince the World of at his Coming, is
Judgment, because the Prince of this World is judged.

Nothing had exposed the Son of God more to the Scorn and Derision of the
World, than that Unexampled Patience and Meekness with which he suffered all
the Indignities that were cast upon him, never making any other Returns than
Kindness to his greatest Enemies, and Prayers unto God for them. When he was
reviled, he reviled not again: When he suffered, he threatened not 1 Pet. ii. 23.
. He was oppressed, and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his Mouth: He was
brought as a Lamb to the Slaughter, and as a Sheep before her shearers is dumb,
so he opened not his Mouth Isa. liii. 7. Acts viii. 32.
. He did not strive, nor cry, neither did any man hear his voice in the
Streets. Mat. xii. 19. Isa. xlii. 2.
. This, the base and degenerous World imputed to his Impotence, and made it an
Argument of his Guilt, which was rather an Instance of his Love, and Goodness,
and Compassion to Men. Thou that destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in
three days, save thy self: If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross
Matt. xxvii. 40.
! were the insulting words of the Jews, mocking him whilst he lay laboring
under the Throws and the Agonies of Death. The Time of his Abode upon Earth was
indeed a Time of Sufferings: 'Twas the Hour of his Enemies, and the Power of
Darkness Luke xxii. 53.
. But when once God had exalted him, and taken him up unto himself, it was then
fit he should assert his Power and Godhead by his Judgments on the World, and
that being sat down at the Right Hand of God, his Enemies should be now made
his Footstool Psalm. cx. 2 Matt. xxii. 44.
. But the Heavens being to contain him until the Times of the Restitution of
all things Acts iii. 21.
, he could not come down presently again on the Earth, to execute Judgment in
Person upon the World that had rejected him. Therefore he sends the H. Ghost,
who, as his PARACLET, his Great Representative on Earth PARACLETUS Vicarius
Christi. Tertul. advers. Valent. Cap. xvi.
, avenges him on the Authors and Instruments of his Sufferings. Not one of them
escaped the Vengeance they deserved. Judas who betrayed him, had some time
before, with unconceivable Horror and Anguish of Mind, ended his wretched days
Mat. xxvii. 3. Acts i. 18.
. Herod lost his Tetrarchy, and, with his Incestuous Herodias, died in
Banishment Joseph. Antiq. Jud. lib. xviii. cap. 9.
. Pilate was put out of his Government, grew weary of his Life, and became his
own Murderer Eusebius. Hist. Eccl. lib. ii. cap. 7. Nic^ph. Callist. Eccl. Hist.
lib ii. cap. 10. Vid and quae ^bidem resert de Anna and Calpha, aliisque qui
and ipsi (ut loquitur) dignas variasque dederunt paenas, ejus quam Christo
intulerunt, iniquae and injustae Necis.
. But not to insist on Judgments upon Particular Persons, to whom God's
afflicting Providence are so variously and so unaccountably administered in
this World, what became rather of the Jews and Romans, those two great Nations
that had combined to put him to Death? They were destroyed by the Sword of his
Mouth Rev. xix. 15.
, and by the mighty Power of his Spirit 2 These. ii. 8.
. The Jews were his most deadly Enemies, but they soon felt the terrible
Effects of that direful Imprecation which they made upon themselves and their
Posterity, when they cried out at his Crucifixion, His Blood be on us, and on
our Children Mat. xxvii. 25.
! No sooner was the Lord ascended unto his Glory, and the PARACLET came down,
but the Christian Church prevailed over the Jewish Synagogue. Their Pompous
Temple was destroyed, the daily Oblation ceased Dan. ix. 27.
, The Abomination of Desolation stood in their Holy Place Matt. xxiv. 15.
, and the Divine Justice left not pursuing them till they were no longer a
Nation. As for the Romans, never was the Hand of God more remarkably seen in
any thing than in the Overthrow of their Empire Vid. D. August. de Civit. Dei.
and Osor. adv. Paganos, qui Argumentum hoc fuse, and operato prosequuntur.
, which, at the Birth of our Savior, was at the Height and Top of all its
Glory. All the Mighty Nations of the Earth were Tributary to it, and there was
an Universal Peace in all its Provinces. But after his Ascension, and the
Descent of the PARACLET, it began visibly to decline. The Rhine, the Danub, and
the Euphrates, which were before the Bounds of its Greatness, and over which it
was certain Death for any Barbarous Nation to pass, saw their Banks covered
with Swarms of a Savage and Unknown People, that spread over it like Locusts.
Rome it self, which was called the Eternal City Romulus Aeternae nondum
fundaverat Urbis Marnia. Tib. lib. ii. Eleg. 5. Inter haec Orphitus praefecti
potestate regebat Urbem Aeternam. Amm. Marcellin. lib. xiv.
, that Name of Blasphemy Roma, Aeterna cum dicitur, quae Temporalis est, nomen
est Blasphemiae. Prosper.
mentioned by St. John in his Revelation xiii. 1.
, which said I sit a Queen, I shall see no sorrow, I shall never be moved
xviii. 7.
; That proud City, the Mother of Spiritual Whoredoms, the Seat of all the
Idolatries and Abominations of the Earth, Drunk with the Blood of the Saints,
and of the Martyrs of Jesus xvii. 5, 6.
, was sacked by the Goths and Vandals.

But I hasten to that Judgment which our Lord tells his Disciples the H. Ghost,
his PARACLET, would more particularly execute on the Devil, the Chief Author of
his Death, and of his Sufferings. For it was he that had most bitterly
Persecuted him in the whole Course of his Life, tempting Judas to betray him,
animating Herod and Pilate, the Jews and Romans, to his Destruction.

Our Lord calls him here (...), The Prince of this World. So he had called him
twice before. Now is the Judgment of this World: Now shall the Prince of this
World be cast out Joh. xii. 31.
. And again, The Prince of this World comes, and has nothing in me -- xiv. 30.
St. Paul calls him yet somewhat more, even The GOD of this World 2 Cor. iv. 4.
. These were some of the Usual Names and Appellations by which the Devil was
Known and Understood among the Jews Vid. Doctiff. Lightf. Hor. Hebr. and
Thalmud. in Joan. Cap. xii. Verse. 31.
, who thereby intended to express that Empire which he had at that time over
the whole World, that little corner of it where they dwelt, Palestine, only
excepted. There indeed the true God was Confessed; for in Juda God was known,
his Name was great in Israel Ps. lxxvi. 1.
: But every where else, a dark Night of Idolatry and Paganism covered the face
of the Earth, and Wretched Men forsaking the God that made them Deuteronomy. xxxii.
15, 16, 17.
, paid Religious Service to the Devil Toto passim Terrarum Orb rerum
potiebatur Satanat, colebaturque ab cmnibus propemodum Gentibus and Nationibus.
Ubiq, extabant Delubra in illius Honorem crecta, ubique Arae, ubique
Sacrisitia, etc. Author. Comment. in Luc. adscript. Tito Bostrens. Ep. in
Auctuar. Biblioth. Patr. Tom. xi.
. He had Sumptuous and Magnificent Temples erected to his Honor: Glorious and
Goodly Shrines, which were every day thronged with vast Multitudes of
Worshippers of all Countries under Heaven. He had all the Rites and Ceremonies
of a Public and Solemn Ministration appointed him: Flamins and Priests ordained
to attend and to serve at his Altars; which sent up a Cloud of Incense toward
Heaven, and reek'd with the Blood of the Victims that were offered him: But
that Murderer Joh. viii. 44.
chiefly delighted in Human Sacrifices Eusebius. Praeparat. Evang. lib. ix. cap.
15. and alibi passim. Lactant. Divin. Instit. lib. i. cap. 21. Minuc. Foelix.
in Octav. Porphyr. (...). lib. ii. Sect. 53, 54, etc.
. Parents made him a Burnt Offering of their Children, and drowned the Cries of
the Dying Innocents with the Noise of Drums and Cymbals. He had Vestals and
Holy Virgins consecrated to him. He had Augurs, and Sybils, and Prophetesses
that spoke in his Name, and delivered his Oracles to Men, when they consuited
him about Future Events.

Our Lord then tells his Disciples in the Text, that the PARACLET at his Coming
would overthrow this Empire which the Devil had set up in the World; and this
Prediction was most exactly accomplished at the Descent of the H. Ghost. For
that Blessed Spirit coming down on the Apostles, armed them with such an
irresistible Power, that they soon led Captive the Prince of this World.
Wherever they went, by the Doctrine which they preached, and the mighty Works
which they did for the Proof and Confirmation of it, they destroyed his
Kingdom, and set up the Kingdom of Christ: They beat down his Idolatrous
Temples, and built Churches on their Ruins Eusebius. Praepar. Evang. lib. iv.
cap. 4.
: They overturned his Altars, and erected the Triumphant Cross: They struck
dumb his Oracles Id. ibid. lib. v. cap. 16, etc. Id. Demonst. Evang. lib. v. in
Proem. (...).
, and published aloud in all places the glad Tidings of the Gospel: and by that
means convinced the Unbelieving World that That impure Spirit, who had so long
reigned in the Earth, whose Nostrils had been fed with the Steams and Fumes of
so many Sacrifices, was now Judged and Condemned, and That Jesus who had been
Crucified, and who sat at the Right Hand of God, was the only God and Lord.

When the H. Ghost came down, and assisted the Apostles in Preaching up Jesus,
and the Power of his Resurrection Phil. iii. 10.
, then fell Satan as Lightning from Heaven Luke x. 18.
; who had said, I will exalt my Throne above the Stars of God, I will be like
the most High Isa. xiv. 12, 14.
. No sooner did the Light of the Gospel, by the Ministry of these Holy Men,
display its Beams over the benighted World, but the Powers of Darkness
vanished, and fled at its Glorious Appearance. The Devil could not bear that
Light, which discovered the Imposture he had kept the World under for so many
Ages.

How Absolute was he in the World before, when all the Mighty Kingdoms of the
Earth paid him Homage, and were daily prostrate at the foot of his Altars! Well
might he be called The Prince of this World, who Reigned on this side Heaven
with so uncontrolled an Empire, and to whom were offered the Vows, the
Supplications, and Prayers of the Idolatrous Nations. Some worshipped him under
one Name, some under another: but under those Various Names he had those Divine
Honors paid him that were due to the only Supreme God. For what were all those
False Divinities of the Gentile World but Impure Demons Ps. xcvi. 5. (...).
Septuag. Omnes Dii Gentium Daemonia. Vulgat.
, who nestl'd in those Unhallowed Places where those Divinities were Worshipped
Isti impuri Spiritus, sub Statuis, and Imaginibus consecratis, delitescunt; and
afflatu suo authoritatem quasi praesentis Numinis consequuntur; dum inspirantur
Vatibus, Fanis immorantur, Oracula efficient -- Minuc. Fael. in Octav. In eadem
fere verba S. Cyprian. lib. de Idolorum Vanit. (...), etc. Scriptor Respons. ad
Orthodox. apud Just. Martyr.
, and under those Various Names Iidem sunt Daemones quos vulgus Deos esse
opinatur; qui dejiciendi hominis causa, varios sibi cultus per diversa Regionum
condiderunt, mentitis tamen assumptisque Nominibus, ut fallerent. Lactant.
Divin. Instit. lib. iv. cap. 27. (...). Athenag. legate. pro Christianis. (...).
Scriptor Respons. ad Orthod. utsupr.
drew unto themselves the Adorations of Mankind? This is evident from
Scripture, where the Worship of Heathen Gods and Idols (that is, of those
Spiritual Invisible Intelligences, which the Idolatrous World thought to reside
in the Visible Objects of its Worship: in some Naturally, as in the Heavenly
and Elementary Bodies; in others, by the Virtue of Magical Consecrations and
Telesms Rapere ad se Daemonia, and omnem Spiritum immundum, per Consecrationis
obligamentum. Tertul. lib. de Idolol.
, as in Images, and the like Artificial Representations) is expressly termed a
Worship of Devils Revel. ix. 20. See also Lev. xvii. 7. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 17. ii
Ch^on. xi. 15. etc.
. Thus, the Apostat Israelites, who made their Children pass through the fire
to Molech, the Abomination of the Ammonites, and the same with Saturn, are said
to have Sacrificed their Sons and Daughters unto Devils Psalm. cvi. 37.
. The Things which the Gentiles sacrifice, says the Apostle plainly, they
sacrifice to Devils, and not to God 1. Cor. x. 20.
. And he calls the Table where they feasted after those Sacrifices, in honor
of their Gods, the Table of Devils Ibid. Verse. 21.
. But what is now become of all those False Divinities which swarmed in the
World when Our Savior came in it? They are gone! They are perished from the
Earth! The Coming of the H. Ghost, and the Preaching of the Gospel, has
convinced the World that they were indeed but Devils; and the Nations who once
worshipped them, (We among the rest) worship now the Great God, the Creator of
Heaven and Earth; and bow the Knees before the Lord Jesus, the Savior and the
Redeemer of the World Mr. Mede Disc. on Jerem. x. 11. page 193.
.

How successfully did the Holy Apostles (...), etc. D. Crysost. de Sto. Paulo
Apostolo. Hom. xxxii. in Epist. ad Romans
, and the First Preachers of Christianity, assisted by the Spirit of God, go up
and down the World erecting Churches on the Ruins of Idolatry! How did they
everywhere, by the Mighty Power that went along with them, shake the
Foundations of the Devil's Kingdom! How did they expose to view the Impious
Cheats, the Obscene Mysteries, the Ridiculous Pomps and Pageantries of his
Religion! How did they confound the Wisdom of the Philosophers, and triumphed
over all the Ministers of Paganism! In less than Forty Years time, there was no
Part of the then known and Habitable Earth, where the Gospel was not Preached;
and in few Years more the whole World in a manner became Christian. Wherever
Christianity appeared, the Devil was forced to quit his Idolatrous Temples: He
was awed by the Presence of the meanest Christian coming into them Cum Diis
suis immolant, si assistat aliquis Signatamfrontem gerens, sacra nullo modo
litant. -- Cum enim quidam nostrorum sacrificantibus Dominis assisterent,
imposito frontibus Signo, Deos eorum fugaverunt. Lactant. Divin. Instit. lib.
iv. cap. 27.
: His Service and Sacrifices grew into Contempt: His Priests withdrew into
Corners and Villages Inde Religio Pagana. Vid. Cl. Sarravij Epist. Posthum.
page 90. Superstitio ultima resedit in Pagis, ubi tenaci^re cultu Rustici sua
Numina adorabant. Certe Religio Pagana inde appellata, quod in Pagis adhuc
perseveraret, cum ab Urbibu^ jam esset exterminata.
: His forsaken Oratories were razed, or fell of themselves to the Ground; and
if some, for the Beauty or Convenience of their Structure, were thought worthy
to be preserved, they became the Mansions of the H. Ghost, and the Name of
Jesus was Invocated in them. When a Strong Man armed keeps his Palace, his
Goods are in Peace, says our B. Savior, foretelling this Destruction of the
Devils Temples; But when a Stronger than he shall come upon him, and overcome
him, he takes from him all his Armor wherein he trusted, and divides his
Spoils Luke xi. 21, 22.
.

The Ceasing of Oracles, which at the time of our Savior's appearance began to
be very rare, but were not perfectly Silenced till the Descent of the PARACLET,
and in proportion to the Progress which Christianity made in the World, is a
Famous Instance of what the H. Ghost did then in it: Viz. scattered those Evil
Spirits that abused the Credulity and Simplicity of Mankind, chased away the
Father of Lies Joh. viii. 44.
, that he should deceive the Nations no more Rev. xx. 3.
. This I observe again, because it was then much taken notice of, not only by
Christians Vid. supra.
, but by the very Heathens themselves Cicer. de Divinat. Lib. ii. Porphyr. apud
Eusebius. Praep. Ev. Lib. V. passim.
; who were amazed at that unusual Silence, and wondered the Gods did not answer
their Worshippers as formerly. Plutarch, we know, wrote a Book about it (...).
Inter Opusc. Moral.
.

Now, how the World has been convinced by this remarkable Judgment which our
Lord after his Ascension executed on the Devil, the Prince of this World, by
sending the PARACLET, I think I need not lose time to show you: It being That
which has most evidently demonstrated that That Jesus must needs be a Great and
a Mighty God who has thus overcome the Devil by the Force of his Spirit, and
has wrested the Worldly Power and Empire out of his hands. It Is that which has
opened the Eyes of Men, that were before blinded with Ignorance and Prejudice,
and turned them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God
Acts xxvi. 18.
. It Is That which has set up Christ's Throne in the World, and made those that
were before the Devil's most Zealous Votaries, become Converts, renounce him
(as we do still) at the Sacred Fonts, and Profess themselves the faithful
Soldiers and Servants of our Lord The Ancient Form of Baptism.
. Whereby you see how exactly our Savior's Promise to his Disciples has been
fulfilled. Nevertheless, I tell you the Truth; It is expedient for you that I
go away: For if I go not away, the PARACLET will not come unto you; but if I
depart, I will send him unto you. And when he is come, he will reprove the
World of Sin, and of Righteousness, and of Judgment: Of Sin, because they
believe not on me; Of Righteousness, because I go to my Father, and yet see me
no more; Of Judgment, because the Prince of this World is judged.

The Consideration of these Things, I fear, has carried me too far. For who can
sufficiently repeat the Mighty Changes which the H. Ghost wrought in the World
at his Coming? the Glorious Triumphs of our Lord over all his Enemies on Earth,
after his Exaltation at the Right Hand of his Father? But I must forbear.
Therefore to Conclude,

You have heard that the End of the Coming of the PARACLET was to do these
Three Things. I. To Vindicate the Truth of our Savior's Mission, as to his
Office; and to show that he was the very Christ, sent from God, and therefore
that it is a very great Sin, not to believe on him. II. To Vindicate his
Righteousness or Innocence, as to his Life and Conversation among Men, from the
unjust Calumnies and Reproaches of the World: and That by showing how God had
raised him from the Dead, taken him up from the Earth, and seated him next to
his Divine Majesty in Heavenly Places, which it is not conceivable God would
have done, had he deserved the ill Usage he received among Men. III. To avenge
him on all his Enemies, bring them like so many condemned Captives at the Foot
of his Throne, and slay them before his face, who would not have this Great
King to Reign over them Luke xix. 27
; especially to avenge him on the Devil, The Prince of this World, by
overthrowing his Kingdom, casting him out of his Idolatrous Temples, and
causing the Name of Jesus to be Magnified in the World. You have heard how
eminently All these Things have come to pass. We have heard with our ears, O
God! Our Fathers have told us, what Work thou did in their days, in the Time
of old Ps. xliv. 1.
!

Now, the best Use that we can make of this Discourse, is, to be confirmed by
it in the Belief of Christianity, that Blessed Religion by which alone we can
hope to be Eternally Saved: That is to say, in the Belief of Jesus, his Life,
his Death, his Doctrine, his Miracles, his Resurrection, his Ascension into
Heaven, the Power he has now over the Quick and the Dead, and the Final
Judgment he will accordingly pass and execute on All at the Last Day, when he
shall come to reward every Man according to his Works Matt. xvi. 27.
. For these are the Things that I call Christianity, all others being but
Superstructures on this Great Foundation. The World can have now no Plea for
its Infidelity, if it does not believe in this Jesus, and in this Religion,
after the Truth of it has been attested by so many Instances of a Divine Power
going along with it, and setting it up against all Oppositions of Devils, and
of Men. And this I mention, because I know how many there are who do really
question the Truth of our most Holy Faith in this Skeptical and Degenerate Age.
We abound with certain Vain and Frothy Men; who are not afraid to Scoff openly
at Christianity; and These would pass in the World for the Great Masters of
Reason, Men of true Latitude of Thought, who will not be enslaved by Opinions
grounded only on the Report of Priests, that tell them I know not what Stories
of one Jesus, and the Mighty Works done by him, because it is their Trade to
Preach up these Things, and their Interest to have them Believed. It Is strange
indeed, that this Spirit of Infidelity should still possess the World, after
all that God has done to Convince it, and to ascertain the Truth of Our Holy
Religion! God no sooner made Man, but he Revealed himself to him. He appeared
frequently to the Patriarchs in the First Ages of the World. Under the Law, he
gave a very clear Knowledge of himself to Mankind, inspiring Prophets, and
sending them in his Name. But in these last Days, he has spoken unto us by his
own Son, who being the Brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his
Person Heb. i. 2, 3.
, came down on the Earth, and made himself like unto one of us, that he might
more familiarly converse among Men. He fulfilled all the Prophecies that had
been given many Ages before, as Marks to know him by when he came: He spoke so
as no Man ever spoke Joh. vii. 46.
: And he sealed the Truth of his Doctrine by such Miracles, as none could do
but He that had all the Powers of Nature subject to his Command. And when he
had finished what he came to do on the Earth, when by a Free and Voluntary
Oblation of himself upon the Cross he had made Atonement for the Sins of the
whole World, he rose gloriously from the Dead, and in the Sight of many
Withnesses was taken up into Heaven. Presently after his Ascension he sent the
PARACLET, to confirm all that he had said or done before. That Blessed Spirit
came down, and wrought New Signs and Wonders by the hands of his Apostles. They
spoke with Tongues, and in the Name of Jesus they cast out Devils. They were
endued with such Wisdom and Virtue from above, that they drew after them the
Admiration of the World, the Heathens crying out That the Gods were come down
on the Earth in the likeness of Men Acts xiv. 11.
. The Effects of this Miraculous Power of the H. Ghost accompanying them, were
in very little time seen throughout all the World. The Devil's Kingdom was
overthrown, his Oracles were silenced, the Temples of the Idols were
demolished, Paganism was beat down, and Christianity prevailed wherever it
appeared. These are plain Matters of Fact, delivered down to us by Credible
History, and by the Constant and Universal Tradition of all Ages. Now, if Men
will not be Convinced by these Things, what can God do more to Convince them?
They that can doubt after this, neither would they be persuaded, I do not say
though one rose from the Dead Luke xvi. 31.
, for That our Lord has done, and a great deal more, for their Conviction,
but, tho a Voice should speak unto them from Heaven.

And here I cannot conceal my Thoughts, that Infidelity, or a Denial of the
Truths of Christianity now, that is, since the Descent of the H. Ghost, I very
much suspect to be that tremendous Sin and Blasphemy against the H. Ghost,
which our Lord pronounces to be Unpardonable in this World, and in that which
is to come. I am confident, that if That Sin can be committed now, it must be
This; or, I know not what it is. I say unto you, all manner of Sin and
Blasphemy shall be forgiven unto Men, says our B. Savior; But the Blasphemy
against the H. Ghost shall not be forgiven unto Men. And whosoever speaks a
word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever speaks
against the H. Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this World,
neither in the World to come Mat. xii. 31, 32.
. Our Lord here states a Difference betwixt Sinning against the Son of Man
(that is, against himself) and Sinning against the H. Ghost. They that were
Guilty of Sin against the Son of Man, were the Jews, who lived in our Savior's
time, saw his Miracles, and yet did not believe on him. And tho this no doubt
was a very great Sin, nevertheless upon Supposition of the (...) and
Acknowledgment of him, which (...)sonably be expected from those fur^^^^ (...)
that God was yet to make use of (...) ^^^^iction, had still room left for
Pardon. For, when the Lord said this, he was not yet Risen, he was not yet
Ascended into his Glory, and the PARACLET was not yet come down. All these
Great Evidences of Christianity were still wanting, to leave them without
excuse. And doubtless many were Convinced by them, that did not at first
believe. But They are Guilty of Sin and Blasphemy against the H. Ghost, who
have lived since the Manifestation of that Blessed Spirit, and have heard of
all the Mighty Things he has wrought in the World to attest the Truths of
Christianity, and yet continue in their Unbelief. This, our Lord declares to be
Unpardonable, because Pardon presupposes Repentance and Faith in our Savior;
but Faith must proceed from a Conviction of the Mind; and They whom these
Things will not Convince, can never be Convinced: Because, since the Descent of
the H. Ghost, no New Revelation is to be looked for, all Extraordinary
Dispensations are ceased; The Sending of the H. Ghost was the Last that God had
resolved to use for the Conviction of Men, and we must expect no other Cameron.
Myrothec. Evang in Loc. supr. Alloquitur Dominus Pharisaeos, qui Patris
Oeconomiam, quae ante Christi Adventum vigebat, insuper habuerant: suamitem
Blasphemantes spreverant. Ait ergo, licet Oeconomias illas, quamdiu duravere,
contempserint, esse tamen spem veniae sub Tertia, quae Spiritui Sancto
tribuitur. Sancti vero Spiritus Oeconomiam si prosequantur odio, sublatam esse
omnem veniaespem; quia Quarta Oeconomia minime expectari debet.
. Therefore They that doubt still after this, must doubt on for ever; Their
Case is desperate; and they must be abandoned to their own perverse and
Reprobate Sense. GOD, in his Infinite Mercy, preserve us all from Hardness of
Heart, and from doing despite unto the Spirit of Grace Heb. x. 29.
. AMEN.

THE END.

