THE PUBLIC WORSHIP, OR, The Worship of God. Baptism, and Sacrament, (so
called) according to Gods appointment, or as hereafter appears. And
concerning coming to the Church according to Scripture. And also a Prophecy of
Christ, in fulfilling, and how it is against the Law of the Land to banish
Christians for the Service and Worship of God. Together with an Epistle to
Friends.

Written in the Year 1664. by R. F.

Printed in the Year 1664.

CONCERNING The Worship of GOD, Baptism and Sacrament. (So called)
And coming to Church, as hereafter follows.
AS there is one only true God, who is a Spirit, so there is one worship of
God, under the new covenant and gospel dispensation: John 4.23.24.
which is the worship of God alone, and is to be performed in spirit and in
truth, according to the mind of the Lord, who is to be worshipped, and as there
is one body, Ephesians. 4.3.4.
and one spirit, so are the true spiritual believers and worshippers of God,
the Father in spirit and truth, (which is the true public worship of God,)
called in one hope of their calling, Colos. 1.20.21.22.23.24.25.26.27.
and they are to keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace, or in
Christ Jesus; who is the covenant of peace, and the hope of glory, whereunto
they are called, even into him, who is the hope of their calling, to whom God
does make known what is the riches of the glory, of the great mystery of
Godliness, which is Christ in them, the hope of glory.

And as there is one spiritual Lord, and one spiritual Faith, so there is one
spiritual Baptism, Ephesians. 4.5, 6, 7.
amongst them that are the caled of God, the Father of them all, who is above
all, and through all, and in them all, who gives grace to every one of them,
according to the measure of the gift of Christ Jesus; 1 Cor. 12.12.13.
for as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of that one
body being many, are one body, so also is Christ, for by one spirit we are all
baptized into one body, and have been all made to drink into one spirit: so
that as the Saints and true spiritual believers, are baptized by one spirit
into Christ Jesus, John 6.32.48.49.50.51.
they also do unite and mere spiritually in him, even to eat and drink
spiritually together in a sweet spiritual communion, and he is bread and wine
our souls nourishment, and feeding to them who are to live in him, and feed
spiritually upon him, for he is the bread of life come down from Heaven for
Immortal souls to eat of, and live for ever; this is the bread that comes
down from heaven which a man may eat of, and not dye eternally. Labor not for
the meat which perishes, but for that meat which endures unto everlasting
life. John 6.27.
Which the Son shall give unto you, for him has God, the Father sealed, for
the bread of God is he which came down from heaven and gives life unto the
world. And Jesus said unto them I am the bread of life, he that comes to me
shall never hunger, and he that believes on me shall never thirst, John 6. 35,
who then would not but come unto Christ, that their fouls might eat and drink
spiritually in him, and be satisfied with his virtue and sweetness that they
might live for ever, and not dye eternally, and as many as are baptized into
Christ do put on Christ, and they are all one in him, and such are Children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus, and are heirs according to the promise, Gal.
3.26.27.28.39.

And for as much as to be a Christian and member of the Church of Christ,
according to the constitutions and Cannons of the Church of England is to be
Baptized, and to be Baptized is to enter into a Covenant with God, by promise
and vow made unto God before many witnesses to be perfect and free from sin.
First, In forsaking the Devil and all his works. Secondly, In keeping Gods Holy
will and Commandments, and walking in the same for term of life, and also to
be regenerate and born again. Seeing then that it is so, ought not the Priests
to perform to the People what they have promised to them, and ought not they to
perform unto God what they promise and vow unto him, and if the Priests cannot
regenerate any, they cannot baptize any; and, until they can regenerate them,
ought they not to excuse the People, for not bringing their Children unto them,
and if they be not regenerated, they are not baptized according to the
Constitutions and Cannons as aforesaid, and if they do not forsake the Devil
and all his works, and keep Gods holy will and Commandments, and walk in the
same all the days of their lives, arid be not regenerated, how then are they
Church members? if they be not such how are they the Children of God? and
inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, confider well of it.

Concerning the Sacrament as now it is by many so called.
And concerning the Passover, there was and is a Spiritual Feast to be kept
amongst the Saints and true Christians, for Christ is their Passover, who is
sacrifized for them: 1 Cor. 5.7.8.
Purge out therefore the old Leaven that ye may be a new lump, ye are
unleavened, for even Christ our Passover is sacrificed for us; therefore let us
keep the Feast not with old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of malice and
wickedness, but with the Unleavened bread of Sincerity and Truth. 1 Cor. 5. So
that as Christ is the Saints Passover, and is Sacrificed for them, they are to
keep a spiritual feast, that is to say the Feast of Un-leavened bread, and the
bread they are to keep this feast with is the Unleavened bread of sincerity and
truth, and Christ who is the Saints Passover, is the Unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth, or the bread of life come down from Heaven for them to
keep the Feast with, and as he is the bread which the Saints are to break, or
administer and feed spiritually upon, so he is the wine or water of life to
refresh souls spiritually withal, for he is the spiritual Vine, and as wine
is the virtue of the Vine, so the virtue of Christ who is the true spiritual
Vine is as spiritual wine to the souls of the Saints, for their refreshment and
great consolation; and if to receive Christ Jesus be to receive the
signification and substance of the word Sacrament, and so in effect to receive
the Sacrament, then we have receive and do receive Christ Jesus, therefore we
have and do in effect receive the Sacrament, because we receive the
signification thereof as aforesaid.

Concerning coming to the Church.
And concerning the Church, it consists of Regenerate ones, who live up to a
righteousness of Faith toward God, and a righteousness of life both toward
God and man. First, In forsaking the Devil and all his works, and, Secondly, In
keeping Gods holy will and conmandements, and walking in the same all the days
of their lives, being such as are governed and are sanctified by the spirit of
God, and are of the household and family of God, and this is according to the
constitutions and Cannons of the Church of England, then to meet together in
point of Religion and worship of God with them, that live up to a
righteousness of Faith toward God, and a righteousness of life both toward
God and man, who are regenerated or born again, and are of the household and
family of God, who are also sanctified arid governed by the spirit of God, is
to come to the Church, though they cannot meet in point of Religion and worship
with them that are not such as aforesaid, and with such as abovesaid we meet
with all in point of Religion and Worship of God, therefore we come to the
Church and worship of God as aforesaid.

And acording to the Scriptures, the Church is in God the Father of out Lord
Jesus Christ, but Steeple Houses, or Parish-meeting places are not in God, how
then are they Churches, and why are people presented and punished, for not
coming to Steeple Houses or Parish-meeting-places, seeing they are not Churches
according to the Scriptures, for Paul and Silvanius and Timothyus, write to the
Church of the Thessalonians, which is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ; but in writing to the Church in God, they did not write to
Steeple Houses or Parish-meeting-places, therefore people may be in the Church,
and come to the Church according to the Scriptures, though they come not to the
Parish-meeting-places, 1 Thessalonians, 1. and 2. Thessa. 1. Again Christ is
declared in Scripture to be the head of his body the Church, so that the Church
is the body of Christ according to the Scripture, Ephesians. 1.22.23. Ephesians.
2.19.20.21.22.
but Steeple Houses or Parish-meeting-places are not the body of Christ, how
then can they be said to be Churches, whereby it is evident that people may be
members of the Church of Christ, and come to the Church according to the
Scripture, though they come not to the Parish-meeting-places, 5. Ephe.
23.24.25.26.27.32.

And as concerning the Temple of God, 1 Cor. 6.15.16.17.18.19.20.
the Saints body under the new covenant and Gospel dispensation are said to be
the Temple of the Holy Ghost for God to dwell in through the spirit, and the
Saints are said to be as a spiritual building fitly framed in Christ Jesus, and
do grow together in him to an holy Temple in the Lord, 2 Cor. 6.16.
in whom they are also builded together for an habitation of God through the
spirit, and this is according to the Scriptures, 2. Ephe. 19, 20, 21, 22. so
that to meet with the Saints of God is to come, to the Temple of God according
to Scripture.

And concerning the house of God according to the Scripture, and under the new
Covenant and Gospel dispensation, the Holy Brethren who are partakers of the
heavenly calling, who hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope
firm unto the end, are declared to be the house of God, and Moses verily was
faithful under the Law in all his house as a servant, for a Testimony of those
things which was to be spoken after, but Christ as a Son over his own house
(under the Gospel) whose house are we if we hold fast the confidence and the
rejoicing of the hope firm to the end, according to that of the Apostle to the
Hebrews, Heb. 3. And as concerning the meetings of the people of God called
Quakers, in meeting together with them that are born of God, and are governed
and sanctified by the spirit of God, in point of Religion and Worship of God,
according to Gods appointment, or agreeable to Gods holy Will and Commandments,
ought they not to be owned, allowed of, countenanced and tolerated by the
Episcopal and Protestant Priests, Rulers, and People, because they have
covenanted with God, and caused others to covenant with him by promise and vow
made unto God before many witnesses, to keep Gods holy will and Commandments
and walk in the same all the days of their lives. And therefore for us and
others to live up to a righteousness of life toward God and man, and in
meeting together according to Gods appointment, and walking answerable to Gods
holy will and Commandments; and, continuing therein, is according to the
fundementalls of the Episcopal and Protestant Religion: And for so doing we
ought not to be fined, presented, or punished either by Eclesiasticall sensure,
or Temporal punishment, but rather to be freed and clearly acquitted therefrom,
to all intents, constructions and purposes whatsoever, if they regard their
promise and vow made unto God as aforesaid.

A Prophecy of Christ, which was Prophesied above sixteen hundred years since,
has been and is now in fulfilling, etc.
GOd is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in spirit and in
truth, for the Father seeks such to worship him, John 4.23, 24. And because
God is a spirit, he will have his people to be spiritually minded: that they
may mind the things of the spirit, Romans 8.5, 6. Seeing that God is a spirit,
and requires his people to worship him in spirit: why should they be compelled
from the worship of God in spirit, or punished, and persecuted, if they do not
forsake the way and worship of God, to follow the Ceremonies and Inventions of
Men? what cause is there for it? but that the Scriptures may be fulfilled, is
this come to pass. For Christ Jesus has said to the Disciples, and true
Believers in him, they shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the time
comes, that whosoever kills you will think that he does God good service.
And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father,
nor me, John 16.2, 3.

It is evident, and that by the Scriptures, or prophecy of Christ. First that
the Disciples of Christ, and true believers in him, shall be excommunicated, or
put out of the synagogues. Secondly, that the believers in Christ, and
worshippers of God the Father in spirit and truth, shall be in great danger of
their lives, for says Christ in his prophecy, John 16.2. They shall
excommunicate you, or put you out of the synagogues, and that part of the
prophecy of Christ is fulfilled, and now in fulfilling: Yea the time comes
that whosoever kills you, will think he does God service, and is not that
part of Christ's prophecy also near at hand to be fulfilled. Two things are
very observable from hence. First, That the Saints and Believers in Christ
shall be excommunicated, or put out of the sinagogues by Enemies or Strangers
to Christ. Secondly, That after excommunication, or being put out of the
sinagogues by such, they shall be in great danger of their Lives.

If it be asked, who they are that shall deal thus hardly and cruelly with the
Saints and Believers in Christ: as First, to excommunicate them, or cast them
out of the synagogues, and after endanger their lives? It is answered in the 16
Chapter of John 2 and 3 verses, by our Lord Jesus Christ, who has said, these
things will they do unto you; and why? The reason given by the Lord Jesus is
this, because (says he) they have not known the Father nor me.

It is evident therefore, and that by the Scriptures, or prophecy of Christ,
that ignorant men, who know neither God, nor Christ, but are strangers unto
them, will deal so hardly, and cruelly with the Saints, and true believers in
Christ, as to Excommunicate them, or put them out of the synagogues, and after
endanger their lives, by possessing the ignorant and ungodly with a false
confidence: that to kill the Saints under the notion of Heretics, is good
service and done for the glory of God. But these things the Saints have been in
expectation of, and they come, not untold of by Christ, nor unlooked for by
them, for these things have I told you (said Christ) that when the time shall
come, ye may remember that I told you of them, John 16.4.

And in the days of the Prophet Isaiah, the Lord had a broken hearted People,
who trembled at the word of the Lord: for which cause they were hated, and
excommunicated, or cast out of Church fellowship: and they that hated them, and
cast them out, pretended the glory of God in that act of excommunication, or
casting them out as aforesaid; but the Lord sent his Prophet with a Message
that included two things. First, Gods owning of that broken hearted people, who
trembled at his word, when they were excommunicated, or cast out by their
pretended Brethren, who covered their act of excommunicatition, or casting them
out with the pretense of bringing glory to God. And secondly Gods dislike unto,
and displeasure against them: that so excommunicated or cast them out from
amongst them saying, hear the word of the Lord, all ye that tremble at his
word, your Brethren that hated you, and cast you out for my names sake: said,
Let the Lord be glorified, but he shall appear to your joy, and they sall be
ashamed, Isa. 66.5.

First, It is to be observed, that God promised to appear to them that were
Excommunicated, or cast out, and not only appear, but he also promised to
appear to their joy. And if to their joy, that were so Excommunicated, or cast
out, then for their encouragement, and for the owning of them. And Secondly, It
is to be observed that God promised to appear to them that did Excommunicate,
or cast them out, but it should be to their shame; and if to their shame, then
not to the owning of them in their Act of Excommunication, or as aforesaid.
They that are Excommunicated, or cast out because of their love, and
faithfulness to the Lord, need not to be ashamed, though they that hate them,
and cast them our, account them heretics, and pretend they do it for the Glory
of God. Their Excommunicating, or casting of them out cannot hinder God for
owning of them, nor for appearing to them for their joy. For he has promised
to appear to them for their joy, that are so hated and cast out, and to the
shame of them that so hates them, and casts them out as aforesaid.

Who are they that Christ said, the Ignorant, who know not God, should
Excommunicate, or put out of the Synagogues and after endanger their live? John
16.2.3. I answer, First, They are such as are beloved of Christ, and commanded
to continue in his love. John 15.9. Secondly, they are such as are in Christ
Jesus, as branches in a Vine, who are purged that they may bring forth fruit
unto God. John 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Thirdly, they are such as are the friends of
Christ, who manifest their love to him, by abiding in him, and keeping his
Commandments, John 15.4, 14.

For what cause do they Hate, Persecute, Excommunicate and endanger the lives
of the Friends of Christ, who abide in him, and keep his Commandments. I
answer, First, because they are chosen of Christ. Secondly, Because they are
ordained, that they should go and bring forth fruit unto God. John 15.16.
Thirdly, Because they abide in the Doctrine of Christ, and love one another, as
he has commanded, John 15.17. Fourthly, Because they are not of the World, but
are chosen out of the World, as Christ has declared and said, John 15.19.

Are these the causes, why the people of God reproachfully called Quakers,
together with the Saints and Believers in Christ, are hated, persecuted, and
Excommunicated? I answer, Yea, these are the very causes, because they abide in
Christ and keep his commands.

For if they should depart from Christ, and go into the spirit of the World,
and cease being Godly and Righteous, and learn to be deboyst and wicked, and
comply with the spirit of the World in its ways and Worships, then persection
against them would be at an end, and cease.

And if they should daily err, and go astray from the ways of God, and follow
the devices and desires of their own hearts, and cease bringing forth fruit
unto God, disobey the Commands of Christ, and daily offend against Gods Holy
Laws, and be miserable sinners, then persecution would cease.

Who are they that are the haters and persecutors of the Friends of Christ's
Saints and Believers in him? I answer,

First, They are the World.

Secondly, They are such as are haters of Christ, for says he, If the World
hate you ye know that it hated me before it hated you, John 15.18.

Thirdly, They are such as are of the same nature and spirit which they were
of, that persecuted Christ, who has said by way of remembrance, That the
Servant is not greater then the Lord, if they have persecuted me they will also
persecute you, John 15.20.

Fourthly, They are such as know not God, as Christ has said, all these things
will they do for my names sake, because they know not him that sent me, John
15.21.

And they hated Christ without a cause, John 15.25. So do they hate his friends
without a cause, for if they could depart from him, and disobey his commands,
and enter into the spirit of the World again, and be one with the world in
profaneness and will worship, then persecution would cease, as Christ has
said; If ye were of the World, the World would love his own, but because I have
chosen you out of (the profaneness, will worship and spirit of) the World,
therefore the World hates you, John 15.19.

And inasmuch as the friends of Christ are hated without a cause, there is no
just cause, why the Saints and Believers in Christ should be hated and
persecuted: But as then he that was born after the flesh, persecuted him that
was born after the spirit, even so it is now, Gal. 4.29.

But as then he that is born after the flesh, had no right nor authority from
God given to persecute him that was born after the spirit, no more has he now.
For they that are in the flesh cannot please God, Romans 8.8. But persecutors are
in the flesh, therefore persecutors cannot pelase God, neither have they that
are in the flesh any right given from God to persecute them that are in the
spirit, in whom the righteousness of the Law is fulfilled, even in them who
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit, as it is written, Romans 8.1, 2,
3, 4.

1. The true spiritual Christians, who are regenerate, and born after the
spirit: they are the true believers in Christ; and worshippers of God the
Father, in spirit, who are sought and taught of the Lord according to his word.

Therefore, there is no reason why they should be hated, and persecuted:
neither has the spirit of the world any right or authority given unto it from
God, to hate and persecute them, that are regenerate and born of God. For they
that are regenerate and born of God, are the household and family of God, and
have access unto him, by the spirit through his son, as it is written, Ephesians,
2.18.19.

2. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, because they
have crucified the flesh, with the affections and lusts, and do live in the
spirit, and walk in the spirit, and bring forth the fruits of the spirit,
against which there is no law, Gal. 5.22, 23, 24, 25.

For the law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made them free from the
Law of Sin and Death: and the righteousness of the law is fulfilled in them,
Rom, 8.1, 2. etc.

And if there be no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who have
forsaken the flesh, and are entered into the Spirit and life of truth to walk
after the spirit, and worship the Father therein, being dead unto sin, and
alive unto God, through Christ Jesus our Lord, Romans 6.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. What
right reason can any one give for the haring, reviling, persecuting or
banishing of them: Who shall lay any thing to the change of Gods Elect, seeing,
it is God that justifies them, Who is he that condemns? seeing, it is Christ
that dyed, who is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, an
Intercessour, who also makes intercession for us, Romans 8.32, 33.34.

3. They are the true spiritual Christians, and Worshippers of God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, who being born again of water and the spirit are
ingrafted, or begotten into Christ, the seed and power of God, and are
therefore declated new Creatures and Children of God.

Why then should such be hated, persecuted, excommunicated, or banished? What
right reason can be showed for the fame? for we know that whosoever is born of
God sins not, but he that is begotten of God keeps himself, and that
wicked one touches him not: and we know that we are of God, and the whole
world lies in wickedness: and we know that the Son of God is come, and has
given us an understanding that we may know him that is true, and we are in him
that is true: even in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God, and life
eternal, 1 John 5.18, 19, 20.

Lie not one to another, seeing you have put of the old man with his deeds: and
have put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the Image of him
that created him; where there is neither Greek, nor Jew, Barbarian, Scythian,
bond or free, but Christ is All, and in All, Colos. 3.9, 10, 11. As ye
therefore have received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him, rooted and
built up in him, and established in the Faith:as ye have been taught,
abounding therein with thanksgiving Colos. 2.6, 7. Therefore if any man be in
Christ Jesus, he is a new creature 2 Cor. 5.17, 18. Behold, what manner of love
is this, that the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be called the Sons
of God: therefore the world knows us not, because it knew him not, 1 John
3.1. Be ye therefore followers of God, as dear children, and walk in love, as
Christ also has loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and
sacrifice to God; for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.1, 2. And because ye
are sons, God has sent forth the spirit of his Son into your hearts crying,
Abba Father, wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son, and if a son, then
an heir of God through Christ, Gal. 4.6, 7,

4. They are the true spiritual Christians, believers in Christ, and the true
worshippers of God the Father in spirit, and in truth, who being regenerate,
are sanctified through the word and are in Christ Jesus as branches in the
Vine. And such ought not to be hated and persecuted by them that profess
themselves Christians: for the kindness and love of God our Savior toward
man, appeared not by works of righteousness which we have done; but according
to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the
holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Savior:
that being justified by his grace, we should be made heirs according to the
hope of eternal life Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. John 15.

5. They that are in Christ Jesus, as branches in the Vine, bearing fruit, they
are purged that they may bring forth more fruit, John 15.1, 2.

And they that are so in Union with Christ, as branches in him, and purged, or
made clean through the word, that they may abide in him, and he in them, they
bring forth much fruit unto God by virtue of that union, for as the branch
cannot bear fruit of it self, except it abide in the vine, no more can true
Christians and worshippers of God the Father in spirit, except they abide in
Christ Jesus, and grow up in him, John 15.3, 4, 5. And they that are such, and
do so, ought not to be persecuted, or banished by them that profess love to the
Lord Jesus: no just cause by them can be showed for it: and the Heathen, who
know not God, they have no right to do it.

And by the Law of the Land no man can be banished our of his native Country,
but either by Authority of Parliament, Cook. 2. part, inst. fol. 47.
or in case of Abjuration for Felony by the Common Law, says Cook upon Magna
Chartafol. 47. But it is not Felony to worship the Lord: nor it is not enacted
and declared by Authority of Parliament, that people shall be banished for the
service and worship of God: therefore Christians ought not to be banished for
their love and faithfulness unto Christ Jesus as aforesaid.

An Epistle to Friends.
DEar Friends and Brethren, and Sisters, begotten and brought forth by the
Immortal word, who are of the family of the heavenly love; which is the
household of Faith, and so of the eternal God, and all who are in any measure
acquainted with him, dwell in the power by which you are brought forth, as a
people for his praise, in these perilous times, which is a trying age, in which
we are born and brought forth; for the Lord to be honored and glorified by us,
that you may keep in pure innocence and uprightness of heart, to appear amongst
men: for the Lord to bear your testimony in love and faithfulness for God, even
in the life and power by which you are brought forth, and borne up into the
Spirit of the Lamb, to bear witness for him unto his own, and against that
which is not his generation and Birth or offspring: and that you may appear
for God, you are to appear in the spiritual life and power of God, to go out
unto and meet with that which is of God: and is desiring after him, to be with
him, and to live upon him, live you therefore in the life and power by which
you are the Lords, that you may reach forth from him unto his own begetting,
that by and with the same power which ministers and gives in of the heavenly
treasure and virtue unto your souls; (for their refreshing and consolation) you
may reach forth of that treasure and virtue after a spiritual manner, unto the
begettings and gatherings of God in others.

For you know that spirit and life in the outgoings from God, as from a
Fountain sends forth streams of refreshings, by reaching forth, conveying, and
carrying along with them in a spiritual dispensation, divine power, life,
virtue, and heavenly sweetness, to the taste and feeling of the senses of the
Immortal babes, for their refreshment and great consolation, to the rejoicing,
raising, reviving, and gladding their spirits.

So with the same virtue and heavenly power by which you are refreshed, you may
be a refreshing, and by the same power and spiritual consolation, by which you
are, and often have been inwardly raised, revived, strengthened, and comforted
in heart and soul: you may be as strength to the weak, and for the raising up
of that which lies low, and for the reviving and comforting of it, that so you
may go out in the springings up and outgoings of life, after a spiritual way
and manner: attended with heavenly matter, for the refreshing and comforting of
that which the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven into your hearts, goes out unto
for the Refreshing and strengthing of.

So dear babes and Lambs dwell in the green pasture of life: that you may sit
down together in a heavenly communion with God, in the Covenant of Grace, and
in all your meetings together, as the worshippers of God, the Father of
spirits: you will meet with God in a sweet heavenly communion at the Table of
the Lord, where his heavenly Body is discerned: weh is full of light, life,
glory power, and virtue: that you may see him showing unto your spirits the
glorious light of his heavenly countenance, for the rejoicing and gladding your
hearts, and souls, and spirits, which is and will be more unto you then all
outward riches.

And mind your continuation and abiding with God, even in the principles of
God: which are heavenly principles, full of heavenly light of life, power,
wisdom, counsel, discerning, understanding and utterance for the reaching
forth from him of his own light, life, power, wisdom, counsel, virtue, and
hidden treasure in his own principles, to his own begetings for the planting
and watering of them: in order to the giveings forth of God, unto them an
increase, in the increasings of God; that grace and peace may be ministered unto
you, and from the outgoings of the Spirit and life in you, to Gods begettings,
may be abundantly multiplied through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ.

Dear Frinds, know that it is given unto you to know the things conserning the
mystery and Kingdom of God, but to others in Parables.

And so it is given to you, and all true spiritual believers on Christ, in the
spirit, not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake.

And as believing is a gift given from God in the Spirit, soalso is suffering
for his name sake a gift, its given unto you to suffer. Therefore mind the end
and intent of God in the gift, so will you not be weary of sufferings, neither
will any forsake the truth of God that are truly begotten into it who are born
of it, and do contiune and abide therein with God in the spirit.

If any depart from God for fear of sufferings, and fall into love with the
spirit and way of the world, to obtain the favor of the world, and to avoid
persecution; it is either such as have not received the gift from God, to fit
and furnish them for a suffering condition for Christ and the Gospel, or else
it is such as denies both the gift and the giver.

Yet notwithstanding truth is truth still, and will stand in the midst of all
storms, do you therefore continue and abide in the truth, in the Life, Love,
and Power thereof; So will you continue and abide with the Lord, and be sitted
and furnished with gifts and graces, and Gospel abillitics, that you may stand
and not start aside when you are tried.

Oh feel the power and virtue of the Lord enter into and remain with your
spirits, to work down, burn up, and purge out the self-will, and the old
reasoning fleshly part, that the enemy of your souls may be withstood and kept
back, or crushed down in all his insinuations, twistings, twineings, and subtle
devices, or cunning misterious appearances and risings, that your souls may be
kept in the life and power of the spirit of God, which treads down Satan's
devices, and knows how to withstand him in all his outgoings.

And as the risings of divine life, and springings up of the heavenly power, is
felt working in you to put down Satan's risings, and to cross the outgoings of
the enemy within you, and cause him to disappear there.

Then Angels will minister unto you, or the Holy Ghost sent down from heaven as
a ministering spirit sent from God into your hearts, will open, refresh, and
fill you with the joy and peace of the Kingdom of heaven.

Therefore mind the unwearied life of the spirit of Christ in you, which is not
wearied out with temptations and trials, but knows how to succor your souls in
the hour of temptation, and to bring forth an inward deliverance for you, that
you may be freed from the power of the enemy, and be at liberty and freedom
in spirit, to serve and worship the Lord according to his own mind in the way
of our God.

So will you not be weary of sufferings, but overcome that which would be weary
of a suffering condition, and know the Lord to fill you with joy and gladness
of heart in a prison, and to be with you in a suffering condition, whose life
is known to be an unwearied life, and to stand in the end of all sufferings,
and fill with divine joy and gladness of heart: all dear friends live in Love
with God and one with another, and keep your meetings in the name and power of
God in which you are gathered, that in your meetings you may meet with God in
spirit for your refreshment.

And take heed of giving way to the seducing spirit, that would either be
persuading to go back again into that way of Worship which God has called you
from, or to be out of love and in dislike to that way and Worship which God
has made known himself unto you in, for neither of these persuasions comes of
him that has called you out of the way and Worship of the spirit of the world,
and into the way and Worship of the spirit of God.

Therefore as you have begun in the Spirit of God, go not from it to enter
again into the Spirit of the world for any by end: If you love God above all,
you will love to walk with him, and to worship him as God, according to his own
mind, in spirit and in truth, which is the public worship of God.

And therefore hold fast the profession of your faith, without wavering; waver
not in your minds, least you wander from God in your hearts, and be terrified
or afrighted at sufferings, For many are the troubles of the righteous, but the
Lord delivers out of them all.

Have you had more troubles then deliverances, or have you not had as many
deliverances as you have had troubles: why then should any be dismayed, who
have been and still are acquainted with the way and means both of the coming
and working of the Spirit, and power of our God.

For blessed and happy, arc they that have the Lord for their God: and you
have the Lord in communion of spirit, and in covenant with you, who are called
and chosen of God.

Therefore you are blessed of God, be strong in the Lord, and in the power of
his might: Let the Lord be your strength, that you may be kept by his power to
his praise, and that you may always be found in that of himself wherein you
and your services have been and still are accepted of him, is the desire of him
who desires your spiritual welfare, and everlasting happiness, whose love is
reached forth unto you in a pure remembrance, in that spirit wherein we have
had many refreshings from God, and signal testimonics of his love, and Ancient
acquaintance with God, and one with another in the Covenant of light, and life,
and peace, Farewell.

R. F.

The End.

