A Second BEACON FIRED.

Humbly Presented to the LORD PROTECTOR AND THE PARLIAMENT By the Publishers of
the First.

With their humble Petition, that they would do what may be expected from
Christian Magistrates, in suppressing Blasphemous Books.

For Sions sake we cannot hold our peace.

ANCHORA SPEI.



LONDON, Printed for the Subscribers hereof. 1654.

A Second Beacon Fired.
THat supreme Magistrates ought to have a care of their peoples souls, in
keeping from them the pestilentiall infection of Idolatry and Blasphemy, as
well as of their temporal weal, is so well known unto You, as also the danger
of knowing the Masters will and not doing it, that it would be needless for
the most able men to teach You, and therefore great presumption in us.

But for the danger that these Nations are in of being overspread with Popery,
Socinianisme, and enchanting Quakerisme, may not be known to many of You, or at
least through other great affairs not thoroughly considered of, as through Gods
blessing it may be upon a true and faithful information.

Be pleased therefore to give us leave to reminde You,

1. Of the contrivances and actings of the Papists to introduce their Religion.

1. By sending forth their Emissaries, disguised under the name of Army-men,
Church Members and Anabaptists, as we are able to demonstrate.

2. By their setting up an Hierarchy and Consistory, consisting of an
Archbishop with other dependents on him in this Nation, as appears by the Lord
Protectors testimony in his late Speech ( viz.)

We know very well, that Emissaries of the Jesuits never came in those
swarms, as they have done since these things were set on foot. And I tell you,
that diverse Gentlemen here, can bear witness with me, how that they have had a
Consistory abroad, that rules all the affairs of things in England, from an
Archbishop, with other Dependants upon him. And they had fixed in England (of
which we are able to produce the particular Instruments in most of the Limits
of the Cathedrals,) an Episcopal-power, with Archdeacons, etc. And had persons
authorized to exercise and distribute those things, who pervert and deceive the
people. Thus far the Lord Protector.

3. By their publishing in the years 1650, 1651, 1652, 18 several sorts of
Popish Books in the English tongue, an Impression of each, in all (as we have
cause to judge) no less then 30000, and all printed in London we are sure; the
Names whereof do here follow,

1. The Golden Treatise of Vincentius Lirinensis. 2. The Verity of Christian
Faith. 3. The Felicity of a Christian Life. 4. The Profit of Believing. 5.
Saint Austin's Care for the Dead. 6. Parson's Resolutions. 7. Sales his
Introduction. 8. The lost Sheep returned home, or The motives of the Conversion
to the Catholic Faith of Tho. Vain D. D. 9. A Missive to his Majesty K. James
by Dr Carrier. 10. The Love of the Soul, by G. M. 11. A Manifest touching Mr.
W. P. Aversion from the Protestant Congregation, and his Conversion to the
Catholic Church. 12. The Examination of the late Act of the Convocation at
Oxford, containing their Reasons against the Scottish Covenant and Presbytery.
13. The Right Religion Evinced by L. B. 14. Prayer to the Saints Vindicated by
F. P. 15. A prudent and secure Choice, being a sure Landmark to all those who
have been tossed to and fro in these wavering times, by H. G. 16. A Treatise of
Schism, by Scot. 17. The Christian Sodality, or Catholic Hive of Bees, by E.
P. alias Gage, as is said. 18. The Christian Moderator.

All which we humbly minded the Parliament of, with the Contents of each Book,
in a Book two years ago printed, called The Beacon set on fire. And we are very
sure that since that time there has been printed diverse Impressions of other
Popish Books not there named.

2. Of the great increase of Socinianisme, Quakerisme, and other fundamental
Errors.

1. By the public meetings and Exercises that Socinians have in London and
elsewhere every week, blasphemously holding and teaching their damnable
doctrines.

2. By the like meetings of Quakers in London, whose opinions are Blasphemous,
Paganish, Antiscriptural and Antichristian, even as the former.

3. By the Printing and Publishing many thousands of Books, containing
Blasphemous, Heretical and Antimagistraticall opinions, tending to unchristian
and disorder the people of the Nations, and introduce Paganism, Popery,
Socinianisme and Libertinisme. A taste of the loathsome, poisonous, blasphemous
Errors contained in the foresaid Books, we do herewith humbly present unto
you, to provoke your zeal against them.

A Catalogue of some of those Blasphemies and Errors that have been Published
within these two or three years last past.
1. THat no Opinion is damnable, or, that a man may be saved in any Religion. A
Discourse touching the Peace of the Church, Chap. 5.

2. That Christ is a mere man, not having any other nature, besides his humane
nature. Bidles Confession of Faith, Article 3.

3. That the holy Ghost is not God, but only the chief of the ministering
Spirits. Bidle.

4. That God has a similitude or shape, has his place in the heavens, has
also affections or passions. Bidles Preface to his Catechism.

5. That in case any assurance of the unchangeablenesse of Gods love, were to
be found in or regularly deduced from the Scriptures, it were a just ground to
any intelligent man to question their Authority and whether they were from God
or no. Redemption Redeemed, p. 335.

6. That water-Baptisme is to be laid aside. Dell the Doctrine of Baptism.

7. That if any man consider diligently, he will find the Scripture and all
ordinary Catechismes are at so wide a distance, that he will begin to question
whether the Catechists gave any heed at all to what they wrote, and did not
only themselves refuse to make use of their reason, but presume that their
Readers also would do the same. Bidles Preface to his Catechism.

8. That Christ's death did not reconcile God to us, but only us to God. Bidle
Catechism, p. 68.

9. That we are not justified by Christ's imputed righteousness, but by faith
and by good works. Bidle Catech. p. 82, and 96.

10. That the wicked shall not live for ever in torments, but shall be
annihilated and utterly perish after the judgment. Bidle Cat. p. 133, 135.

11. That the righteous enter into life for their good-works. Bidle brief.
Script. Catch.

12. That the Sacraments in use among us are not appointed in the Scripture.
Farnworths Answer to a Petition.

13. That the light of God that is in all meu, viz. natural conscience, the
spirit of a man being the candle of the Lord, is sufficient, if we give heed
unto it, to discover all sin, inform us of all duties, change our wills, turn
our hearts from all sin unto God, to delight in God, and to show us the way
to salvation; And that this light within every man is the grace of God, and
that spirit which searches all things, even the deep things of God: yea, that
it is Christ in us. Farnworths General good to all People.

14. That men clothed with the Name of God and Religion, are generally the
most dangerous and deceitful men in the whole world, for instance, Aaron, the
Kings, Priests, and Prophets in both Old and New Testaments, nor can it be
otherwise whilst Kings and Priests claim a right from God to be above other
men, Norwoods Additional Discourse.

15. That man is a right rule, yea, the rule of all things. Ibid.

16. That God never did, nor does, nor possibly can hurt us, and therefore not
to be feared. Norwoods Pathway.

17. That Unbeleevers that are under the Law should keep the seventh day
Sabbath from the Creation, but believers must keep the Lords day. Brains New
Earth.

18. That the worship that is performed by the people of England in fellowship
with the Ministers thereof, is heathenish worship. Easter Reckoning.

19. That those Ministers that sing David's Psalms, baptize Infants, wear double
cuffs, or boothose tops, take Tithes, say men are not perfect in this world,
and but sanctified in part, or that say the Letter of the Scripture, or the
written Word is the Light and Word of God, and that salvation is in the
Scripture, and call the four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and John the Gospel,
are Seducers, nor Ministers of the Word, and show the spirit of error. Easter
Reckoning.

20. That acquired Learning by its self and of its own nature is nothing else
but sin, and can no more truly and properly said to be sanctified, then sin.
Websters Book.

21. That it is a Question whether the godly actions of Saints are duties or
privileges. Ibid.

22. That those who in print say, The Ministers of England [are of the
Synagogue of Satan, and know nothing of God, but are enemies of God, being
guided by the spirit of error, without, among dogs, whose humility is fained;
That their Sermons are fleshly fancies and Conjurations, dirty miry Doctrine, a
stinking puddle; That their hearts are filthy, deceitful, seeking praise from
men; That they are scandalous, folluwing the ways of Balaam and Cain, worse
then Simon Magus, knowing nothing of the life of the Gospel; That they are
heathens, wallowing in the mire and filth of the flesh, on whom all the Plagues
of God are to be powered, blind guides, proud, Baals Priests, Liars,
Blasphemers, Enemies to Christ Jesus, Murderers, Sorcerers, Whoremongers,
Children of disobedience, greedy dumb dogs, Witches, Antichrists, Antichrists
Merchants, Robbers, Deceivers, Ministers of the world, Conjurers, Devils of a
Serpentine nature, a Brazen faced Beast, Covetous, Idolatrous Priests, Thieves,
Devilish Priests, Priests of the world, Foxes, Ministers of Antichrist, Proud
Pharisees, Envious, malicious Priests, Egyptians, Sodomites, Gog and Magog, a
Seed of evil doers, children of the devil, Blind Watchmen, Back-biters,
Raylers, Seducers, Taskmasters of Egypt, Devouring, Lions, Firebrands of hell,
Sons of Belial] are themselves notwithstanding holy, perfect, new creatures,
called out of the world, an humble, meek, innocent people, yea, though they are
the maintainers of the errors contained in this Paper. Out of most of the
Books before and after quoted.

23. That none are Ministers of God, and called by him who are sent forth by
authority of man. Farnworths Answer to Pet.

24. That he who is not infallible in his judgment when he gives counsel and
advice, is no Minister of Christ. Ibid. To the Law and to the Testimony.

Antimagistraticall Errors.
25. That the Magistrates are not to have Titles of Worshipful or Right
Worshipful. Ibid.

26. That the Subjects of a Commonwealth which is not the Commonwealth of
Israel, are to disturb and destroy that Commonwealth. Ibid.

27. That no civil Government is to be acknowledged but the Government of the
Law within us. Ibid.

28. That in the Apostolical Precept, Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
Powers, By power is meant God the Father of Jesus Christ, and by King the Lord
of Hosts. Farnworths Genesis Good to all people.

29. That no man having the absolute entire Rule and Government of himself in
himself, inseparably united to him in his very essence and being, none
whomsoever upon any pretense whatsoever may or ought to challenge, assume, or
exercise in any measure, in any kind or sort, any right or power with him or
over him herein, for he was made perfect, which admits of no supplement, and is
commanded to have no other God. Norwoods Additionall Discourse.

30. That in a people, no one or more part or parts whatsoever, can in any
proper and true sense, be called or said to be the Sovereign or Supreme.
Norwoods Pathway to Englands settlement.

31. That as we find not any rule or dominion given unto one man over another
in the beginning, neither is it so now here. Ibid.

32. That the Soldier shall take down the Law-rule or Government that is by
the Commons in Parliament, as being of the fourth Monarchy. Brains New Earth.

33. That the Civil Magistrate has not any positive power to punish any man,
or restrain any for their light, judgment, conscience, opinion or way of
worship, if so be they act or speak nothing that is destractive or destructive
to the Civil Power, or tending to the breach of the Peace, or to injure one
another; The reason is, because the Magistrate man, as he is natural, knows
not what is Blasphemy, Error or Idolatry, they are foolishness unto him,
neither can he discern them. Websters Book.

34. That under the fifth Monarchy now setting up, the world must be governed
without the mixture (as now is) of men's Laws and Inventions, whether in respect
of Magistracy or Ministry, Church or Civil affairs. Declaration of Church
members walking with Mr Feake, Dr Chamberline, Mr Highland, Mr Barbone, etc.



What true Christian can read or hear such things as these without much
trouble of soul and spiritual indignation? How can the Friends of Christ choose
but endeavor the stopping of this mouth of Blasphemies? But alas, for some
years last past, either there have been none that could or at least that would
do it; So that the children of Zion have only spread the blasphemies and
errors of the time before their God, who in answer to their prayers, we hope,
has by his Providence assembled you, conjoined, and united your Powers and
Councels, to try if you will own him as your King, by suppressing the grand
Traitors and Treasons against his Majesty. Will Heathens allow men to blaspheme
their false gods? Oh ye Rulers of these Nations, kiss the Son lest he be
angry, and ye perish in the way; and if your rule, power, sitting, should
miscarry upon this account, you will come off with more honor and quieter
consciences then shall accompany any Successor or Successors in his or their
taking part with the enemies of God by a boundless Toleration.

And now we hope your Highness and your Honors will consider, that the
Printing and Publishing so many thousands of such Books aforesaid, argues that
there are many buyers, and the many buyers argue a great infection by them,
which like a Gangrene spreads more and more, and chiefly in London and the
North parts of England, where there was a meeting lately of about Two thousand
Quakers. And that this four leaven threatens the leavening of the whole lump,
and that too soon, though it should not be completed until by age or death
you be called off the stage, when the Lord shall examine how you have improved
your Talent: And what a Popish, or what a Paganish Parliament shall we have
then, if any? Where then will be our Laws, Magistrates, Religion, Ministry,
Liberties, Strength, when a Papist or a Nero, taking the advantage of our
confusion, shall get into the saddle, though by the stirrup of a pretended
Fifth Monarchy? If you should judge us too presumptuous in this address (as we
hope you will not) our apology is, that through grace we are Christians, that
judge it no great adventure to appear before the Rulers of this world in so
good a cause, since we are used to frequent admittance into the presence of the
King of Kings our dear Lord and Master. And if it shall be blamed as
discovering the nakedness and wounds of our dear Country, to the Churches and
Nations round about; we hope that reason will plead for us, that you cannot
cure these wounds until they be discovered and searched; and that if such
Books and blasphemous Opinions were not suffered to be spread all the Land
over, we had not troubled You with the mention of them.

The Premises considered, we humbly renew our Petition to his Highness the
Lord Protector and the Honorable Parliament, and heartily implore You by God
and Man's Expectations, your own public Professions and Engagements, and as
ever you expect to appear before God with comfort, who has put power into your
hands to do much for his beloved Spouse and Cause; That you would stir up your
strength and your zeal against the Enemies of both the souls and bodies of the
people of this Commonwealth; by suppressing of Popish, Blasphemous,
Antimagistratical and Antiministeriall Books, which are the nursery of Error,
Idolatry and Rebellion, Putrefaction and Shame of a Nation, Provocation of
Divine vengeance, and highway to eternal perdition. And to the end so good a
work may be accomplished, and effectual means may be applied, we shall humbly
offer our Proposals (if commanded) how it may be done, without any trouble to
the State; In the mean time begging leave, that without offense we may say, we
humbly conceive, that we shall despair of ever seeing a sufficient Redress in
this case, unless the way of Licensing Books, by faithful able men that are
sound in the Faith, be strictly enjoynd, and an equitable Penalty laid upon all
that Print and Publish, or cause to be Printed and Published, any Book not
Licensed; and the said Penalty to be recovered by any that shall prosecute the
Offender at the Common Law, with good encouragement to the Prosecuter.

And lastly, Least the Parliaments great Affairs about War and Peace should
hinder such an Information as this from being heard; we do beg (in the Name of
Christ) of all persons, of all degrees, whether Ministers of the Gospel,
Gentlemen or others, by what Names soever distinguished, that are or would be
esteemed real Friends to true Religion, the Lord Protector, the Parliament and
Commonwealth of England; that they would improve all the Interest they have
both in God and men in authority, for the effectual Suppression of such Books,
as are destructive to the Religion and welfare of these Nations.

Octo. 9. 1654. And the Petitioners shall ever pray, etc. Luke Fawn. Samuel
Gellibrand. Joshua Kirton. John Rothwell. Thomas Underhill. Nathanael Webb.



