THE FATAL FEASTS, OR GODS Finger upon the WALL, Appearing At the great
thanksgiving Festival (upon Cains slaughter of his Brother Abe^) Solemnized by
the General, Army, Parliament, Council of State and City of London, at
Grocers-hall June the 7. 1649.

DANIELL 5 25, 26, 27, 28. In the same hour came forth fingers of a Man's hand,
and wrote over against the Candlesticks upon the plaster of the Wall --.

And this is the writing that was w^itten. MEAN MEAN TEKEL PEERS.

God has numbered thy Kingdom and finished it, thou art weighed in the
Balances, and found wanting.

Thy Kingdom is divided, and given to the Medes and Persians (to wit Foreign
Nations.)

G^n. 4.11, 12. And now thou art Cursed from the earth, which has opened her
mouth to receive thy Brothers blood from thy hand.

-- A fugative and a vagabond shall tho^ be in the Earth.

He that reads and considers, shall find it no FABLE.

LONDON, Printed, in the Year of our LORD, 1649.

The Fatal Feasts.
THe rule of equity planted by God in every man's Conscience is so strong and
vigorous, that in spite of ^he stoutest and strongest h^arted man, it
continually and undauntedly accuses or excuses him, to his face, in public, in
private, in afflictions, in ^a^^i^g, in feasting, according as he ^^i^ket^;
peaketh or practices, good or evil, in sincerity or in hypocrisy; so as he
continually hears from within himself, and that so loudly too, as drowneth
all the acclamation of flatterers; the noise of 10000 drums and trumpets, ^o
nor all the O^dinance upon a feasting day can out-roar this i^ward v^yce; (...)
in the midst of all jollity, noise, music, dalliance, it will be heard:
Proclamations of Kings, Declarations, V^tes of P^rliament, cries of Cities,
P^^ple, Nations ar^ bu^ ^^ares o^t, if once offended.

A most blessed and up^i^ht Judge it is, judging impartially of the action and
intention, accor^ing ^o ^he u^q^^stionable rule of Gods justice: So that thou
(who ever thou art that have thriven and prospered in thy wickedn^ss, and have
do^e it upon such plausible pretenses as might and does often dec^^ve ^he very
El^ct: pl^ad thy success unto thy conscience, and tell thy conscience (as thou
(...) to do thy ignorant flattering and timorous hearers) that he that is the
Lord ^f Hoasts, the God of battles has given test in any on thy side by many
conti^uall, ev^n miraculous victories; and it will immediately tell thee; Cain
after he had sl^in his innocent brother Abell, might as justly have u^ged the
same argument in his justification.

No, if thou will live in peace with G^d, and hold friendship with thine own
Conscience, thou must neither regard success, nor the acclamations of
fl^tt^rers, not the appro^ation of preachers nor the acceptance or rejoycings
or feastings of p^^ple; but before thou act or do any thing, inquire the mind
of God in his holy word, and take council then of thine own conscience, and
accordingly act or not ^ct, and stand clear in thy judgment from all passion
and corrupt affection in understanding what that voice within thee speaks,
and swerve not for thy life or any worldly thing, from that easily known and
ap^oved rule of equity, of doing as thou would be done unto; if thou do,
assure thy self, thou will be condemned of thy self; and if thy conscience
^ondemn thee, God is greater then thy conscience, and will not aquit thee
(^oast thou never so much of success) so everlastingly true will that saying of
God to Cain prove in all times and cases; If thou do evil, sin lies at the
door.

The serious consideration whereof as it is necessary for all times, so
especially in this time and age we live in, the voice of Gods word and the
voice of conscience being never more neglected, men seeming not to regard any
thing but the praise and approbation of another, and no argument so generally
used for justifiing men's actions, yea of war, of killing and slaying of men of
all sorts, yea of pious religious known friends, as success and prosperity in
the undertaking.

And therefore it may prove good counsel to all sorts of men, yea the highest,
strongest and most succesful, timely to hearken and give good heed to the voice
of their own consciences, and to mark in all ages how conscience works, and
how surely the judgments and vengeance of God follows all such as make
sleight of that rule of equity he has therein planted.

God is the searcher and tryer of the Reins, a most exact observer of men's
intentions, holding perpetual intelligence with the conscience of every man,
Conscience being Gods agent.

Observe how God and Conscience works together with Cain and Abell, and so
work they with all sorts of men, Genesis 4.5. the text says, Abell was a keeper
of sheep, but Cain was a tiller of the ground; and they were both so Religious,
as they did apply themselves unto God by way of sacrifice (a sacrifice of
thanksgiving) verse. 3. And it came to pass in process of time, that Cain
brought of the fruit of the ground an Offering unto the Lord: verse. 4. And
Abell he also brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof,
and the Lord had respect unto Abell, and to his Offering; but unto Cain, and to
his Offering he had no respect. See how God observes the reallity of the heart,
as the words And of the fat thereof, import; Cain was merely formal and in
show, Abell real; see then how this works on Cain, he soon discerns Gods
non-acceptance, which should have wrought his repentance; now he swells against
the light of his own Conscience, and was very wroth, and his countenance fell;
Conscience disturbs him, verse. 6. And the Lord said unto Cain, why art thou
wrath? and why is thy countenance fallen? If thou do well, shall thou not be
accepted? and if thou do not well, sin lies at the door: (thy Conscience
will be sure to tell thee of it) verse. 8. And Cain TALKED with Abell his
brother, and being in the fieild together slew him; it is probable under color
of Treaty and friendship; never was cause more unjust, yet strength and
injustice prevails, and might be justified, if success were a good argument
with God or Conscience.

But see how God and conscience follow him, thy Brothers Blood says God cries
unto me from the ground, thou art cursed from the earth, a fugitive and a
vagabond shall thou be in the earth: And Cains conscience echoes to the Lord,
forcing him to cry out, My punishment is greater then I can bear: And from thy
face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in the earth: And
it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me shall slay me: Now
conscience enforces him to acknowledge that never failing rule of equity, what
measure thou have met unto others shall be met unto thee again; though when
time was, he could not prevail with him to do as he would be done unto.

And though this be the way of God in all ages, yet still vain man renounces
the clear judgment of God in his own conscience, goes on in ways of blood,
cruelty and injustice, and if God immediately take not vengeance, he adds
iniquity to iniquity, and boasts that God by success haah given clear
testimony of the righteousness of his cause, of the equity of his proceedings,
and in effect, that Cain is more righteous then Abel, because Cain was too
strong and too politic and slew him.

But this is so deceitful a way of judging, as it is wonderful, a time
admitting the least dram of Christian knowledge, should admit; The experience of
all times, ages, places, persons, evidencing the weakness or wickedness
thereof: I saw (says David) the wicked flourish, but I looked, and behold his
place was no more to be seen; fatal are the rejoycings of the hypocrites, and
of the man that pursues the righteous unto blood.

What greater wickedness can there be in the earth, then for a man to hate his
Brother because God loves him? to hate him to the death, because he offers unto
God a more acceptable sacrifice; because his heart is more clear and more large
in thankfulness unto God for his extraordinary favors.

Yet this is the case betwixt men that have long time lived together as
brethren in these times, men that have been bosom friends, children of one
cause, made dear unto each other by mutual obligations of love, of friendship,
and of defense, carrying their lives and their strength in their hands more for
others safeties then for themselves; yet now in process of time that they have
been at Peace, and have gotten sheep to keep, and land to till, shame in some,
and conscience in others importunes for sacrifices of thanksgiving unto the
Lord of Hosts that has preserved them, and given them strength to go through
with so many victories.

The effects of shame produce lean sacrifices; those that when they were in
the storm and doubtful how to get forth, that promised mountains of freedom
and redress of grievances to the people in thankfulness to God, are no sooner
out of the Storm, but Mole-hils a^^ great m^tters with these our firstborn
Officers: And because our well meaning Abels are mindful what they promised,
what the poor people that stuck to them deserve, and in conscience and
thankfulness^ to God off^r now the fi^stlings of their fl^cks (the best they
can imagine) and of the fat, the pu^est of the^r love, and think the utmost of
their freedom, and the rem^vall of all gri^vances, and that for ever by an
Agreement of the People little enough in lieu of so great merci^s, so large and
fair opportuniti^e of doing good.

Because God manif^sts his accep^^nce unto the sacrifice of those innocent
Abels, ^y the T^stimony of all u^el^sh men, increasing their num^ers
continually, and manif^sts his di^resp^ct to those Cains and their
Musty-^ffering, by the General complaints of all goo^-hearted people.

Our Cains grew v^ry wroth, and their countenance fell, and the Lord said un^o
them by his faithful Servant Master Sal^marsh; Why are ye wroth, and why are
your coun^enanc^s fall^^? if you do well and perform your promises and
e^g^gem^nts to the people, your conscien^es cannot witness against you, shall
you not be a^^epta^l^ both of God and man? but if you do evil, if you break
all promises and engagem^nts with all sorts of people as ye have done, and now
think to fl^tter God and man with crying Corban, with s^tting days apart to
fast in, and to hang down the head for a da^ like a B^lrush; Nay, to give no
more to the Nation ^or all the blood and misery it has suff^red, but a Bulrush
but the shad^w of Freedom and ease of Burdens; nor to render no more honor to
God for all his mercies, but to set up your selves in the places (...) those
you have removed with the price of oth^^s blood: If you do this evil, know
then (says he) sin lies at the door, and the Judg^ment of God shall pursue
you as it did Cain; ye shall in time be cast out as un^^vory salt that has
lost its saltn^sse, the love of God, and the affection of the people shall
forsake you, and the fear of Cain shall be upon you, you shall be afraid of
your selves, and thos^ that a^^ nearest to you; and though ye may prevail
against some of the Abels and sl^y them, yet in time ye shall be as vagabonds
and runagates upon the earth, and your consciences shall tell you continually,
that it shall come to pass, that every one that is near you, shall slay you,
every one that finds your delusion shall destroy you.

But though God by him in effect told them long since thus much; yea, and
though already they have found much of it come to pass; yet all this and more
has but hardened the hearts of all our Cains; nor would they give ear to the
voice either of God, his servants, or their own consciences, but with Ahab they
have sold themselves to work wickedness.

They have TALKED with those Abels, they have flattered them, they have taken
them out-into the field upon renewed promises, and renewed repentances, they
have made them a Game, and v^ntured their lives in their defense; but all this
in treachery, and now at length in process of time its come to pass that
those Cains arose against those Ab^ls, in time of Treaty, and to^k them, and
murdered them.

And having done, hand joins in hand, and as before a Jesabels F^ast was
proclaimed, and men of B^lial hired to swear, those Abels, and Nabot^s sough^
to destroy all Religion and to level all men's estates: so having killed and
taken possession, their conscienc^s are yet more dead then Cains; they having
notice that those Abels and Naboths were sto^ed and dead, these Jesabels worse
then Cains, said to Ahab their confederates, Come let us rise and take
possession, let us eat, drink, and be merry, let us Proclaim a day of
Thanksgiving.

Almighty God who has owned our cause, and given testimony against these
Atheists, these Levellers, as he has done against other enemies by giving us
Success, the undoubted testimony of his approbation; he has blessed our
perfidiousnesse, our cruelty and our murdering of our Brothers, as he blessed
Cain against Abel his Brother, and Jesabel and Ahab against Naboth: Therefore
let us eat our meat with gladness, and drink our wine with merry hearts, for
God now accepts our facrifice.

But being at Grocers-hall in the midst of their Jollity, Pride, and Feasting,
the spirit of Eliah comes into the Consciences of these Caines, with this
dismal Message from the Lord.

Have thou killed and taken possession? (are ye so proud and pompered with
success?) in the place where the dogs licked the blood of Naboth, of Lockier
and the rest; shall dogs lick thy blood, even thine O Faixfax, and thine O
Crumwel; and thine, and thine O Parliament, O Council of State, O Major, O
Aldermen, that thus countenance those bloody inhumane and treacherous Monsters,
and thine O Officer, and thine O Soldier that willingly had an hand in
slaying thy most innocent and righteous Brethren, Abells and Naboths, under the
name of Levellers; and I will bring evil upon thee, and will take away thy
prosperity, and will cut off from thee him that pisseth against the wall: and
thy Feasts shall prove unto the chiefest guests, as the Earl of Sommersets
Feast when he espoused a Strumpet (as ye have done corrupt interests) as
Buckinghams Feast before his fall (against whom no complaint could be heard) as
the Kings Feasts at Mayor Freemans, when he had corrupted him (as ye have done
this covetous Mayor) to betray the Nations Liberties (calling it the triumph of
Peace) he never prospered after it; The Mayors tongue was cankered and cut out,
that had made a false report, for white soap: Essex was so Feasted, and Hollis
and his Facton was so Feasted, rejoicing in iniquity, but they are all perished
and become as the dung of the Earth.

Look! look! says conscience and tremble! see you not Belshazzar like an hand
writing upon the wall! R^ad, what wr^tes it? what sh^ke ye, ye stoutest men of
war! fear ye, ye men of greatness! ^tart ye ye covetous wretches! what writes
it, that ye are so much amazed? the thing is truth; your own consciences will
tell you so when you would sl^ep; your Kingdom is rent from you, your reign is
at an end, your wine i^ mingled with innocent blood, and your venison is the
flesh of freeborn Englishmen, and it shall breed a Pestilence among y^, that
shall d^vour you: God will awaken the Consciences of the upright in the Army
and all places, and they shall abhor and detest you; yea a devouring seed shall
be raised up that shall tear you in pieces, and there shall be none to deliver
you; for the very hope of such Hypocrites shall rott; after this so Impudent,
Abominable, Atheistical, or blasphemous Defiance of God: never, never look to
prosper; your strength is departed from you, the people hate you, God and your
own consciences must be your Enemies; and ye may truly say with Cain, my
punishment is greater then I can bear. I, and I, and I shall be a Fugitive and
vagabond upon the Earth, and it shall come to pass, that every one that finds
me, shall slay me. So may all thine Enemies perish O Lord God.

FINIS.

