FAUXS GHOST: OR, Advice TO PAPISTS November. 5. 1680.
THe Morning of that day was almost come,
Which once, the Daring Catalines of Rome
Designed to make Great Britains day of Doom.
( November's Fifth,) a Day which had not Heaven,
(Just when the Fatal Stroke was to be given,)
Stretched out its Saving Hand, had seen the Fall
Of King and People; Root, and Branch, and all:
A Day which since, (and may it Ever be!)
Has been, by all true Protestants, to Thee,
And to thy Praise, Great God, Devoted Solemnlie.
'Twas just before the Morning of This Day,
As in my Bed, in a Deep sleep I lay,
I felt a sudden Trembling seize my Heart,
And a Cold Sweat ran over every Part:
Methought, the Room I lay in was Ore-spread
With thick Black Darkness, such as hides the Dead;
And to increase the Horrors it brought there,
Loud Thunders Roared throu^h all the ^roubled Ai^;
And Dismal Lightnings Rev^l'd in the Clouds,
Which fighting winds drove on in trembling croud^:
Such was that Hour, I thought it could Portend
No less, then that the World was at an End.
When lo! methought, a Mighty Earthquake came
And Cleft the Ground; then, in a Sulpherous Flame
That seemed to fill the Chamber, straight arose
A Ghastly shape, Ugly and Black as those
We Paint the Devils in; its Glaring Eyes
Looked like two Comets of a Monstrous size.
So Hidious 'twas, I guessed it straight to be
Some Damned Arch-Traytor's Ghost; but whose, to me
Was something hard, at first, to Understand;
But when I spied the Dark Lanthorn in his Hand,
I knew 'twas FAVX, (that Darling of the Devil,)
That strove to Out-doe even Hell it self in Evil.
Methought he Frowned, and deeply seemed to groan,
And (with a Horrid Voice,)
'Twixt Grief and Rage, at last, thus made his Moan:
And is it come to this? (cried he) did I
So Great, so Glorious an Example dye,
To teach succeeding Ages how to Dare,
And at the Highest Crimes not shrink, nor fear;
And yet can you, ye Dull Tame Sons of Rome,
(Unworthy to be thought from Thence to come,)
When you have so far, and Venturously past,
Leave the Great Work but done by Halves at last:
All you have yet done has only rendered Us,
And our Religion the more Odious.
But Pardon me, dear Sons o'th Church, it is Zeal,
(Zeal for the Holy Cause,) makes me reveal
My Grief so Passionately; besides, you know,
I Am newly come from a Hot Place Below.
I know you Plotted well, and Plot on still;
And till Our End's accomplished Ever will:
But I Dislike the Method you Proceed in,
It is too Mean; set all the Land a Bleeding;
With Fire and Sword, the Heretics Destroy,
And Endless Fame for the Brave Act Enjoy:
Do what I aimed at; let that Vipers Nest,
That Conventicle of Heretics in the West,
That now sit Plotting how to Extirpate
Us, and Religion, find a sudden Fate.
Ah! had the Fatal Squire a while but spared
Those Famous Modern Hero's, they would have Dared:
Coleman, Groves, Pickering, Whitebeard, all the Crew
That strove in Royal Blood their Hands to Embrew;
Had they but lived yet Undiscovered, what!
Oh! what had they now done! rather what not?
Yet some are Living, Roman-Soul'd indeed,
That for the Sacred Cause dare boldly Bleed:
There Is Don Thomazo, (Curse on the Renegade!)
Had he stood firm what Work would he have made!
But to spare Names, (to all our Hero's Shame,)
Our brave Bold Heroine has Engrossed all Fame;
She who like Hecate, dire Mischief loves,
And, though o're-power'd. Undaunted on still moves.
Celier! Famous Celier! whose Name at Rome,
Shall like the Sun, shine to all Times to come,
And dim the Glories of all Saints that are
Recorded in the Sacred Calender:
On then, True Daughter, of so Great a Sire;
Thy Holy Father bids thy thoughts aspire;
And though Confined in such Ignoble Walls,
Plot still King's Murders, and great Kingdom's falls.
And oh! ye Men, for shame, at last be Brave;
Let not a Woman all the Honor have;
And be assured, if you but dare do Well,
We Will arm, to aid you, all the Powers of Hell.
With that, methought he Vanished, with a Noise
Dreadful and Loud as thousand Thunders Voice:
I started, and awaked, and Kneeling there,
To England's Gracious God adress'd this Prayer;
Great God, who hitherto has't saved this Land,
Oh! stretch out still thy all-Protecting Hand:
Keep safe our Sovereign from Hell and Rome,
And never let Popery into England come.
FINIS,
LONDON. Printed for Mr. Benskin, in Green's-Rents near Fleet-Bridge.


