CHRISTIAN Tolleration.

OR Simply and singly to meet upon the Account of Religion, really to Worship
and serve the Lord, without any unlawful Act to be done or intended, is not an
Offense against Law.

And also concerning Seditious Sectaries, disloyal Persons, and Seditious
Conventicles punishable by the late Act. And likewise concerning Banishment;
For no man by the Law of the Land ought to be Banished out of his Native
Country for the service and Worship of God; Or as hereafter Appears.

Written in the eighth Month. 1664.

Concerning Seditious Sectaries, Disloyal Persons, and Seditious Conventicles,
etc.
FIrst, By the late Act of Parliament Entitled An Act to prevent and Suppress
seditious Conventicles, it is declared in the Preamble or ground of the Act,
which is the Reason for making the Act, 16. Car. 2. fol. 25.
That the speedy Remedies thereby Provided are against the growing and
dangerous Practices of seditious Sectaries, and disloyal Persons, who under
pretense of tender Consciences, do at their meetings contrive Insurrections, as
late experience has showed.

So that those are the dangerous Persons and Practices, that are to be
suppressed, who do at their meetings contrive Insurrections as aforefaid; And
they are the seditious Sectaries, and disloyal Persons, and their meetings are
seditious Conventicles, who assemble and meet together under color of
Religious exercises, and pretend tenderness of Conscience, to the intent that
they may contrive Insurrections, and cover over and prosecute a wicked
intention under so fair a pretense, which so to do is great wickedness; and if
there be any Persons or People who meet together under color of religious
exercise, and pretense of tenderness of Conscience, to contrive Insurrections
at their meetings; There is good Reason to provide Remedies against the growing
and dangerous practices of such as do meet to contrive Insurrections, as
aforesaid; And those meetings may justly be declared To be seditious
Conventicles, and unlawful Assemblies, because they meet about seditious and
unlawful Actions, who meet to design and contrive Insurrections.

Secondly, It is declared to be an Offense for five Persons over and above them
of the household, to be present at any Assembly, 16. Car. 2. fol. 26.
Conventicle, or Meeting, under color or pretense of any Exercise of Religion,
in other manner than is allowed by the Lyturgie, or practice of the Church of
England.

So that it is no Offense (against the Law) for Persons to Assemble and meet
together really and truly for no other end, intent or purpose but to serve and
worship the Lord, though they meet to the number of five, or above, beside them
of the household, because the Liturgy of the Church allows of the same, saying,
It is right, very meet, and our bounden duty to meet together at all times and
in all places to give thanks (or perform duty and service) to the Lord.

What is it for many persons to assemble and meet together upon the account of
religious Exercise, according to the manner allowed of by the Liturgy, or
practice of the Church of England?

To assemble and meet together (to the number of five or above, beside them of
the household before the Lord upon the account of Religion, as Worshippers of
him, to render thanks unto God for the great benefits that we have received of
him, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to
ask those things that be requisite and necessary, both for soul and body, and
in the performance of that duty to accompany one another in Prayer, with a pure
heart, and an humble voice to the Throne of Gods heavenly grace, is according
to the Liturgy of the Church as aforesaid, and is allowed of thereby. For
proof thereof, see the beginning of the Liturgy.

What is it then for Persons to assemble and meet together to the number of
five, or above, beside the household or family in other manner than is allowed
of by the Liturgy, or practice of the Church of England?

To assemble and meet together under color or pretense of religious Exercises,
To contrive Insurrections is to meet in other manner than is allowed of by the
Liturgy or practice of the Church; for neither the Liturgy, nor practice of
the Church allows of any such actions.

After what manner are the persons offending against the said Act (concerning
meetings as aforesaid) to be apprehended?

It seems a Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate is to repair unto the place,
where such meetings are held, or to be held, and dissolve, or prevent the same.

And if such Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate, be not able to suppress or
dissolve the same, Then he may by certificate under his hand and feal, made to
the Lieutenants, Deputy. Lieutenants, or Cummissioned Officers of the Militia,
etc. of his particular Information, or knowledge require or call for their
Assistance; 16. Car. 2. fol. 34, 35.
And he is to go in person with them unto the place, where the meetings are
held, or to be held, and use the best means they can to dissolve, and
dissipate, or prevent the same.

But it seems, That the Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants, nor Commissioned
Officers of the Militia, or soldiers, etc. are not to meddle in dissolving,
dissipating or preventing such meetings without a certificate from under the
hand and seal of a Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrate, who himself is to be
present with them at the place where the meeting is held, or to be held as
aforesaid. 16. Car. 2. Reg. fol. 34, 35.

And no dwelling house of any person whatsoever must be entered into with force
by virtue of the said Act, but in the presence of one Justice of the Peace, or
chief Magistrate, except within the City of London; And there no dwelling house
must be entered into as aforesaid, but in the presence of one Justice of the
Peace, Alderman, deputy Alderman, or any one Commissioner of the Lieutenancy
for the City of London. 16. Car. 2. Regis fol. 37.

After the persons offending, as aforesaid, be apprehended, how must they be
convicted, and tried?

It seems, That for the first and second offense, They must not be convicted or
tried by a Jury, but two Justices of the Peace, or chief Magistrate (if it be
within a corporation, where there are not two Justices of Peace) They are
required and enjoined upon proof to them, or him respectively made of such
offense, either by confession of the Party, or Oath of witnesses, or notorious
evidence of the fact, To make a Record of every such offense under their hands
and seals respectively, which Record so made, is to be taken and adjudged to be
a full and perfect Conviction of every such Offender, for such Offense. 16.
Car. 2. Regis fol. 26, 27.

And it seems, the Offenders for the first and second Offense in that case,
must not first be committed to Prison, and afterward tried by an Jury, in order
to Judgment, or final determination of the matter; But they must first be
fined, and afterward imprisoned, if they do not pay down the Fine, which Fine
for the first offense is not to exceed five pounds, or imprisonment without
Bail or Mainprize, not exceeding three months for none payment thereof, and not
exceeding ten pounds for the second offense, or imprisonment for some time
without Bail or Mainprize for non-payment thereof, not exceeding six months.
16. Car. 2. Regis fol. 27, 28.

Simply to meet upon the account of Religion, really to worship and serve the
Lord, without any unlawful Act to be done or intended, is not an Offense
against Law.

Is there any general Custom, or Statute made directly against the true
spiritual service and worship of God in the spirit, John 4.23, 24. If there be
any general Custom or Statute made directly against the true spiritual service
and worship of God in the spirit; Is not such Custom and Statute directly
against the Law of God; And if there be any general Custom, or Statute
directly against the Law of God, Is not such a Custom and Statute void in it
self? seeing it is declared in the book called Doctor and Student, or grounds
of the Law of the Land, That the second ground of the Law of England is the Law
of God, Doct. and Stud. Cap. 6.
and also if any general Custom were directly against the Law of God, or if
any Statute were made directly against it, the Custom and Statute were void.
Doct. and Stud. cap. 6.

And the King has been pleased to promise and declare a liberty to tender
Consceiences, and that no man shall be disquieted, and called in Question for
differences of opinion in matters of Religion, which do not disturb the peace
of the Kingdom, And have not all those an interest in the Kings promises, who
never yet forfeited the same, but are utterly and absolutely against designing
and contriving any Insurrection, and the remedies provided by the act are
against them (that have forfeited their intrest in the Kings promises) who do
at their meetings, contrive Insurrections, Therefore the Innosent ought not to
be punished by Inprisonment or Banishment, etc.

For the liberty of a man is a thing specia^^y favored by the common Law of the
Land, and therefore says Dalton in his Justice of peace, Dalt. 406.
if any of the Kings Subjects shall Imprison another without sufficient warrant
of him or of his Law, the party grieved may have his action, and shall recover
damages against the other, and the King also shall have a fine of him, for
Inprisonment of another without offense of the Law is one of the Kings Royal
prerogatives annexed to the Crown. See Dalt. I. P. 406.

And by the Statute of Magna. Charta (many times confirmed in Parliament) it is
enacted that no freeman shall be taken and Imprisoned, or Disseized of his
Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, Magna
Charta cap. 29.
or any otherwise destroyed, or we shall not pass upon him, nor condemn him
but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, we shall sell
to no man we shall deny, or defer to no man, either Justice, or right. Mag. 29.

The Confirmation of the great Charters says, that all Majors Sheriffs,
Justices and other Ministers which under us have the Laws of the Land to guide
them, 2^. Edw. 1 cap. 1.
shall allow the said Charters pleaded before them in Judgment in all points.
25. Edw. 1. c. 1.

And we will, that if any Judgment be given from henceforth contrary to the
points of the Charters, by the Justices, or by any other our Ministers that
hold Plea before them against the Points of the Charters, ^5 Edw. 1. cap. ^.
It shall be undone and holden for naught. See the Stat. 25. Edw. 1. cap. 2.

A Confirmation of the great Charters, and a Repeal of those Statutes that be
made to the contrary.

At the Parliament of our Lord the King, holden at Westminster the first day of
May, the two and fortieth Year of his Reign; It is assented and accorded, That
the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, be holden and kept in all
Points; And if any Statute be made to the contrary, That shall be holden for
none. Stat. 42. Edw. 3. cap. 1.

What Persons are they that the late Act is made against?

They are seditious Sectaries, and disloyal Persons, who under pretense of
tender Consciences do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections. 16. Car. 2.
Regis 25, 26.

To meet together under color of Religious Exercise, and pretense of
tenderness of Conscience, to contrive insurrections, is a seditious
Conventicle, and an unlawful Assembly; And those are the persons and meetings
which the Act does provide Remedies against.

For first, the Title of the Act is to prevent and suppress seditious
Conventicles. Secondly, the Remedies provided by the said Act are against the
growing and dangerous practices of seditious Sectaries, and disloyal Persons,
who do at their meetings contrive Insurrections, as aforesaid, Thirdly, the
Execution or Penalties of the Act are to be inflicted upon such Persons, and
for preventing of the mischiefs which may grow by such seditious and tumultuous
meetings under pretense of Religious Worship. 16. Car. 2. Regis fol. 25, 26, 54.

It seems, That for Persons to assemble and meet together under pretense of
tender Consciences, to contrive Insurrections, is a seditious Conventicle, and
unlawful Assembly punishable by the said Act.

2. It seems, That for Persons to the number of sive, or above, etc. to meet
together under pretense of Religious Worship, to be mischievous, seditious, and
tumultuous, it is a seditious Conventicle, and unlawful Assembly, punishable by
the late Act, as aforesaid.

For it is Enacted by the Authority of Parliament, for better preventing of the
mischiefs which may grow by such seditious and tumultuous meetings, under
pretense of Religious Worship, That the Lieutenants, Deputy Lieutenants,
Commissioned Officers of the Militia, Soldiers and Sheriffs, etc. by
Certificate made to them respectively, under the hand and seal of a Justice of
Peace, or chief Magistrate, of his particular information, or knowledge of such
unlawful meetings or Conventicles, held, or to be held in their respective
Counties or places; And that he (with such Assistance as he can get together is
not able to suppress or dissolve the same) shall and may, and are required, to
repair (with the Justice of Peace, or chief Magistrates) to the place where
they are so held, and by the best means they can to dissolbe and dissipate, or
prevent such unlawful meetings. 16. Car. 2. Regis fol. 34, 35.

Is it not plain and clear by the said Act, That the meetings which are to be
dissolved and dissipated, or prevented as aforesaid, are seditious and
tumultuous meetings? And is it not as plain, That those seditious and
tumultuous meetings, are such meetings as are seditious Conventicles and
unlawful Assemblies, which the Act provides remedies against and also Penalties
for the preventing of the mischiefs that may grow by such seditious and
tumultuous meetings, under pretense of Religion, at which they do contrive
Insurrections, as aforesaid.

Are not those meetings only accounted unlawful by the said Act, as are
seditious and tumultuous meetings? And are not those the seditious meetings at
which there is Insurrection contrived under pretense of Religious Worship? And
is it not plain that the meetings of the People of God, reproachfully called
Quakers, which are, only for the Service and Worship of God, are not unlawful
Assemblies, nor seditious Conventicles, because they are peaceable, and not
seditious and tumultuous meetings; for they neither meet to contrive
Insurrection, nor with force and violence to the terror of the People, nor to
do any unlawful Act with violence or force, as daily experience does manifest:
And ought not therefore the Innocent People of God (called Quakers) to be freed
and clearly acquitted from the force of the Penalties?

There must be Sedition and Tumults, or the contriving of some Insurrection,
intended or acted under color of Religious Worship (it seems) to make a
seditious Conventicle, and unlawful Assembly or meeting punishable by the late
Act. And if there be sedition, must it not be either in Words or Actions, or
both; and if there be no sedition, nor contriving of Insurrection at meetings
under color of Religious Worship and pretense of tenderness of Conscience, how
can those meetings be justly punished as seditious and tumultuous meetings?
Seeing the Remedies and Penalties of the Act are provided against the growing
and dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries, and disloyal Persons, who under
pretense of tender Consciences, do at their meetings contrive Insurrections, as
late experience has showed: And to prevent the mischiefs which may grow by
such seditious and tumultuous meetings under Religious pretenses. 16. Car. 2.
Regis, fol. 25, 26, 34, 35.

Concerning Sedition, and wicked Sectaries, etc.
Does it not appear by a Statute made in the three and twentieth year of the
Reign of Queen Elizabeth, 23 Eliz c. 1
Entitled, an Act for retaining the Queens Subjects in their due obedience,
who are seditious or wicked Sectaries, and disloyal Persons.

1. Are they not such Persons as pretend to have Power from the Sea of Rome to
absolve People? 23. Eliz. 1.

2. Are they not such Persons who shall or may persuade the Kings Subjects from
their natural obedience to his Majesty, and from the Protestant Religion
established to the Romish Religion. 23. Elizabeth cap. 1.

3. Are they not such as move the Kings Subjects to promise any obedience to
any pretended authority of the Sea of Rome.

4. Are they not such also as are willing to be withdrawn from the Church of
England to the Church of Rome?

5. Are they not such as brought, or shall bring in and put in Execution Bulls,
Writings and Instruments, and other superstitious things from the Sea of Rome;
And in respect thereof did withdraw great numbers from their due obedience to
her Majesty's Laws established for the service of God; And did also withdraw
diverse of the Queens Subjects from their natural obedience to her Majesty to
obey the usurped authority of Rome. 23. Eliz. cap. I.

Are not those seditious Persons, and seditious Actions, for any to withdraw
the Kings Subjects from the Common Prayer Book, and that form of Religion and
Worship as it is now established, to reconcile them to the Romish Religion, and
as aforesaid? And is not that to withdraw the Kings Subjects from their natural
obedience to his Majesty, etc.

But the Innocent People of God reproachfully called Quakers, are free from
such seditious principles and practices, and how can their Godly Meetings be
said to be seditious Conventicles and unlawful assemblies.

And the Statute made in the five and thirtieth year of the Reign of Queen
Elizabeth, 25 Eliz. c. 1.
against seditious Conventicles, was for the preventing and avoiding of such
great inconveniences and perils as might ^^ppen, and grow by the wicked and
dangerous practi^es of seditious Sectaries, and dis^oyal persons; And is it not
plain by the Statute aforesaid ( viz. the 23. El^^. 1.) who are those
seditious or wicked Sectaries, and disloyal Persons? And is not plain that the
^uakers so called are not a People of such wicked principles and seditious
Actions as aforesaid.

Concerning unlawful Assemblies, etc.
Seditious and Tumultuous Meetings are declared by the late Act to be unlawful
Assemblies, so that they are seditious and tumultuous meetings that are to be
dissolved and dissipated or prevented, as by the Statute appears. See 16.
Car. 2. Regis fol. 34, 35.

And how does it appear that the godly meetings of the Quakers are seditious
and tumultuous meetings? Must it not appear by Words and Actions? and if there
be no such things apparent, are they not innocent and free from the same, as
aforesaid?

Says Dalton in his Justice of Peace, An unlawful Assembly, etc. Is where
three persons or more shall gather together, come or meet in one place, to do
some unlawful Act with violence. See Dalt. I. P. fol. 277.

And is it not plain and evident that the innocent Quakers do not meet to do
any unlawful Act with violence? How then are their meetings said to be unlawful
meetings?

Says Dalton, when three Persons and more shall come and Assemble themselves
together, to the intent to do any unlawful Act with force or violence against
the Person of another, his Possession, or Goods, Dalt. 278.
as to Kill, Beat, or otherwise to hurt a man, to pull down a House, Wall,
Pale, Hedge or Ditch, wrongfully to enter upon, or into another man's
Possession, House or Land, etc. Or to cut or take away Corn, Grass, Wood, or
other goods wrongfully, or to Hunt unlawfully in any Park or Warren, or to do
any other unlawful Act (with force or violence) against the Peace, or to the
manifest terror of the People, if they only meet to such a purpose or intent,
This is an unlawful Assembly. Dalt. I. P. fol. 278.

But it is as clear as the Sun at noon day, That the innocent People of God
(called Quakers) do not meet together to such a purpose or intent, to do any
such unlawful actions, with force or violence, nor to the manifest terror of
the People: Therefore how can their godly meetings be truly said to be unlawful
Assemblies?

1. If Persons Assemble together to the intent to do any unlawful Act, with
force or violence against the Person of another, his Possession or Goods as
aforesaid, or to do any other unlawful act (with force or violence) against the
Peace, or to the manifest terror of the People, if they only meet to such a
purpose or intent, although they shall after depart of their own accord,
without doing any such thing, yet this is an unlawful Assembly. Dalt. I. P. 278.

2. If after their meeting, They shall ride, go, or move forward toward the
execution of any such act (wether they put their intended purpose in execution
or not) This is a Rout. Dalt. 278.

3. And if they execute any such thing indeed, then it is a Riot. Dalt. 278.

And says he, Mr. Finch describes them shortly thus, fi. libro 2.

An unlawful Assembly is when Persons shall Assemble to do any unlawful Act.
(So that the unlawfulness of the act about which they assemble to do, is that
it seems which makes their meeting together to be an unlawful Assembly, and to
be an Offense against Law.) A Rout is when they set forward to do it. And a
Riot is when they do it indeed. Dalt. 278.

Now in Riots, Routs, and unlawful Assemblies, these four circumstances are to
be considered. First, The number of the persons Assembled. 2. The intent and
purpose of the meeting. 3. The lawfulness, or unlawfulness of the Act. 4. The
manner and circumstance of doing it.

First, The number.
For the number, there must necessarily be three persons at the least, so
gathered together (to the intent to do some unlawful act with force or
violence, against the Peace, or Person of another, his Possession or Goods, or
to the manifest terror of the People as aforesaid,) For else, it can be no
Riot, 1 M. 12. 1 Eliz. 17.
Rout, or unlawful Assembly (says Dalton) within the meaning of these
Statutes. Dalt. 278.

For says he, an Assemby of an hundred Persons, or more (yea though they be in
Armor) yet if it be not in terror or affright of the People, and were assembled
without any intent to break the Peace, It is not prohibited by these Statutes,
nor unlawful. Dalt. I. P. 279.

2. For the intent. The intent.
It seems it can be no Riot, Rout, or unlawful Assembly, Except there be an
intent precedent to do some unlawful Act, and with violence or force. See Dalt.
J. P. fol. 279. Cromp. 6. P. R. 25.

3. As for the lawfulness of the act. Every man may Assemble company to aid him
in his House, Lawfulness of the Act.
against injury or violence; And every man in peaceable manner may assemble a
meet company, (and may come) to do any lawful thing. Dalt. J. P. 280.

4. As there must necessarily be three Persons at the least assembled together
to make a Riot, Rout, The manner and circumstances.
or unlawful assembly, so their being together, and their demeanor must be
such, as shall or may breed some apparent disturbance of the Peace; either by
threatening speeches, turbulent gesture, show of Armor, or actual force or
violence (to the terror and fearing of the peaceabler sort of people; or to the
emboldenimg and stirring up of such as are busy headed, and of evil
disposition, by such fact) or else it can be no unlawful assembly, etc. See
Dalt. J. P. fol. 281.

And does, or may it not clearly appear, the premises and circumstances being
truly and duly considered, That the peaceable and godly meetings of the
innocent people of God reproachfully called Quakers, truly and really to serve
and worship the Lord, without any intent, or purpose to do any unlawful act
with force or violence as aforesaid, are no unlawful Assemblies; Because their
being together, and their demeanor is such, as does not breed any apparent
disturbance of the Peace, neither by threatening speeches, turbulent gesture,
nor show of armor, nor actual force or violence, nor to the terror and fearing
of the peaceabler sort of people, who do neither meet in terror or affright of
the people, nor with any intent to break the Peace, by any unlawful act with
force or violence.

If any Riot, Assembly, or Rout of People against the Law be made in any part
of the Realm, the Justices of the Peace, three or two of them at the least,
and the Sheriff or Undersheriff of the Shire, where such Riot, Assembly, or
Rout shall be made, shall come with the Power of the County (if need be) to
Arrest them, and shall Arrest them; And the same Justices; Sheriff or
Under-Sheriffs have power to Record, that which they shall find in their
presence against the Law, and the same. Offenders shall be Convict by the
Record of the same Justices, Sheriff or Undersheriff, in manner and form as it
is contained in the Statute of Forcible Entries. See Pultons abstract and
Statute, 17: Rich. 2.8. Stat: 13. Hen. 4.7. And see Forcible Entry. 2.

And in Forcible Entry, 2. Pult. says, If a Justice of Peace of the County,
or Major, Bayliffe, Sheriff, Justices or Justice of Peace of the City, do fine
any that made such Forcible Entry, etc. he shall take the Offenders, and
commit them to the next Goal, and there to remain, etc. And whether the Parties
which made such Entries be present or gone, at the coming of the Justice, the
said Justice, Major, etc. shall in some good Town, or convenient place, near
unto the place where such force was made, enquire by a sufficient Jury of the
same County, City, etc. of them which made such forcible Entries, and if it be
found before them, That any have made Entry in form aforesaid, The said
Justices, Major, etc. shall reseise the said Lands, and put the party in
possession, which in such sort was put out. Pult. 132. Stat. 8. Hen. 6.9.

So that a Riot, Rout, or unlawful assembly is to be enquired of and found by a
Jury. For if any such Offense be committed within this Realm, the Sheriff
having a precept directed to him, shall return four and twenty persons dwelling
within the Shire, where such assembly or fact was committed, whereof every of
them shall have Lands and Tenements within the same shire to the yearly value
of twenty shillings Charter Land, or Freehold, or twenty six shillings eight
pence Copyhold, or of both above all charges, for to enquire of the said Riot,
Rout, or unlawful Assembly, etc. See the Stat. 19. Hen. 7.13. Pult. Abstract.

Arrest and Imprisonment.

An Arrest is the first apprehending and restraining of a man's person,
depriving it of its own Will and Liberty, Dalt. 405. Shep. 171.
and may be called the beginning of imprisonment. Dalt. J. P. 405. Shep. Just.
P. cap. 6. sect. 1. p. 171.

Imprisonment is where a man is Arrested against his Will, Dalt. 405. Shep 171.
or is restrained of his Liberty by putting him into the Goal, Cage or Stocks,
or into some House, or otherwise by keeping him in the high street, or open
field, so as he cannot freely go at liberty when and where he would. Dalt. J.
P. 405.

If the Constable, or other Officer (upon a Warrant received from a Justice of
Peace) shall come unto the party, or require, or charge, or command him to go,
or come before the Justice, etc. This is no Arrest or Imprisonment. And upon a
Warrant for the Peace; the Officer ought first to require the party to go
before the Justice before he may Arrest him. See Dalt. 405.

But (says he) this Arrest (being in Execution of the commandment of some
Court, or of some Officer of Justice) is expressed in their Writs by these words
or the like Capias Attachias, etc. To Attach, Arrest, Take, Bring, or Convey,
or cause to be Attached, Arrested; etc. All which words do imply the taking and
laying hold of the persons. Dalt. J. P. fol. 405, 406.

Is not the old Law of the Land very tender of the Liberty of a man, yea and of
all men of what estate and condition soever they be, without respect of Persons
(or differences of Opinions in matters of Religion, Faith and Salvation) seeing
it takes care and provides, That no man be imprisoned or destroyed in his
Liberty, Person or Estate, without being brought in to answer (or trial) by due
course of Law; and if men be imprisoned of destroyed in their Liberties,
Persons or Estates, without the Verdict of twelve men, or without being brought
in to answer (or Trial) by due Process of Law, are they not destroyed contrary
to Magna Charta, and the good old Law of the Land. For by a Statute made in the
eight and twentieth year of the Reign of King Edward the third, it is amongst
other things Enacted, That no man of what Estate or condition soever he be,
shall be put out of his Lands or Tenements, nor Taken, nor Imprisoned, nor
Disherited without being brought in to answer by due process of Law. Stat. 28.
Edw. 3. c. 3.

And by another Statute made in the forty second year of the Reign of King
Edward the third, It is Enacted, That no man be put to answer without
presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by due process, or by Writ
Original according to the old Law of the Land, and if any thing be done to the
contrary, it shall be void in Law, and holden for error. Stat. 42. Edw. 3. cap.
3.

First, does it not appear by the Statute, That no man is to be imprisoned
without being brought in to answer (or Trial) by due process of Law. (28. Edw.
3.3.) And secondly, that no man that is imprisoned, is to be put to answer
without presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by due Process,
or by Writ Original according to the old Law of the Land. And thirdly, That if
any thing be done to the contrary, It shall be void in Law, and holden for
error. Stat. 42. Edw. 3.3.

Also (says Dalton) The Liberty of a man is a thing specially favored by the
common Law of the Land, and by the Statute of Magna Charta, made 9. Hen. 3.29.
No Freeman shall be Taken, or Imprisoned, or Disseised of his Freehold, or
Liberties, or free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or otherwise destroyed;
but by the lawful Judgment of his equals, upon his ^^nviction for some
offense, by the Verdict of a Jury of twelve good and lawful men, or by the Law
of the Land. See the Petition An. 3. Car. Regis. And Stat. 5. Edw. 3. cap. 9.
Dalt. J. P. 406.

And by this Statute of Magna Charta (says Dalton) every Arrest or
Imprisonment, and every Oppression against the Law of the Land is forbidden;
and if any Judge, Officer, or other person against the Law, shall usurp any
Jurisdiction, and by color thereof shall Arrest, Imprison, or Oppress any
man, it is punishable by the Statute. See Dalt. J. P. fol. 406. Co. 10.75.

This grand Charter is a declaration of the ancient common Law. Co. 10.48. And
the Statute of Magna Charta, and Charta de Forresta for their excellency have
since been confirmed by the Authority of above thirty several Parliaments. See
Cooks Preface to the eighth Report, and Dalt. J. P. fol. 406.

Note that all Jurisdiction (says he) ought to be either by Charter, or by
prescription. See Co. 11.99. and Dalt, 406.

Also by the Statutes of 25. Edw. 3. cap. 4.28. Edw. 3.3. and 42. Edw. 3. cap.
3. No person shall be taken or Imprisoned, nor put to answer unless it be by
Indictment or Presentment of a Jury before Justices, or by matter of Record, or
by due Process made by Writ Original at the Common Law.

Says he, A Commisson to Arrest or Take a man, (and his goods) was holden to
be against Law, for that this ought to be either upon Indictment, or suite of
the party, or other due process of Law, Says Dalton 407 Br. Comiss. 15.16.
and Faux. Impris. 9. and Indictment 38.42. All. 5.12.42. Ed. 3.9. Co. 5.64.

And so note (says Dalton) That no man shall be Arrested for Debt; Detinue,
Trespass, or other cause of Action, but only by virtue of a preceptor
Comandment out of some court of Record, Dalt. I. P. fol. 407. Neither shall any
man Commit Another to Prison Except he be a Judge of Record. Cook 10.103. Dalt.
407.

But yet for Misdemeanors done against the Kings peace, as for Treason,
Felony, etc. The Offenders as well by the Common Law, as by diverse Statutes
may be Arrested and Imprisoned by the Officers of Justice Dalt. 407. And yet
for the Arresting of the body of a man in such cases, There must be some just
cause, etc. says Dalton. Dalt. I. P. fol. 407.

The Manner of Comitment of such Offenders. When any person shall be brought
before a Justice of peace for Murder, Manslaughter, or any other Felony
(wherewith the Justice of Peace may deal,) or for Suspicion thereof before the
Justice shall Commit or send such Offenders to Prison (says Dalton) he shall
take First, the Examination of such Offenders.

2. The Information of such as bring him, viz. He shall take their Examination,
and Information of the Fact, and Circumstances thereof, and so much thereof, as
shall be material to prove the fact, shall be put in writing within two days
after the said Examination. 3. The same Justice of Peace shall bind all such
by Recognisance, as do declare any thing Material to prove the fact, to
Appear at the next general Goal delivery (to be holden where the Trial of
the said fact shall be) Then and there to give in Evidence against such
Offenders. Dalt. 365.

4. And then the same Justice shall make his Mittimus to Carry the Offender to
the Goal. 5. And the said Justice or Justices of Peace shall Certify at the
next general Goal delivery such Examination, Information and Recognisance.
See the Stat. 1. and 2. Ph. and Ma. 13. Dalt. I. P. fol. 395.

No man is to be Attached by Any Accusation nor Forejudged of life or Limb,
etc. against the Form of the Charter, and the Law of the Land.

For by A Statute made in the fifth year of the Reign of King Edward the Third,
It is Enacted, 5. Edw.3.
That no man shall be Attached by any Accusation, nor Forejudged of Life or
Limb, nor his Lands, Tenements, goods nor Ghattells Seized into the Kings hand
against the Form of the Charter, and the Law of the Land, see the Stat. 5. Ed.
3.

And by Magna Charta many times confirmed in Parliament, It is Enacted, That no
Freeman be Taken and Imprisoned, or Disseized of his Freehold, or Liberties, or
Free Customs, or be Outlawed, or Exiled, or otherwise Distroyed, but by Lawful
Judgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land, we shall sell to no man, we
shall deny or defer to no man either Justice or Right. 9. Hen. 3.29. Co^k
upon Mag. cha^. fol ^^, etc.


And Cook upon Magna Charta says, That upon this Chapter, as out of a Root
many fruitful Branches of the Law of England have sprung. It contains nine
several branches.

First, that no man be taken and Imprisoned but by the Law of the Land, that is
to say, Common Law, Statute Law, or Customs of England.

2. No man shall be disseized, viz. put out of his Freehold, that is, Land,
Livelihood, or Liberties, such as belong to him by his Free Birthright,
unless it be by the lawful Judgment and Verdict of his Equals, by due course
and Process of Law.

3. No man shall be Outlawed, or put off the Law, that is, deprived of the
benefit of the Law, unless he be Outlawed by the Law of the Land.

4. No man shall be Exiled or Banished, but by the Verdict of his Equals, or
according to the Law of the Land.

5. No man shall be destroyed, etc. unless by Verdict, and according to the Law
of the Land.

6. No man shall be condemned, but by the Judgment of his Equals, or according
to the Law of the land.

7. We shall sell to no man Justice or Right.

8. We shall deny no man Justice or Right.

9. And ninthly, we shall defer no man Justice or Right.

And as it is Enacted, That no man of what Estate and condition soever he be,
28 Edw. 3. cap 3.
shall be taken or Imprisoned, etc. without being brought in to answer by due
Process of Law; So likewise no man that is imprisoned is to be put to answer
without Presentment, or matter of Record, or by due Process made by Writ
Original according to the old Law of the land. And moreover it is Enacted, That
if any thing be done to the contrary, it shall be void in Law, and holden for
error, as by the Statute appears. See Stat. 28. Edw. 3. c. 3. and Stat. 42.
Ed. 3. c. 3.

Are not they who are first Condemned, and Fined before they be imprisoned, and
after they be condemned and fined without the Vedict of their Equals, are
committed to prison without Bail or Main prize, are they not committed to
Prison without being brought in to answer or Trial? And if they be committed to
Prison without being brought in to answer by due Process of Law, are they not
committed contrary to the form of the Charter and Statutes aforesaid? And is it
not void in Law? seeing that no man is to be taken and imprisoned without being
brought in to answer by due Process of Law. And that no man that is taken and
imprisoned is to be brought in to answer without Presentment or Indictment, or
matter of Record before Justices, or by due Process, or by Writ Original
according to the old Law of the Land, and that if any thing be done to the
contrary, it shall be void in Law and holden for error as aforesaid. 28. Ed.
3.3. and 42. Ed. 3.3.

No man shall be condemned without Presentment or Indictment of good and lawful
people of the same neighborhood where the fact is committed, etc.

For the Law of the land provides and takes care that no person or persons
shall be condemned upon suggestion, without lawful Presentment or Indictment of
his good und lawful people of the same neighborhood, where such deeds be done
in due manner, or by Process made by Writ Original at the Common Law, nor none
shall be put out of his Franchise, nor out of his Freehold, unless he be duly
brought in to answer, and forejudged of the same according to the course of the
Law, and if any thing be done against the same, it shall be redressed and
holden for none: See Stat. 25. Ed. 3. cap. 4. Stat. 5. Edw. 3.9. Stat. 28. Edw.
3.3. Stat. 42. Edw. 3.3.

They which make false suggestions shall be punished by imprisonment until they
satisfy the party wronged, etc.

Item, Though it be contained in the great Charter, That no man be taken, nor
imprisoned, nor put out of his Freehold without Process of the Law,
nevertheless diverse people make false suggestion to the King; as well for
malice as otherwise, whereof the King is often grieved, and diverse of the Realm
put in damage against the form of the same Charter. Wherefore it is ordained,
That all they which make such suggestions shall be sent with the same
suggestions before the Chancellor, or Treasurer, and his grand Council, and
that they there find Surety to pursue their suggestions, and incur the same
pain that the other should have had, if he were attainted, in case that his
suggestion be found evil, and that then process of the Law be made against them
without being taken and imprisoned against the form of the said Charter and
other Statutes: Stat. 37 Edw. 3.18. St. 9. Hen. 3.29. and 25 Edw. 3.4. St. 42.
Ed. 3.3.

Item, As to the Article made of the last Parliament of those that make
grievous complaints to the King himself it is assented, That if he that makes
the complaint cannot prove His intent against the defendant by the process
limited in the same Article, he shall be committed to Prison, there to abide
till he has made agreement to the party of his damages, and of the slander
that he has suffered by such occasion; and after shall make Fine and Ransom to
the King, and the point contained in the same Article, That the Plaintiff shall
incur the same pain, which the other should have, if he were attainted, shall
be out in case that his suggestion be found untrue. See the Stat. 38. Edw. 3.
c. 9. 38 Ed. 3. cap 9.


All men are to have even Law and Execution of right, both rich and poor,
without respect of Persons.

The Law of the land provides and takes care, that all men shall have even Law,
and Execution of Right, both rich and poor, for by a Statute made in the reign
of King Edward the third, the King has declared, That he by his Oath is bound
to maintain the Law of the Land. And perceiving that the Law of the Land was
not well kept, and the execution of the same disturbed many times by
maintenance and procurement, as well in the Court as in the Country.

The King being (as he said) greatly moved of Conscience in this matter, and
for this cause, desiring as much for the pleasure of God, and ease and
quietness of his subjects, and for to save and keep his said Oath.

By the consent of his Council and other wise men did ordain that all his
Justices should from thenceforth do even Law and Execution of Right to all his
subjects rich and poor.

The Justices of both Benches, Assize, etc. shall do right to all men, and take
no Fee, but of the King.

First, We have commanded all our Justices, That they shall from henceforth do
equal Law, 20 Edw 3 cap. 1.
and execution of right to all our subjects, rich and poor without having
regard to any person, and without omitting to do right for any Letters, or
Commandment, which may come to them from us, or from any other, or by any other
cause. 20. Edw. 3. cap. 1.

And if that any Letters, Writs, or Commandments come to the Justices, or to
others deputed to do Law and Right according to the usage of the Realm, in
disturbance of the Law, 20 Edw 3
or of the Execution of the same, or of right to the Parties, The Justices and
other aforesaid shall proceed and hold their Courts, and Processes, where the
Pleas and matters be depending before them, as if no such Letters, Writs, or
Commandments were come to them.

And they shall certify Us, and our counsel of such Commandments which be
contrary to the Law as is aforesaid.

And to the intent that our Justices should do even Right to all people in the
manner aforesaid without more favor showing to one then to another, We have
ordained and caused our said Justices to be sworn, That they shall not from
henceforth, as long as they shall be in the Office of Justice, take Fee, nor
Robe of any man, but of our self, And that they shall take no gift, nor Reward
by themselves, nor by other, privily nor apertly of any man that has to do
before them by any way, except meat and drink, and that of a small value, etc.
And for this cause we increased the Fees of the same our Justices in such
manner as it ought reasonably to suffice them. Stat. 2o. Ed. 3.1. St. 2, Ed.
3.8. St. 11. Rich. 2.10. Regist. f. 186.

See the Oath of the Justices being made Anno the 18. Edw. 3. wherein it is
contained, That they shall well and lawfully serve the King, and his people in
the Office of Justice, and that they shall do equal Law, and execution of Right
to all his subjects, rich and poor without having regard to any person; and
that they deny to do no man common right by the Kings Letters, nor none other
means, nor for none other cause; and in case any Letters come to them contrary
to the Law, that they do nothing by such Letters, but certify the King
thereof, and proceed to execute the Law notwithstanding the same Letters. And
in case they be from thenceforth found in default in any of the points
aforesaid, They shall be at the Kings Will of body, Lands, and Goods, thereof
to be done as shall please him. See the Oath of the Justices (at large) being
made Anno the 18. Edw. 3. and Anno Dom. 1344.

No Commandment under the Kings Seal shall disturb or delay Justice.

Item, it is Recorded and established, That it shall not be commanded by the
Great Seal, nor the little Seal, 2 Edw. 3. cap. 8.
to disturb or delay common right, and though such Commandments do come, the
Justices shall not therefore leave to do Right in any point. Stat. 2. Ed. 3.
St. 9. Hen. 3.29. St. 5. Ed. 3.9. and 14. Ed. 3.14.

None shall be attached or forejudged contrary to the great Charter and the Law
of the land. Item, 9 Hen 3.29 2 Ed. 3.8 14 Ed. 3.14 28 Ed. 3.3.
It is enacted, That no man from henceforth shall be attached by any
accusation, nor forejudged of Life or Limb, nor his Lands, Tenements, Goods,
not Chattels seized into the Kings hands against the form of the Charter, and
the Law of the Land. Stat. 5. Ed. 3. cap. 9.

None shall be put to answer an Accusation made to the King without
Presentment, or some matter of Record, etc.

Item, At the Request of the Commons by their Petitions put forth in this
Parliament to Eschew the mischiefs and damage done to diverse of his Commons by
false Accusers, which oftentimes have made their Accusations more for revenge
and singular benefit, than for the profit of the King, or of his people, which
accused persons some have been taken, and sometimes caused to come before the
Kings Counsel by Writ, and otherwise upon grievous pain against the Law. It is
assented and accorded, for the good Governance of the Commons, That no man be
put to answer without Presentment before Justices, or matter of Record, or by
due process made by Writ Original according to the old Law of the Land. And if
any thing from henceforth be done to the contrary, it shall be void in the Law,
and holden for error. Stat. 42. Ed. 3. ca. 3. St. 25. Ed. 3.4. and 37. Ed. 3.18.

None shall be condemned without lawful Presentment, etc.

Item, Whereas it is contained in the great Charter of the Franchises of
England That none shall be imprisoned, nor put out of his Freehold, nor of his
Franchises, nor free Customs, unless it be by the Law of the Land: It is
Accorded, Assented and Established, That from henceforth none shall be taken by
Petition, or suggestion made to our Lord the King, or to his Counsel, unless it
be by Indictment or Presentment of his good and lawful People of the same
neighborhood, where such deeds be done in due manner, or by Process made by
Writ Original at the Common Law: Nor that none be put out of his Franchise, nor
of his Freeholds, unless he be duly brought in to answer and forejudged of the
same by the course of the Law: And if any thing be done against the same, it
shall be redressed and holden for none: Sat. 25. Edward 3 4. Stat 5. Edw 3.9.
Stat. 28. Ed. 3.3. and Stat. 42. Edw. 3.3.

If the Law of England cannot be lawfully executed without a Jury, Jur. p. 2, 3.
who are said to be the true and Ordinary Judges of the land, whose verdict is
the effectual Judgment, (as its said) whereby all men, are Judged by their
Peers, as well for their lives as lands, etc. if so, how careful ought Jurors
to be, that they neither ignorantly nor wilfully destroy men in their lives,
liberties, or estates, who are so entrusted therewith upon trials, and so
greatly Concerned in the same, And if men be Condemned or in many sort
destroyed; without the verdict or Judgment of a Jury, is the Law of England
lawfully Executed upon them?

And Concerning Banishment, Cook upon the 29. Chapter of Magna Charta, says,
that by the Law of the land no man can be exiled or Banished out of his native
Country, but either by Authority of Parliament or incase of abjuration for
felony by the common Law. Co. 2. part. Institutes. fol. 47.

Then is it not evident and remains true, that no man ought to be Banished (by
the Law of England) out of his native Country for the Service and worship of
God, (in the way and manner, appointed by the word and Spirit of God) because
it is not felony to serve and worship the Lord, Neither is it Enacted,
Ordained and declared by Authority of Parliament, That (such and such persons
or) any man shall be Banished out of his native Country for the Service and
worship of God.

If Judges take upon them to condemn and pass the Sentence of Transportation
or Banishment upon others, for error (as they Apprehend) about the manner of
the worship of God, whilst the Judges themselves (acording to their own
confession in evidence against themselves) do daily err and go astray from the
way of God, and daily offend against the laws of God, do not they in so doing
condemn others for the same or the like offense as the Judges know themselves
gulty of; And says Andrew Horn in the Mirror of Justice, Criminal persons
are forbidden by the law, to be Judges for (says the same Author) God when he
was upon Earth entered into the Consistory, where a Sinner was to be Judged to
death when God wrote upon the ground, and said to the suitors who came to Judge
her, who of you is without Sin; and there gave a Judgment as an example to
Judges, who take upon them every day to Judge the people, whereby he taught
them, that none should take upon them so high and noble a calling as to sit in
the seat of God to Judge offenders when they themselves are guilty and
Condemnable, See the mirror of Justices, page 59. 60.

The END.

