Father Peters's APOLOGY TO THE POPE FOR HIS Miscarriages in England.
Pope. SO Monsieur Petre, What News from the English-Court? How stand the
Affairs of our Holy Mother there? What Progress in our Designs? Does our
Intended Reformation thrive? What number of Converts? Is the Army new Modeled,
and all things ready for the main point? Come tell us, Mr. Petre, for I am big
with Expectation.


Petre. May it please your Holiness we are all undone, I Vow.


Po. Now, as I hope to be Sainted, I must tell you, you are an unmannerly blunt
Fellow, to put me into such a Fright of a sudden: That Rebellious Son of mine,
at Paris, has so often disordered me, with the Apprehension of his Dragoons,
and Military Contributions, that every hard Word I hear, is as bad as a Fit of
an Ague to me; and I had rather lose my Eyes or my Ears, than receive a
Memorial from France, it smells so horridly, I fancy, of Powder and Match: But
now I am recovered, prithee, What is the matter?


Pet. Why, Sir, you must muster up all your Courage to hear what I am going to
relate, and truly, nothing but the satisfaction of having Escaped, could
encourage me to make a Repetition of the Danger.


Po. What Danger do you mean? I thought England was as safe a place as the
Conclave here.


Pet. Ay, and so it was, till a parcel of ill-natured Dutchmen came and
spoiled good Company, and made us give over Housekeeping; they would, indeed,
have provided a sort of a scurvy Lodging for some of the Chief of us; but being
very nice in the choice of my Appartments, I made shift to provide for my self.


Po. What, then I understand our last and great Pillar whereon our Interest in
England leant is fallen, fallen, never to be recovered: And now, I Will warrant,
you are come to make a lamentable Apology for the Defeat, though nothing but
your own hotheaded Council ruined the Design.


Pet. May it please your Holiness, my Endeavors and Abilities to serve Your
Holiness and this Court, I humbly conceive, need not a Confirmation, and --


Po. Yes, Sir, I must confess you have some Qualifications of a Man for our
business. But, Sir, if Impudence be the greatest Virtue you can boast of, you
may serve indeed for an Executioner, but never for a Privy Counselor. I told
you, I feared your hard Riding would cost you a Fall.


Pet. Sir, with Submission, all Circumstances considered, I could do no less,
for what with the Fears on the one side, and Encouragements on the other, it
had been Madness to have misspent or lost so much as one hour. Be pleased to
consider, the King was far gone in his Declension, and how impossible it seemed
to do any thing by fair means, with that scrupulous Generation.


Po. Ay, Sir, but one would think a Man of Discretion should, at least, so
manage his Projects, as that every Eye should not be able to see their
nakedness.


Pet. Your Holiness has a piercing Judgment indeed: But I presume you will not
say, our Mysteries were liable to every easy Interpretation: Did not we keep
up an Army, contrary to Law, with the bare pretense of the King's Martial
Disposition, and that it tended no farther than to make an appearance of
Grandeur? Did we not prepare the People, by our Jesuits, Monks, etc. to all
Changes whatsoever, by Preaching up the necessity of Obedience, even without
Reserve? And if we could but have brought our Two Friends of Holland to have
encouraged the Taking off the Tests, they would have saved us abundance of
Labor, and have been themselves accessory to their Destruction: But the Devil
owed us an everlasting Chain, and I fear he has paid us home.


Po. O dear, In nomine Patris and Filii, etc. I wonder, Sir, at your Rudeness
to name the Devil in my Company: why, pray Sir, you speak of him with as little
concern, as you would of an Old Acquaintance: Pray, Sir, let us be as quiet as
we can while you are here, and the Devil and you go together afterward, if you
love his Company so well. But, pray Sir, had not you a Politic Stroke in
another Grand business of State too; you can guess what I mean.


Pet. Lord, Sir, that was my Masterpiece, 'twas a Design well laid, and I do
not doubt will come in Play again yet.


Po. Oh! yes the Groundwork was good, the Foundation was laid to your hand, in
a President of the same nature, and yet you built, by your favor, but very
aukardly upon it.


Pet. Nay, nay, question that and take all: Pray, Sir, What can prove the
Validity of a Cause better than an answerable Effect.


Po. Yes, yes, you are in the right of it thus far, let us Talk big at least,
now we are Loosers especially: But between you and I, there were such palpable
Contradictions in your Reports of it, that an ordinary Naturalist, or indeed
Arithmetitian might have reduced you to a Nonplus about it.


Pet. Why truly, Sir, we had so many Irons in the Fire at once, that we could
not dis-engage our selves clearly of any of them; and, according to the English
Proverb, Between two Stools we let fall the Dish. But the first opportunity
your Holiness shall be pleased to grant, I shall endeavor to make your Holiness
sensible, that most of our Designs have been both Prudently laid and managed;
and, that nothing but an overruling Providence could have defeated or ruined
them.


Published with Allowance.

LONDON, Printed for W. D. 1688.


