Farway Bell.

A CHRISTMAS TRUTH OR TWO out of the West worth the hearing;

Which will be Attested by very many of known worth:

Sent up in diverse Reports and Letters, and upon full examination committed to
the public to be thought upon.

Oh the depth! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and his ways past finding
out?

Printed in the Year 1646.

Farway Bell
I Must thus far anticipate him that takes these Admiranda's to hand, telling
him he is here not to expect either learned Paraprase or Judgment upon these
manifestoes, but only a naked Relation of their truths, and nothing but their
truths, which have matter in them worthy the wisest Rumination.

Ad Rombum succincte.
Upon the day of our Saviors Nativity this present year, at the Canonical hour
of Morning Prayer, the known learned and able Minister of the Parish of Farway
in the County of Devon near Honyton, Mr. Thomas Foster, being outed of his Cure
of Souls, for no other crime that he knows or hears of, but his conscionable
care of Preaching his People into constant Loyalty and Obedience to the sacred
Servant of God, their dread Sovereign, and a young piece of Dagon Divinity
Committee'd into his place, by the force of as judicious a Troop of Horse; The
new come thing to show his zeal to this present rare Reformation to Confusion,
forbids the Banes of Devotion and Worship of God the Father, that graciously
sent his obedient Son, who out of incomparable indulgence, as on that day came
in flesh to Redeem all flesh from sin; Betwixt himself, Timothy White worm and
the present new Churches one part, and the Religious longing fouls of his now
usurped Parishioners of Farway on the other part, he as wisely, as well knowing
cause why, they ought not to be joined together, according to the Statute Law
of this Land, yet by consent unrevoked.

Guess you whence it came to pass just at the ancient Canonical hour of
Morning Prayer, upon that day set apart by our Protestant Church of England for
many Ages, to the solemnizing of the most blessed Birth of our Redeemer; The
Church and Belfry doors of Farway all being shut, one of the Bells in the Tower
tolled so competent a time, as that very many of the Parishioners came together
to see whether their Weathercock were turned, and thought by what they heard,
The invitation of the Tolling Bell (their Head upon better resolves) would to
his ability have spoken comfort and rejoicing, being used hitherto to be sent
home as on that day, with ravished spirits on such sweet subjects, but they
find those godly Expectations frustrate, and are filled with amazement,
finding their Bell keep tolling, and their Clark to come with the keys, to
enquire of them whence this should be.

All diligence is used by the Clark and Parishioners in search, who out of
their Astonishment find nor knavery, juggling or collusion in the business,
the doors they find all fast, the Church void and empty of all things capable
of acting such an amazing exploit.

Other Letters tell us, That likewise upon St. Stephens day, at the same hour,
the Bell tolled again, and was seen moving when the searchers came up into the
Tower to make discovery; going away full of trouble and distraction, one of the
Parishioners of known judgment and learning, being demanded his opinion, told
them, He was at the greatest puzzle that ever he was in since he understood
himself, and could not tell what to make of it, unless Almighty God did so
^oll his people in the old way to Church on those times to Worship and Honor
him, with giving of Thanks, and the Devil kept them out.

Thus has Farway Bell tolled out his Truth for Christmas.

Ofwell Barn.
IN this same year about the Nineteenth of December in the Afternoon, one
Aminadab Doset or some such like name, a Rebel (for if there has been any
Rebellion in this wretched Kingdom these five or six years, this Presbyterian
Bell is one) for he has been on both sides, but finding the prevailing State
likely to advantage him most, this loose fellow, to show himself as factious,
as seditious and lascirvious, the last of which has been offered before
Justice to be sworn against him, by the handsomest women of this usurpers
Parish, that very Afternoon this most pernicious Law-driver gave earnest to a
Thatcher to thatch the Parsonage great Barn, he most unworthily having wound
himself into the Benefice of a Divine not known nor informed against to be of
any just exception, That immediate evening of his Bargain making for Christmas
day, the Threshers of the usurped Corn gone from their work, the walls of that
great Barn being strongly built, and having stood firm all these dreadful
storms that righteous Spirits have lately trembled in, fell very strangely in a
calm still breath of Air, the walls tumbling outward from the Corn, and the
roof into the Threshing-floor.

And the same week of sacred Feasts held in honor and memory of the Saints,
which he contemned to celebrate, resolved so highly to profane, this
Individuum vagum that never was long quiet with himself or any other where he
lived, as I am most certainly imformed, and wish no better work then this
Troublers questioning our relation, he was foreed in a serene night, by the
cracking and shaking of the roof of his usurped house, about midnight to raise
and fly, with those he had nested in it, the house being well known to be
likely for long continuance.

Here me thinks I am in his new cut Cloak, and can Divinity as well as he.

The stones in the wall, and the timber in the sides of the house cry, Woe unto
him that coveteth an evil coveteousness, his Brothers house, or his Neigabors
wife: This Aminadab -- heard the voice of the Lord and fled, no strong wind
rent the Mountains; no Earthquake intrembled any other house in the Country;
no fire affrighted in the night: Behold, the Lord passes by; the Beams
(Beloved) put forth their terrible voice, believe it the Lord was in the Voice,
and what do thou hear, was heard in his conscience: And now, Beloved, I have
done with that; and mistake not, for in this I have not broke what I promised,
this is the word of God and not of man.

Ofwell Bible.
I Have but a word of this bound Tragedy, with his black inside of his own more
to trouble you with, and it will be justified to the brazen face of this
Presbyter of Ofwell.

Having fallen out with the Church great Bible, he charitably resolves to
persecute it out of the Parish, and to that purpose sends for his elder
Churchwarden, and downright discovers himself so angry with that big Book, that
he would out it, and have another; telling him, if he would not be the
Executioner, it should be the worse for him.

The elder Churchwarden demanding the reason of this his rage against that
fair, and by full Authority settled Bible: He shortly told him out of his
Divinity, That he would have another, for that Bible was against the
Parliament: A worthy Reason to vote the holy Book out of the house of God, like
the rest that comes from him: But I have done with him, the highest Authority
is fit to take him to task once more.

Broadwinsor work.
William Dunn a factious Farmer of that Parish in the County of Dorset, upon
the same day would himself go with his Plough, which being suddenly at a stand
in the field, had his Speech taken from him, and so the Beast Dunn remained
until he died.

He has others must account for such Irregularities, Prophanenesses, when they
shall appear before the Judgment Seat of the contemned holy ones: Have thou
nothing to do with the stool of wickedness; It is a fearful thing to fall into
the hand of the everliving God. Think upon these manifested Truths; refer all
Judgment to the time: But pray that our distracted deluded people may be
restored to the Spirit of Wisdom, Judgment, and a sound mind.

FINIS.

