Christian Religious Meetings Allowed by the Liturgy, Are no Seditious
Conventicles, nor punishable by the late Act.

OR, What Persons and Meetings are Owned and Allowed by the Liturgy of the
Church of ENGLAND.

And also, What makes a Religious Meeting to pass and Suffer under the Name of
a Seditious Conventicle. And likewise, what is a Conventicle, and what is not a
Conventicle. And concerning the Church and its Government. And the Difference
between obstinately and Conscientiously refusing to take Judicial Oaths. And
concerning the Jurors and Judges, who may be concerned to hear and determine
the Causes and Matters aforesaid.

Written the beginning of the fourth Month, in the Year 1664. By R. F.

Christian Religious Meetings allowed by the Liturgy, are no Seditious
Conventicles, nor punishable by the Late Act, etc.
WHereas by the Act, Entitled, An Act to prevent and suppress Seditious
Conventicles, It is Enacted and Declared, That if any Person of the Age of
sixteen years, or upwards, being a Subject of this Realm, at any time after the
first day of July, which shall be in the Year of our Lord God 1664. shall be
present at any Assembly, Conventicle, or Meeting, under color or pretense of
any Exercise of Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy, or
practice of the Church of England, at which Meeting or Assembly, there shall be
five persons, or more, assembled together, over and above those of the same
Household; Then it shall and may be lawful for two Justices of Peace to commit
them to Prison, etc. for the first and second Offense, in Order to
Transportation.

Is not this a matter very disputable, and does it not belong to spiritual men
to judge, what Meetings upon the account of Religion do agree with, or are
contrary to the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, before the
penalties of the Act be put in execution against them?

For if to assemble and meet together upon the account of Religion, according
to Scripture, be to assemble and meet together according to the Liturgy and
practice of the Church of England; then they who assemble and meet together
upon the account of Religion and Worship of God according to the Scripture (to
the number of five or upwards) they do not meet contrary to the allowance of
the Liturgy, or practice of the Church of England, as aforesaid.

If the Liturgy do allow of meeting together, according to the Scripture, then
they who meet together according to the Scriptures, are no seditious Sectaries,
neither is their Religious meetings seditious Conventicles, or punishable by
the said Act, being according to Scripture, and allowed of by the Liturgy of
the Church, as aforesaid.

The Liturgy allows of the Scripture as its foundation, The Scripture is owned
as the ^ound^^^^^ of the Liturgy, etc.
and the Scriptures are acknowledged by the Liturgy to be the moving cause of
peoples Confession and Acknowledgment unto God of their manifold sins and
transgressions, with an humble, lowly, penitent and obedient heart, to the end
that they may receive forgiveness of the same by his infinite goodness and
mercy; for proof thereof see the beginning of the Liturgy.

What the Liturgy allows at Meetings.
To assemble and meet together before the Lord to render thanks for the great
benefits that we have received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy
praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to ask those things which be requisite
and necessary, as well for the Body as the Soul, and to accompany one another
in prayer, with a pure heart and an humble voice, to the Throne of Gods
heavenly Grace, is that which the Liturgy owns and allows of, as its own and
the Churches Practice; see for pro of thereof that part of the Liturgy at the
beginning, where it is said, Dearly Beloved Brethren, the Scripture moves us
in sundry places, to acknowledge and confess our manifold sins and
transgressions.

To meet according to the Liturgy.
Seeing it is so; Then for us and the People of God to assemble and meet
together (to the number of five and above) before the Lord, upon the account of
Religion, as Worshippers of him, to render thanks for the great benefit we have
received at his hands, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most
holy Word, and to ask those things which be requisite and necessary, as well
for the Body, as the Soul, and to accompany one another in prayer, with a pure
heart and an humble voice, to the Throne of Gods heavenly Grace, is allowed by
the Liturgy, Meetings not punishable by the late Act; but freed from the
penalties, being allowed by the Liturgy, etc.
and according to the practice of the Church of England: And therefore such
ought not to be punished, but acquitted and tolerated, who assemble and meet
according to the Liturgy, or practice of the Church, as aforesaid; because
such their godly religious meetings are allowed by the Liturgy of the Church,
and such meetings are not prohibited but allowed by the Act, as are allowed by
the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England.

By what has been said, it may and does appear what the Liturgy of the Church
of England is, How can evidence or Judgment be safely given without danger in
such cases, etc.
and what it does allow, and that our godly and religious Meetings are not
contrary to the allowance of the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England,
as aforesaid: How can they then that come to swear against us, swear with a
safe Conscience, that we meet and assemble together on the behalf of the Lord
as his Worshippers, contrary to the allowance of the Liturgy, or practice of
the Church of England: And if our Jurors or Judges be not spiritual men, and
understanding in Divine matters, how will they judge aright in this case? that
they may not destroy, but preserve us in our Liberties, Principles, and
Practices.

Seeing that in this Case much ambiguity or doubt may arise, and if this be a
Spiritual cause, and divine matter, which is to be heard and determined, that
is to say, Whether we meet and assemble together on the behalf of the Lord, as
his Worshippers, or no; And whether such our godly and religious meetings, be
contrary to, or agreeable to what the Liturgy or practice of the Church of
England in such cases allows of; ought not we herein to be judged by
Spiritual men? Because it is said in the Statute of the 24 Hen. 8. That the
Body Spiritual having power, 2^. Hen. 8. Chap. 12.
when any Cause of the Law Divine happens to come in question, or of Spiritual
Learning, to declare and determine all such doubts, and to administer all such
Offices and Duties, as to the^r Room Spiritual does appertain; for the due
administration whereof, and to keep them from corruption, and sinister
affection, the Kings most noble Progenitors, and the Ancestors of the Nobles of
this Realm, have sufficiently endowed them with honor and Possessions. And the
Laws temporal are for Trial of Property of Lands and Goods and for the
Conservation of the people of this Realm in unity and peace, without Ravin or
Spoil, by the Temporal Judges, and the other by the Spiritual Judges, as
aforesaid, or as by the said Statute may be seen, 24 Hen. 8.12.

Seditious Conventicles.
ANd as concerning seditious Conventicles, provided against by the Act, The
reason given for preventing and suppressing seditious Conventicles, etc.
and the Reason given for the preventing and suppressing of them, It is
declared in the Preamble or Ground of the Act, the Reason for making the Act,
which is, viz. For providing therefore of further and more speedy Remedies
against the gro^ing and dangerous practices of seditious Sectaries, and other
disloyal persons, who under pretense of tender Consciences, do at their
Meetings contrive Insurrections, as late experience has showed.

Seditious Sectaries who at their meetings do contrive Insurrections, ought to
be punished, and Remedies against such meetings to be provided. The innocent
Quakers free from contriving Insurrections at their godly meetings, as
experience has showed.
Are not those persons and that people only declared to be seditious Sectaries
and disloyal persons, who under pretense of tender Consciences, do at their
Meetings contrive Insurrections? as late experience has showed: And may they
not justly be declared to be so, who are so indeed? for there is good reason to
provide Remedies against such persons and practices, who under pretense of
tenderness of Conscience, do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as
aforesaid.

But as concerning the innocent people of God, reproachfully called Quakers,
they are clear and free from such seditious and dangerous practices, and are
not those seditious Sectaries and disloyal persons, because cause they neither
have, nor do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, neither has former or
present experience showed any such thing to be done, or intended by them; for
it is against their Principles, practices, doctrines, and judgments, and they
are utterly and absolutely against designing or contriving any such things;
neither did their godly Religious Meetings ever produce any such bad effects,
as experience has showed for many years bypast.

What is a Conventicle according to the Act, and punishable by the same
accordingly? ought not this to be known and rightly considered by them that are
to be Witnesses, Jurors, or Judges, that the innocent may not be condemned with
the wicked, because it is forbidden by the Law of God, saying, The Innocent and
Righteous slay thou not; therefore by the Law of God, the Innocent and
Righteous are not to be destroyed, but preserved in their Principles and
Practices, to God-wards, as well as in their Liberties, Persons, and Estates.

To meet together in a private House, to the number of four, what is not a
Conventicle.
besides the Household or Family, is no seditious Conventicle, neither is such
private Meetings either declared by the said Act to be such Conventicles,
neither are they provided against by the said Act, or punishable thereby, but
justified and tolerated, and not at all condemned. Therefore private Meetings,
or to meet in private Houses, to the number of four beside the Household or
Family, are no seditious Conventicles, though they may meet contrary to the
Liturgy, or practice of the Church of England.

And (it seems) according to the intent of the Act, to meet and assemble
together to the number of five or upwards, besides them of the Household or
Family where they do meet, under color or pretense of any exercise of
Religion, in other manner than is allowed by the Liturgy, or practice of the
Church of England, is an offense.

Then, it seems, to meet together in greater or lesser numbers, upon the
account of Religion, so that they who assemble and meet together for the
Exercise of Religion, do preach and pray, or perform Religious Exercise and
Duty to God, allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, is
no offense.

What godly and religious meetings are, according unto, or allowed by the
Liturgy of the Church of England, etc.
What is it then for a people to meet in greater Numbers (than four, besides the
Household or Family) upon the Account of Religious Exercises, and not to be
contrary unto, but allowed of by the Liturgy, or practice of the Church of
England, so as such Religious Meetings may not suffer by the Late Act? To the
which, something is said before, that to Assemble and Meet together (to the
number of five, or above) before the Lord, upon the account of Religion, as
Worshippers of him, to render thanks unto God for the great benefits that we
have received of him, to set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most
holy Word, and to ask those things which be requisite and necessary both for
Soul and Body, and in the performance of that Duty to accompany one another in
Prayer, with a pure Heart, and an humble Voice, to the Throne of Gods Heavenly
Grace, is allowed by the Liturgy and practice of the Church of England, as
aforesaid.

To Assemble and Meet together before the Lord upon the account of Religion and
Worship, to Preach and Pray, or perform Duty to God, is not contrary unto, but
allowed of by the Liturgy, and is according to the practice of the Church of
England; because they either do, or ought so to do, as aforesaid; and we meet
together before the Lord, as Worshippers of him, to Preach and Pray, or perform
Duty to God, therefore our Meetings are according to the practice of the
Church, and allowed of by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

Again, The Liturgy of the Church of England says, See Communion upon the
Feast of Trinity so called.
It is very meet, right, and our bounden Duty, that we should at all times, and
in all places, perform Duty to God: And if it be very meet, right, and the
bounden Duty of a professing people, that they should at all times, and in all
places, meet together to Worship God, or perform Duty unto him, as aforesaid,
then for us, and the people of the Lord to meet together at any time, and in
any place, to Worship God, or perform Duty unto him as his people, or true
Worshippers of him, is not contrary unto, but according to the manner that is
allowed of by the Liturgy of the Church of England, as aforesaid.

See Good Friday, the Collects so called.
The Church is declared by the Liturgy to be the Household and Family of God;
then they who are of Gods Household and Family, may meet and assemble together
to wait upon God in the way of his worship: and not go under the name of
seditious Conventicles, because the Liturgy declares the Church to be the
Household and Family of God, and Parish Meeting places are not that Household and
Family, neither are wicked unsanctified people the Household and Family of God:
Therefore wicked unsanctified people are not allowed of by the Liturgy, or
declared to be the Church of God; and to refuse to meet in point of Religion
and Worship with such as are not of Gods Household and Family, is not to refuse
to come to the Church and Service of God; but to assemble and meet together in
point of Religion and Worship of God, with the Household and Family of God, to
perform Duty unto him at any time, and in any place, is to come to the Church
and Service of God, according to the allowance of the Liturgy of the Church,
as aforesaid.

What is owned by the Liturgy to be a Church, what is not.
That the Church is not owned or declared by the Liturgy to be either the
Parish Meeting places, or wicked unsanctified persons, though they may assemble
and meet there, is very plain; because the Liturgy declares and says, the
Church either are, or should be Regenerated and Born of God; and they who are
not Regenerate and Born of God, are not owned or declared by the Liturgy to be
any Members of the Church of England. And again, the Church is declared by the
Liturgy, not only to be Regenerate and Born of Water and the Spirit, but it is
also Declared by the Liturgy, that the whole Body of the Church is governed
and sanctified by the Spirit of God; for proof thereof, Order of Baptism. Good
Friday Col.
see that called the Order of Baptism, and on Good Friday the Collects.

Admittance into Church Fellowship and becoming Church members, according to
the Liturgy.
Seeing then it remains true, according to the Liturgy, that none are admitted
into Church Fellowship, nor accounted Church Members, but such as are
Regenerate and Born of God, and they who are Governed and Sanctified by the
Spirit of God: Then to assemble and meet together with such as are born of God,
and Governed and Sanctified by the Spirit of God, is not contrary unto, but
according to the manner allowed of by the Liturgy of the Church of England.

The Government of the Church is Spiritual according to the Liturgy.
If the whole Body of the Church be Governed and Sanctified by the Spirit of
God, then every particular Member thereof is under the Government and
Sanctification of the Spirit of God, as aforesaid; and it seems such are the
only Church Members allowed by the Liturgy of the Church of England: then they
who have the sense and knowledge of the Work of Gods Spirit upon their hearts, 1
Cor. 6.11 Gal. 4.6, 7. Heb. 8.10, 11, 12. Romans 8.14, 15, 16, 17.
and working within them, both for Regeneration, Government of heart, and
Sanctification, and also testifying unto their spirits, that they are the
children of God, as the Saints and Believers in Christ aforetime had, according
to the Scripture Record, those are the true Church, and they and their Meetings
are allowed of by the Liturgy aforesaid.

Then they who are not governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, Who are
owned to be Mi^isters and Members of the Church, and who are not, both
according to the Liturgy and Scripture.
are no Ministers, nor Members of the Church, neither according to the
Liturgy, nor the Scriptures. For the Liturgy says, the whole Body of the
Church is governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God; then they who are not
governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, are not owned either as Ministers
or Members of the Church; and the Scripture says, If any man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his: Christ does not own any, either as his
Ministers, or Members of his Church, if they have not his Spirit, as aforesaid.
See Romans 8.9.

Seeing that the whole Body of the Church is declared by the Liturgy to be
Governed and Sanctified by the Spirit of God, is not the body of the Church a
sanctified Body, and under a spiritual Government? And ought not Spiritual men
to hear and determine spiritual matters? And seeing that it is a spiritual
matter that is like to come in question, about meeting according to the
allowance of the Liturgy, or no, may not those that are to be tried in such
cases, justly appeal to the spiritual Judges, to judge of spiritual Causes, and
not to the Temporal Judges; for is there not belonging unto the Imperial Crown
of the Realm, a Body Politic, compact of all sorts and degrees of people,
divided in Terms and by Names of Spirituality and Temporality, to render and
yield Justice and final determination to all manner of people, resiants or
subjects within the Kings Realm, in all Causes, Matters, Debates, and
contentions happening to occur, insurge, or begin with the limits thereof? And
has not the Body Spiritual power, when any Cause of the Law Divine happens to
come in question, or of Spiritual Learning, to declare and determine all such
doubts? and are not the Laws Temporal for Trial of Property of Lands and Goods,
24 Hen. 8. Chap. 12.
and for the Conservation of the people of this Realm in unity and peace,
without Ravin or spoil. And are not those Temporal Laws to be administered and
executed by sundry Judges and Ministers of the other part of the said Body
Politic, called the Temporality? If the Body Politic be divided into, and
consist of two Parts, the one part called by the name of Spirituality, and the
other part called the Temporality; the one to hear and determine spiritual
matters and causes and the other to hear and determine Temporal causes and
matters: For as much as ours is a spiritual matter or cause, being concerning
the Worship of God, ought not the Temporal Judges to leave it to the spiritual
Judges to hear and determine? The whole stress of the matter lies in this
thing, that is to say, whether Meetings upon the account of Religion be allowed
by the Liturgy or practice of the Church of England, or no? For those Meetings
that are not contrary to the allowance of the Liturgy or practice of the
Church of England, are not (it seems) neither prohibited, nor punishable by the
Act, as aforesaid.

It is declared by the Liturgy of the Church of England, 2 Coll. for Peace.
that the Service of God is perfect freedom; and seeing that by the Liturgy
of the Church of England the service of God is owned, allowed of, and declared
to be perfect freedom, whether ought any person or persons whatsoever, to be
forced either to it or from it by outward compulsion, but rather left to their
liberty and freedom concerning the same.

Concerning Oaths, and Jurors, or Judges, etc.
WHereas it is said in the late Act, That there are some persons that do
obstruct the proceeding of Justice by their obstinate refusal to take Oaths
lawfully tendered unto them in the ordinary course of Law; It is enacted, That
if any persons do refuse to take a judicial Oath in any Court of Record, except
Court Leets, being duly and legally summoned, or served with process to appear
in such Courts, as aforesaid, as a witness, or returned to serve of any Jury,
or ordered to be examined upon Interrogatories, having no Legal Plea, to
justify or excuse the refusal of the same Oath; or if any persons be duly
served with a Process, to answer any Bill exhibited against them, in any Court
of Equity, or any suit in any Court Ecclesiastical* shall refuse to answer such
Bill or Suit upon Oath, in cases where the Law requires such answer to be upon
Oath, or be summoned to be a Witness in any such Court, or ordered to be
examined upon Interrogatories, shall for any Cause or Reason not allowed by
Law, refuse to take such Oath, that then for every such offense, as aforesaid,
they shall incur the Judgment and punishment of Transportation, as is appointed
by the said Act.

Obstinate refusing of Oaths.
If those who obstinately do refuse to take Judicial Oaths, be the only persons
that obstruct the proceeding of Justice by their obstinate refusal so to do,
without showing any good reason for their refusal, be the only persons
intended, and against whom the penalties of the Act in such cases are to be
extended. Then they who out of Conscience to Godwards do refuse to take Oaths,
and by giving a reason wherefore they cannot swear or take Oaths, as aforesaid,
do make it appear (to the witness of God in the Consciences of men) that their
so refusing to swear, is not out of obstinacy, but out of Conscience to
Godward, as aforesaid; ought not they to be tenderly dealt with, and freed from
the severity of the said Act in those Cases of Conscience?

Difference between obstinately ly and conscientiously refusing to swear.
For there is a great difference between obstinately refusing to swear, and
conscientiously to refuse to take Oaths; and if they who obstinately, without
showing any reason, refuse to take Judicial Oaths, as aforesaid, be the only
Obstructers of Justice by their obstinacy, and the persons punishable by the
said Act in such cases; then they who do not obstinately, but conscientiously
refuse, who out of Conscience to Godward dare not take an Oath, they are not
concerned therein, but ought to be clear and free from the same.

Is it not well known after many years experience and trial, that God has an
innocent people reproachfully called Quakers in this King dom, who do not
obstinately, but out of Conscience, refuse to take Oaths? It is matter of
Conscience to them not to swear at all, because Christ Jesus the Prince of the
Kings of the Earth does forbid it, Rev. 1.5. Mat. 5.34.
saying to his friends and subjects Swear not at all. But if any whose
principle, judgment, and faith, is to swear and take Oaths, should obstinately,
without showing a lawful reason, refuse to take Judicial Oaths, to obstruct the
proceeding of Justice by their obstinacy, it is good to provide against such,
and to distinguish between them who obstinately refuse to swear, and they who
conscientiously refuse to take Oaths; that they who out of Conscience to
Godwards dare not swear and take Oaths, may go unpunished for such a refusal:
And would it not be a good thing to provide Remedies for tender Consciences,
how to take their Testimonies without Oath, whose word and promise is as
obligatory and binding to them, as Oath or Bond can be?

They who in obedience to the Will of God, and Command of Christ Jesus, under
the Covenant of Grace, do refuse to swear and take Oaths in one case or other,
such do not obstinately, Mat 5.34.
but conscientiously refuse to take Oaths, and they have a good reason in Law,
or a lawful plea (in the sight of the Lord, Lam 5.12.
and accepted of by him) to justify and excuse their refusal of Oaths, and
such persons ought to be tenderly dealt withal; and ought they not also to be
clearly acquitted or freed from the force of the penalties?

For they who out of tenderness of Conscience cannot take any Oaths, they have
the command of Christ Jesus under the Gospel (whereby he repealed Oaths under
the Law) to plead for their excuse and justification; and what a better plea,
Mat. 5.33, 34, 35, 36, 37.
more lawful and reasonable, can in such a case be produced and brought forth,
as a reason of a conscientious refusal of Oaths? It is accepted and taken by
the great God of Heaven, and why should it be refused by men?

It is accounted unlawful now in this age for Christians (Saints and Believers
in Christ the Commander) to obey the Will of God, and Command of Christ Jesus?
If not, Then is it not (now accounted) lawful and reasonable (in Law) to obey
the Will of God and Command of Christ Jesus, the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, and to plead his command under the Gospel, as their justification for
not swearing; because he says, Swear not at all, neither by Heaven nor earth
(and therefore not by things therein contained) so that it is the duty of
Christians to be obedient unto Christ Jesus, who commands his Disciples and
Followers to be true and faithful unto him, by denying all Swearing, and to
speak Truth (which is the substance or end of an Oath) upon every occasion.

And ought not this plea to be owned, accepted, and taken in Law, and by the
Jurors, or Judges, as a sufficient reason in Law, to justify or excuse the
conscientious refusal of Oaths, by them who do not obstinately, but out of
Conscience refuse to take Oaths? And is it not the Duty of Jurors, or Judges
(to Godwards) to accept and allow of the same to be good and sufficient (in
Law) to all intents, constructions, and purposes, in the cases aforesaid?
because the Law of God is said to be the ground of the Law of the Land, and
that all Laws ought to be consonant to the Law of God: and therefore it is said
(in the Book called Doct. and Student, Chap. 6.) The second Ground of the Law
of England, is the Law of God: and also, If any general Custom were directly
against the Law of God, or if any Statute were made directly against it, the
Custom and Statute were void. Doct. and Stud. cap. 6.

And again, though that be a good reason to plead against swearing, because
Christ Jesus under the Gospel commands the contrary; and seeing that such a
Plea God accepts, why should it not be accepted and ^llowed by men, who may be
our Jurors and Judges? And moreover, because the Jurors and Judges, and both we
and many other Protestants have covenanted with God by promise and vows, First,
See that called the Order of Bap^^^m.
to forsake the Devil and all his works; and Secondly, to keep Gods holy Will
and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days of our lives: and seeing
that swearing is against the Will of God under the New Covenant and Gospel
Dispensation, being contrary to the Command of Christ Jesus, who says, Swear
not at all; have not both Jurors and Judges, Mat. 5 34. Jam. 5 12.
and we and many good Protestants covenanted with God by promise and vow,
against Swearing, as aforesaid? Consider well of it.

And likewise, if it be asked of us, why we refuse to swear and take Oaths, may
it not be truly answered and pleaded, that we cannot swear and take Oaths,
because the Bishops and Priests have bound us under a solemn Vow against Oaths,
by causing us to covenant with God by promise and vow, in order to the
obtaining that honorable Title of Christians, etc. to forsake the Devil and
all his works, and to keep Gods holy Will and Commandments all the days of our
lives; and does it not plainly appear, that Swearing under the Gospel
Dispensation is against the Will of God, being contrary to the command of
Christ Jesus, as asoresaid.

And we make Conscience of it, it is great matter of Conscience to us, both to
keep Covenant with God, and also to keep the command of Christ Jesus; and if
you or any can convince us, that we may lawfully break Covenant with God, and
disobey the Command of Christ Jesus, without incurring the displeasure of God,
and violating the Fundamentals of the Episcopal and Protestant Religion, we
shall hearken to you, and take it into due consideration.

And moreover, many of the friends of Christ Jesus are excommunicated (as
Christ has foretold in his Prophecy John 16.) and does not that Act of
Excommunication put them out of a Legal capacity of taking a Judicial Oath,
John 16.1, 2, 3.
or bearing an Office? And if so, may not that be pleaded and taken as a Legal
plea, to justify or excuse such for refusing of Oaths?

And if Swearing before a Magistrate be looked upon to be of Divine Institution,
and according to the appointment of God, where does or can it be made apparent
by any plain Text of Scripture, that God ordained and appointed one Magistrate
to administer an Oath to another, before he could be admitted into his Office;
and that an Oath was ordained and appointed of God, to be administered to a
third person by a Magistrate, for the decision of a Controversy? and if that
can be proved by Scripture, it may be of great satisfaction: and if not, Ought
not tender hearted people to be freed from the imposition of Oaths upon their
Consciences in the cases aforesaid?

And for that, and the causes and reasons aforesaid, Ought not the Jurors and
Judges to be tender toward the people of God reproachfully called Quakers, and
to acquit them from the penalties provided by the Act against Meeting and
Swearing? Consider well of it in Christian Moderation and the fear of the Lord,
and the Lord guide you and them in the ways of right Justice, to give Judgment
in the matters and causes aforesaid, who are or may therein be concerned.

Concerning the people and worshippers of God, owned and allowed by the
Liturgy of the Church of England.
SEeing that meeting together upon the account of Religion and Worship of God,
contrary to what is allowed by the Liturgy, or practice of the Church of
England, to the number of five or above, is accounted an offense, punishable
with Imprisonment, and Transportation, by the late Act; it is very good to take
notice, and that all Jurors, Judges, and Ministers of the Law, as well as
Witnesses, do consider who are the only persons and people owned and allowed of
by the Liturgy, as the people and worshippers of him, that such may not be
punished upon such an account, but clearly acquitted from the force of the
Penalties concerning the same.

1. They who are owned and allowed by the Liturgy as the people of God, and
worshippers of him, Public Baptism
are such as God the Father, through the Son of his love, has out of his
bounteous mercy granted that thing unto, which by Nature they could not have,
that is to say, Regeneration, the work of his Spirit.

2. They who are Regenerated, and by that Act of Regeneration are grafted into
the Body of Christ's Congregation, which is holy, and declared so to be by the
Liturgy.

3. They whom God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, has been pleased both
to Regenerate with his holy Spirit, Publ. Bapt
and to receive them for his own children by Adoption, and to incorporate into
his holy Congregation, are the worshippers and people of God, owned and allowed
by the Liturgy of the Church of England, and therefore they may meet and
assemble together upon the account of Religion, according to the allowance of
the Liturgy.

4. They who being buried with Christ in his death, Publ. Bapt
are dead unto sin, and do live unto righteousness, and are made partakers of
the Resurrection of Christ, they are the people of God, and allowed by the
Liturgy, as aforesaid.

5. They in whom the old Adam is buried, and in whom the new Man is raised up,
Publ. Bapt
in whom all carnal affections do die, and all things belonging to the Spirit
do live in them, and grow, are the people of God allowed by the Liturgy so to
be, and may meet upon the account of Religion and Worship of God, to the number
of five and above.

6. They who have spiritual power and strength from the Lord, and Victory to
triumph against the Devil, the World, and the Flesh, Publ. Bapt
and are endued with heavenly virtues, and are made Members of Christ, and
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven, those are the Worshippers and people of
God allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

7. They who are (not viciously, but) virtuously brought up, to lead a godly
and a Christian life, who following the example of Christ, and to be made like
unto him, See the latter end of public Baptism, and that called the Communion
feast of Trinity only.
that as he died and rose again for them, so they should die from sin, and rise
again unto righteousness, who do continually mortify in them all evil and
corrupt Affections, and do daily proceed in all virtue and godliness of living,
those are the people allowed and owned by the Liturgy, who may meet and
assemble together to perform duty and service to God, at any time, and in any
place, which is very meet, right, and their bounden duty, and that according to
the Liturgy. See Public Baptism, and Communion upon the Feast of Trinity.

8. They who are the servants of the ever-living God, who are regenerated by
him, to whom he has granted forgiveness of all their sins, See that called
confirmation or laying on of hands.
and does strengthen them with the holy Ghost the Comforter, and does also
daily increase in them his manifold Gifts of Grace, the Spirit of wisdom and
understanding, the Spirit of counsel and heavenly strength, the Spirit of
knowledge and true godliness, and are filled with the Spirit of Gods holy fear,
those are the people and worshippers of God, owned and allowed by the Liturgy,
as aforesaid; and they may meet and assemble together in the way of the Worship
of God, and ought not for so doing to be imprisoned or banished, but acquitted
and freed therefrom.

Confirmation or laying on of hands.
9. They whom Almighty God does make both to will and to do those things that be
good and acceptable unto him, who are defended with Gods heavenly Grace, that
they may continue his children and people for ever: And do daily increase in
his holy Spirit, to whom God does certify (after the example of his holy
Apostles) and assure them of his favor and goodness toward them, whose
fatherly hand is over them, and his holy Spirit is ever with them, to lead them
in the knowledge and obedience of his Word, those are the people and Worshippers
of God, owned and allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

10. They to whom Almighty God gives grace, to cast away the works of
darkness, and put on the Armor of light in the time of this mortal life, First
Sund. in Advent. the Collect
and they who in obedience to, and by virtue of the grace of God given and
received, do cast off the works of darkness, and put on the Armor of light in
the time of this mortal life, are the people and worshippers of God, owned, and
so to be allowed by the Liturgy of the Church of England:

11. They to whom God does grant and give hearts to learn to love their enemies
and have learned that Lesson, S. Stephens day, the Collect.
as his blessed M^rtyr Stephen did, who prayed for his persecutors, those are
the people of God owned and allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

12. They to whom God has granted the true Circumcision of the Spirit, The
Circumcision of Christ, the Coll.
whose hearts and members are mortified from all worldly and carnal lusts, who
do in all things obey Gods blessed Will, through our Lord Jesus Christ, those
are the people of God allowed by the Liturgy, to assemble and meet together to
perform duty and service to God in the way of his Worship, as aforesaid.

5. Sunday after Epiphany, the Collect.
13. They who are the Church of God, are the Household of God, but wicked and
unsanctified people are not so, because the whole Body of the Church is
governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God: And it is the work of God to keep
his household and family, the Church, Good Friday (so called) the Collects.
so governed and sanctified continually in his true Religion, who are defended
by his mighty power, and such may meet together in the way and Worship of God,
being allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

14. They whom the Lord teaches, that all their doings without charity are
nothing worth, Quinquage. Sund. Collect.
into whose hearts God does pour that most excellent gift of Charity, the very
bond of all peace and virtues, without which whosoever lives is counted dead
before the Lord, those are the people also who are owned and allowed by the
Liturgy of the Church of England. Quinquagessima Sunday Collect.

15. They who put away the Leven of malice and wickedness, See Tuesday in
Easter week. the Coll. 3. Sunday after Easter, the Col.
that they may always serve the Lord in pureness of living and truth, and
being admitted into Christ's Religion, do eschew those things that be contrary
to their profession (as the Quakers do) and follow all such things as be
agreeable to the same, through our Lord Jesus Christ, those people are owned
and allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid. Third Sunday after Easter Collect.

16. They who own, (...) Sunday after Easter, the Col.
and have received and are led by that pure spiritual soul-saving justifying
light which God is the Author of, by whom it is discovered and made manifest to
all men, whilst they are in error, to lead them out of errors and the way of
unrighteousness, into the way of righteousness, which is the way of the Lord,
they are the people owned and allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

17. They who by the holy inspiration and operation of Gods holy Spirit are
made to think and perform that which is good, The 4 and 5 Sundays after Easter,
the Col.
acceptable and well-pleasing to the Lord, who makes the minds of all faithful
men to be of one Will, those people, and their godly religious Meetings are
owned and allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

18. They whose hearts God has taught by the light of his holy Spirit,
Whitsund. the Coli.
to whom by his Spirit he does give and grant a right Judgment in all things,
and evermore to rejoice in his holy Comfort, those people, and their godly
meetings are owned and allowed by the Liturgy of the Church of England.

19. They who are protected, 4 Sunday after Trin. Coll. 1 Sunday after Trin.
Coll. 5 Sunday after Trin. Coll.
ruled, and guided by the Lord, who is the strength of all them that trust in
him, under whose government the course of this world may be peaceably ordered,
that his Congregations may joyfully serve him in all godly quietness, are owned
and allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

20. They who give, grant and allow of liberty of Conscience (to the people of
God) in point of Religion and Worship of God, are owned and allowed by the
Liturgy; because the Liturgy allows of the same, saying, that the service of
God is perfect freedom, 2 Coll. for peace.
and because the service of God is perfect freedom, none ought to be forced
either to it or from it (contrary to the principle of God) by outward
compulsion.

21. They who have received the grace and gift of God, whereby their flesh is
subdued to the Spirit, 1 Sunday in Lent, the Coll.
by virtue whereof they may ever, and always obey the godly motions of the
Spirit of God in righteousness and true holiness, And 2. Sunday in Lent, the
Coll.
to the honor and glory of God, who have no power of themselves to help
themselves, but are kept and defended both outwardly in body, and inwardly in
soul, from all adversities which may happen to the body, and from all evil
thoughts which may assault and hurt the soul; and that by the Spirit and power
of the Almighty God, through Christ Jesus the Son of his Love, those are the
people and worshippers of God, and both they, and their godly religious
Meetings are owned by the Lord, and allowed by the Liturgy of the Church of
England, are not therefore punishable by the late Act on that account, as
aforesaid.

22. They who have obtained of the God of all mercy perfect remission and
forgiveness of sins, First day of Lent. the Coll.
through Christ Jesus, in whom God has by his spirit and power made new and
contrite hearts, who by the goodness of Almighty God, are, or may be preserved
evermore, both in body and soul, through Christ Jesus the Son of his Love,
those are the people and worshippers of God, 5 Sunday in Lent Coll.
and both they and their godly religious Meetings are owned by the Lord, and
allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

23. They who through the tender love and mercy of the Lord do follow the
example of Christ, in his great humility and patience, and are made partakers
of his resurrection, Sunday next before Easter the Coll.
who are governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God, of whom the Lord
receives supplications and prayers, which they offer before him, for all
estates of men, Good Frid Collects.
in his holy Congregation, which is so governed and sanctified by the Spirit of
God, as aforesaid, those are the people which God does own as his worshippers,
and both they and their godly Meetings are owned and allowed by the Liturgy of
the Church of England: and therefore they ought neither to be imprisoned nor
banished for so doing, but rather to be freed and clearly acquitted from all
Ecclesiastical censures, and temporal punishments concerning the same.

24. They unto whom God has granted, and does or may grant his holy Spirit,
always to think and do such things as be right and good in the sight of God,
so that they which cannot be without him, 9 Sunday after Trin. Collect.
may by him be able to live according to his Will in all things, are the people
owned and allowed by the Liturgy, so that the people of God are enabled by the
Spirit given unto them of God, to do and perform that always which is
acceptable and according to the Will of God, as aforesaid.

25. They are the people of God, and allowed by the Liturgy of the Church of
England, 7 Sunday after Trin. Coll.
in whose hearts the Lord God of all power and might, who is the Author and
giver of all good things, does engraff the love of his name, and does increase
in their hearts his true Religion, and does also nourish them with all
goodness, who of his great mercy does keep them in the same, through Christ
Jesus our Lord: so that the people of God have the love of God engrafted in
them, and true religion is planted within them, and does increase in their
hearts, who are nourished with the virtue and goodness of God, and by his power
preserved and kept in the same; and who more in that than the Quakers, so
called? Consider well of it, and do not unworthily punish them, for being so
owned and allowed of both in principle, practice, and judgment or doctrine, by
the Liturgy, as aforesaid.

26. They are the people allowed by the Liturgy, 12 Sunday after Trin. Coll.
whom God almighty and everlasting is always ready to hear, and on whom he
pours down abundance of mercy, forgiving them those things whereof Conscience
is afraid, so that Conscience is afraid, until God out of his mercy forgive
sins and transgressions, and do restore Conscience into a capacity again of
becoming the servant of God; 13 Sunday after Trin. Coll.
therefore it is by the only gift of God, that his true and faithful people do
perform him true and laudable service, and they are the true and faithful
people and worshippers of God, who by the only gift of God do perform him true
and laudable service, as aforesaid; and such people, and their godly religious
Meetings and Exercises, On S Peter's day the Coll.
are owned by the Lord, and allowed by the Liturgy of the Church, therefore
such ought not to be punished by Imprisonment or banishment for serving God
according to the gift of God.

27. They to whom God the Father, by his Son Jesus Christ, has given, or does
give many excellent gifts, and commands them to feed his Flock, are to be
diligent in preaching Gods holy Word, and the people to whom it is so preached,
who do obediently follow the same, are Ministers and people of God; and the
people of God are to serve God according to the gift of God (allowed by the
Liturgy) and they are the true and faithful people of God, in whose hearts his
love is engrafted, true Religion planted, and does increase in their hearts,
who are nourished with the virtue and goodness of God, and by his power are
preserved and kept in the same, who by the gift of God do perform true and
laudable service unto God, as aforesaid; and as that is owned and allowed by
the Liturgy, so likewise by the Scripture; and does not therefore both
Liturgy and Scripture own and allow of the Doctrines, Principles and practices
of the people of God, reproachfully called Quakers, and others?

28. For the Scripture says, As every man has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of
God; If any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God; If any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ; as it is written 1 Pet. 4.11.

29. Whereby it may be observed, that none are enjoined, commanded, or required
of God to minister from him to the souls of the people, but them to whom the
gift of Ministration is given; and also, that all are commanded, enjoined, and
required by the Lord to Minister from him to the people, to whom the gift of
Ministration is given, so that the Gospel is to be preached with the Holy Ghost
sent down from Heaven, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12.

30. And as it is evident, and remains true, that the Ministers of the Gospel
of Christ, are by a spiritual power and Gospel authority, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. 1
Pet. 1.11, 12. 2 Cor. 3.1, 2 2 Cor. 4.1, 2 Act.
whereby they are to be commended in the sight of God to the Consciences of
those that receives them, as Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, to whom the
gift of Ministration is given of God for that end and purpose, to convert
people from the evil of their ways and doings, unto God, by turning them from
darkness unto light, and so from the power of Satan unto God, they are to
preach in the Spirit, and to the spirits in prison, with the Holy Ghost sent
down from Heaven.

31. So are both Ministers and people to pray unto God, and praise him in the
Spirit, and that according to the Apostolic doctrine, as it is written Romans
8.14. Romans 8.26, 27. 1 Cor. 14.15.

Lastly, By what has been said, it is evident, and does appear what persons
and Meetings are owned and allowed both by the Liturgy and Scripture, and that
by the allowance of both, the service and worship of God is to be performed by
the Spirit and gift of God: And that they who meet, preach, and pray, or
perform duty and service to God in the Spirit, and by the gift of God, they are
the only people owned by the Lord, as his people, and worshippers of him, and
also allowed by the Liturgy, as aforesaid. Therefore the people of God called
Quakers, and others, who perform service unto God by the gift of God, are owned
and allowed by the Liturgy and Scripture, as aforesaid, and ought to be
acquitted from all Ecclesiastical Censures and Temporal punishments concerning
the same.

THE END.

