A TOLLERATION Sent down from Heaven to Preach. OR Godly Religious Meetings,
and true Gospel Preachers, praying and preaching, in other places then Parish
Churches and Chapels, justified by the Highest Powers; and signally owned by
Testimonies from Heaven, ought not to be condemned or forbiden, but rather
Allowed and Tolerated by Men upon Earth. AND Likewise what it is to Preach
according to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom, as to the matter of
Preaching, not punishable by the Act against Nonconformists. ALSO Concerning
the manner of Christian Religious Meetings, and the true Ordination of
Ministers sent forth to Preach, according to the Scriprures, since Christ's
Assention. And likewise what the Gospel is, who have a true right to preach it;
and what it is for Preachers to live of the Gospel, according to the
Scriptures, or Ordination of God in that Case provided.

And he commanded us to preach unto the people, and to testify that it is he
which was ordained of God to be the Judge of quick and dead. To him give all
the Prophets witness, that through his Name, whosoever believes in him shall
receive remission of sins.

Acts 10.42,43. Written in Glocestershire the beginning of the 10 th Month,
1665. By R. F.

Printed in the Year, 1665.

A Tolleration sent down from Heaven to Preach; Or, Godly Religious Meetings,
and true Gospel Preachers, Praying and Preaching in other Places then Parish
Churches and Chapels justified by the highest Powers, and signally owned by
Testimonies from Heaven, ought not to be condemned or forbidden, but rather
allowed and tolerated by Men upon Earth, etc.
THe Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, who are made Ministers by the Lord God
of Heaven, 2 Co^ 3.5,6.
they are by a true Spiritual right, and Gospel authority ordained and enabled,
to preach from God unto the Souls of the People, as by the Scriptures is
evident and plain; therefore, such ought not to be forbidden to preach, nor
punished for so doing.

The Ministers of Man are ordained and empowered by man, and are bound to
preach up the Interest of Man, or else to be turned out of their Ministry, and
maintenance by men, for refusing the same: Acts 10.42,43. Act. 28.30,3^ 2 Cor.
4 5.
But the Ministers of God are ordained of God, and empowered by him, and bound
in spirit to preach the Gospel of Christ, and the Interest of God; because,
they are not to please Men, but the Lord, nor to preach themselves but Christ
Jesus the Lord, and themselves (no Lords nor Masters but) servants for Jesus
sake; for they dare not make themselves of the number, or compare themselves
with some that commend themselves; for they who are so in love with
self-commendation, they do but measure themselves by themselves (or by their
Schollership and natural abilities) and so comparing themselves amongst
themselves, 2 Cor. 10.1^
they are not wise: But the true Ministers of Christ will not boast of things
beyond their measure, but according to the measure of the rule which God has
distributed to them, they reach unto others in preaching the Gospel of Christ,
not boasting of things beyond their measure; that is, of other men's labors;
for not he that commends himself is approved, but whom the Lord commends,
as by the Scriptures is evident and plain; see 2 Cor. 10.12,13,14,15,16,17,18.

They who are made able Ministers of the New Testament, 2. Cor. 3.
by him whose Ministers they are, (that is to say by the Lord God of Heaven)
and whose Interest they preach, in preaching the Kingdom of God, Act. 28 30,31.
and teaching those things that concern the Lord Jesus Christ, no man ought to
forbid them, Acts 28.30,31. because they are approved by the Lord, and
commended of him by their Ministration, to the Consciences of Men in the sight
of the Lord as the Scriptures do testify of them; for because they have
received a Ministry from God, they have renounced the hidden things of
dishonesty, not walking in craftiness (to turn with the times for any self-end)
nor handling the word of God deceitfully, 2 Cor. 4.1,2,3,4,5,6,7, etc.
but by manifestation of the truth, commending themselves to every man's
Conscience in the sight of God, as you may read, 2 Cor. 4.1,2,3,4,5,6,7, etc.

The Ministers of the Gospel of Christ who are ordained of God, and have
received a Ministry from him for the Peoples everlasting good, they ought not
to be prohibited from preaching the word of God, but are to be received as the
Ministers of God, because there is great danger both in prohibiting them to
preach the Gospel of Christ, 2 Cor. 4.1,2. Mat. 10.40,^1,42.
and also in rejecting them that are sent of the Lord, and likewise the danger
is great in receiving the Ministers of Antichrist under pretense of the
Ministers of Christ; because John says, ^ Joh. 4.1. ^ Joh. 1.7,8,^,10,11.
receive not such into your house, neither bid them God speed, least ye be
partakers of their evil deeds; and Christ himself says concerning his
Ministers, Mat. 10.7,14,^5.
that it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorah in the day of Judgment,
then for those that reject them, or refuse to hear them preach, and deny to
receive them and their Doctrine, as by the Scripture is evident and plain.
Seeing then that a danger lies on both hands; first in rejecting the Ministers
of Christ under pretense of the Ministers of Antichrist; and secondly in
receiving the Ministers of Antichrist under pretense of the Ministers of
Christ, how may they be known assunder? seeing the one has the form as well as
the other.

I answer first that the Ministers of Christ, who are to be received as the
Ministers of God who are rightly ordained, ^cts 10.43,^. ^ Cor. 3. ^ Cor. 7.1,2.
and have received a Ministry from him, they are accompanied with a true
Spiritual power, and Gospel authority in their Ministration, so as to reach the
witness of God in the people, who are to receive them, that they may be
received as the Minister of God with the peoples consent, without being forced
upon them against their Consciences by outward constraint.

Secondly, Mat. 10.7. 2 Cor. 4.1,2,
it is the part and duty of a Minister of Christ, by virtue of his office as a
Minister, in order to his establishment and confirmation in the hearts of the
receivers of him; first to preach the Word of God to them; and secondly in
preaching the Word, to commend himself to the consciences of them that he
preaches unto in the sight of God that sent him, by manifesting the truth unto
them, as a means provided by the Gospel, for a Ministers entrance into the
people, and in order to the establishment of him and his Ministry amongst them,
2 Cor. 2.18,19,20,21,22.

First, Mat. 10 7. Act. 10.42,43.
the command of Christ to his Ministers is to preach the Gospel; secondly, All
are admitted to the hearing of it, because he commands to preach it to every
Creature; thirdly, They are to preach it as freely as they have received it,
because he that has the best right to send forth Ministers to minister from
him to the people, says, freely ye have received, freely give; fourthly, The
Ministers of Christ are to preach freely, and the people are to hear them as
freely, so that they neither ought to be hindered from preaching, nor the people
from hearing. And it is the duty of a Minister to preach, as well as it is the
duty of the people to hear, 1 These. 5.21.
and they ought not to receive a Minister before they hear him, nor there is no
danger if the hearers receive not a Minister, until they have a true proof
and gospel commendation of him as a Minister, by manifesting truth unto them,
in commending himself to their consciences in the sight of God as a Minister of
the Gospel of Christ as aforesaid, 2 Cor. 3. chap. and 2 Cor. 4.1.2.

But after God has ordained, and sent forth Ministers, and given them a
Ministry they are to attend upon it, and if men forbid them to preach, they
must obey God rather then men; Act. 4 17,18,19,20. 2 Timothy 4.1,^.
and in preaching the Word be instant in season, and out of season, as it is
written; therefore it is the duty of the true Gospel Ministers to preach when
they are forbidden by men, because they are to preach both in season and out of
season; And when is preaching the Word out of season, but when by men it is
disliked and forbidden; for (says the Apostle) the time will come when they
will not endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts shall they heap up to
themselves teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears
from the truth, and shall be turned unto fables; as by the Scriptures is
evident and plain, 2 Timothy 4.3,4.

Now seeing the Ministers of the Gospel are to preach, both in season and out
of season, they are to continue steadfast unto God in the work of the Ministry;
therefore they that give over preaching when men forbids them, either never
received any ministry from God, or else in denying to preach, they have denied
the Lord, and those are not worthy to be either heard or any more received as
the Ministers of God; therefore there is no danger in rejecting of them,
because they have rejected the Lord, Jer. 8.9. Hos. 4.6.

The Ministers of Christ are to be received after they be made manifest to the
consciences of the people by manifesting the truth of the Gospel unto them, in
the sight of him that has sent them, and after they be so manifest, the danger
is great in rejecting of them, Mat. 10.7.14,15.

The Ministers of God ought not to be forbidden to preach the Gospel, 2 Cor. 4.
Math. 10.7.14,15. Mat. 10.40,41,42. Mar. 6.10,11.
because they are to be known before they be received; therefore it is necessary
that they should preach the word of God that the people may have a
manifestation of them in order to the receiving of them, because the receiving
of them is as the receiving of God, and has the promise of a great reward, and
the rejecting of them (or the forbiding of them to preach) is as the rejecting
of God; therefore after the Minister of God be made manifest to the consciences
of the people in the sight of God, they ought to be received; and yet though
the danger of rejecting such be so great, the punishment for rejecting of them
is not to be inflicted by man, but by the Lord; because it shall be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorab in the day of Judgment then for such: as
Christ Jesus has said.

The Ministers of Christ are not to be forbidden to preach, because they are to
commend themselves to the Consciences of those that receives them, by
manifesting the truth of the Gospel unto them; and as it is the Ministers work
so to commend themselves to the consciences of the people in order to
reception, they ought not to be forbidden to preach the Gospel of Christ,
because preaching the Gospel is the right way and means of manifesting the
truth unto them; and after they be made manifest to the consciences of the
people in the sight of God as his Ministers; then it is the duty of the people,
Romans 10.14,15.
unto whose consciences they are so made manifest, to receive them as the
Ministers of God, because in receiving of them, it is accounted as the receiving
of him, Mat. 10.40,41,42.

First, Mat. 10.7.40,41,42. Mar. 6.12. 2 Cor. 7.1,2.
They ought to preach the Word of God, as well as they ought to be received:
because God commands it; and that is upon the account of God; as its said, he
that receives you receives me. Secondly, They ought both to preach, and be
received: as they are Ministers of God, and righteous Men: because the
Scriptures, and the spirit of truth enjoynes to it; and that is upon the account
of their uprightness; both to God and Man, as they are Gods true and faithful
Ministers. First, Because the true Ministers of Christ wrongeth no Man.
Secondly, Because they corrupt no Man. And thirdly, Because they defraud no
Man, as you may read, 2 Cor. 7.2. These therefore who pretend to be Ministers
of God; and are wrongers of Men: and corrupt, and defraud them; are not to be
received as the Ministers of Christ: because they are not owned of God: but
testified against by the Scriptures; and also by the spirit of Christ, in the
true Gospel Ministers.

Secondly, The true Gospel Ministers, do not seek to force in themselves upon
the people; but says receive us; we have wronged no man, we have corrupted no
man, we have defrauded no man, as by the Scriptures is evident and plain, 2
Cor. 7.2. Mat. 7.15,16,20,21,22,23. 2 John 7,8,9,10,11.
But the Ministers of Antichrist, cannot truly say so: because by their fruits
the contrary is manifest: therefore such ought not to be received: but rather
rejected; being testified against by the Scriptures; and also by the spirit of
Christ, in the true Gospel Ministers, because they are not the Ministers of
Christ: but of Antichrist; and therefore deceivers and wrongers of God and man,
as is evident and plain: 2 Pet. and 2.

Thirdly, 2 Cor. 4.1,2. 1 Pet. 1.12. Act. 10.42,43. Act. 4 17,18,19,20.
Those who are ordained and commanded by the great God of Heaven, to preach the
Gospel unto the souls of the people, with the Holy Ghost sent down from
Heaven, if Men should forbid them to preach, when God requires them to preach
it is better in such a case to obey God rather then man: for it was the duty
and practice of the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, when they were forbiden
(by men in Authority) to preach any more in the name of Jesus: to disobey such
commands or ordinances of men, who forbad them to preach by preaching obedience
to the command and authority of God, who requires it of them; as you may read
in the case of Peter and John: therefore it is the duty and practice of the
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ; in preaching the word, to be instant both in
season and out of season, according to the charge given before the Lord: 2 Timothy
1.2.

Fourthly, The Ministers of Christ ought not to be prohibited, from preaching
the Word of God; because by their preaching, they are to be manifested to the
Consciences of the people by a Gospel commendation, that they may be received
by them to whose consciences they are commended, in the sight of God, by
manifesting the truth unto them: but the Ministers of Antichrist ought to be
rejected (though they pretend to be the Ministers of Christ: because they would
come in by force upon the people, to whose consciences they have not commended
themselves (as the Ministers of God) by manifesting the truth of the Gospel
unto them, in the sight of God, as the true Gospel Ministers do, and afore-time
did.

Fifthly, 2 Cor. 2.21,21. Acts 10.42,43.
The Ministers of Christ, ought both to preach, and be received as the
Ministers of God: because they are anointed, and sealed of God, as well as
ordained and sent, to Minister from him to the people for their salvation,
consolation and soul-satisfaction: but the Ministers of Antichrist are not to
be received: but rejected: though they pretend to be the Ministers of Christ)
because they are not ordained and sent of God: (secondly) because they are not
anointed and sealed of God: and (thirdly) because they are not appointed by the
Lord, to Minister from him to the people for their salvation, consolation, and
souls-satisfaction.

Sixthly, They who are ordained, anointed and sealed of God, and sent forth to
Minister from him, to the souls of the people they ought to preach; because
they have the earnest of the spirit; of God given into their hearts, as a
testimony that they are in Covenant with God, and appointed to preach; 2 Cor.
3.21,22,23. Act. 10.42,43.

Seventhly, they ought to preach the Word of God, because they have not
Dominion given them over the faith of their Hearers, but are helpers of their
joy; for it is by faith that they stand; as you may read, 2 Cor. 2.24.

8ly. They ought to Preach, because there is no falsehood in their Doctrine, but
as God is true so is their Doctrine; for it is not yea and nay, as it is
written, 2 Cor. 2.18,19,21,22,23. but the Ministers of Antichrist are not
ordained, anointed and sealed of God, or sent forth to minister from him to the
Souls of the People, for their Salvation, consolation, or souls satisfattion;
therefore they are not to be received as the Ministers of Christ, but rejected
as the Ministers of Antichrist; 1. Because they have not the earnest of the
Spirit of God given unto them, neither are they guided thereby, but do daily
err and go astray from Gods own ways; 2. Because they do not help the joy of
Believers, but rather fills, them with sorrow and sadness by seeking to have
dominion over their faith, in seeking to force in themselves and their Doctrine
and maintenance upon the People, contrary to faith and a good Conscience
whilst they themselves are miserable siners, and daily offend against Gods
holy Laws; 3. They are subject to error both in matter and manner, who have no
saving health in them, whose word and doctrine is not true, but yea and nay
(according to the times) and contrary to the doctrine of the true Gospel
Ministers of Christ, as aforesaid.

They who are ordained, anointed, and sealed of God, and sent to Minister from
him to the souls of the people, Romans 8.14,15,16,17.
they have the spirit of God given unto them to guide them in their
ministration: Romans 8.15,16,17. and if any pretend to be a Minister, and have
not the spirit of Christ, he is no Minister of his, Romans 8.9.

They who have received a Ministry from God, they have also received a spirit
suitable to such a Ministry; that is to say the spirit of God, whereby they
know the things that are freely given unto them; as it is written, 1 Cor.
2.11,12. for what Man knows the things of a Man, save the spirit of Man that
is in him: even so the things of God knows no Man, but the spirit of God. Now
we have received the spirit of God, that we might know the things that are
freely given to us of God, (said the true Gospel Ministers) which things we
also speak, not in the words which Man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy
Ghost teaches, as yon may read the 1 Cor. 2.11,12. The holy Ghost has a
teaching office, in and by the true Gospel Ministers; therefore they ought to
preach, and none are sit to be Ministers, before they receive the holy Ghost
from Heaven: for men are ignorant of the things of God until then, (First)
because no man knows the things of God, but by the spirit of God; so that the
fpirit of God gives men the knowledge of the things of God in order to
administration; (Secondly) the spirit of God is given of God, and received by
them that are to minister from him, to the souls of the people; before they be
sent forth as his Ministers, and they that receive not the spirit of God,
receive not a Ministry from him, therefore they who have hot the spirit of
Christ, are none of his Ministers, as it is plain and clear by the Scriptures,
Romans 8.9.

Romans 8.9.
As it is the love of God to give his spirit, so it is the duty of them to whom
it is offered to embrace and kindly receive such a gift; for they who receive
not the spirit of God, without which they cannot know the things of God, they
are very unfit to be the Ministers of God, (First) because the spirit of God
gives men the knowledge of the things of God: (Secondly) because the spirit of
God; both guides and inables the true Gospel Ministers to preach, or speak the
things that are given of God: And (Thirdly) the spirit of God guides and
inables the true Gospel Ministers to preach according to the mind of God;
because it teaches and enableth them to preach the Gospel of Christ, in the
words which the holy Ghost teaches, and not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches: the words which man's wisdom teaches are not to be used in preaching
the Gospel, but that which the holy Ghost teaches: for the Gospel cannot be
preached by the wisdom of man, without the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven;
therefore no man can be a true Gospel Minister, but such as have received, and
do receive a true Gospel Spirit to Minister withal; as by the Scripture is
evident and plain, 1 Cor. 2.11,12,13. 1. Pet. 1.10,11,12. Romans 8.9.

1 Cor. 2.11,^2.13. 1 Pet. 1.10,11,12. Romans 8.9.
The Scripture does not enable men to be Preachers of Christ and the Gospel
without the true Gospel Spirit, which is the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven
into the hearts of men, for if the Scriptures without the Spirit were
sufficient to enable men, by their own wisdom to preach the Gospel, why
should the holy Ghost be sent down from Heaven for men to preach the Gospel
by; without which it cannot be done, as by the Scriptures aforesaid is plain.
Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of any private
interpretation; therefore the Scriptures are not to be interpreted in the words
which man's wisdom teaches: but in the words which the holy Ghost teaches;
so that man by his wisdom is no true Interpreter of Scriptures: therefore the
right of interpreting Scriptures belongs not to men, by virtue of their humane
learning, that speaks and teaches the words of man's wisdom; but the true
right of interpreting Scriptures belongs to them that have received Gods holy
Spirit, to give them the knowledge of them, and be a guide unto them, both in
the administration and interpretation of Scriptures, for the Prophecy came not
in old time by the will of man; 2 Pet. 1.20,21.
therefore man by his will cannot interpret the Scriptures, but Holy Men of God
spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; so that the Holy Ghost in them was
the moving cause of their speaking forth Scriptures, and without the Holy Ghost
Scriptures cannot be rightly known and interpreted by Men, for the Spirit
searches all things, yea the deep things of God, and God has given his
Spirit, and also revealed deep things to his Ministers by his own Spirit; for
as no man can know the things of God but by the Spirit of God, 1 Cor.
2.9,10,11,12,13. so the Scriptues being of the things of God no man without the
spirit can truly know them according to the mind of God, therefore the right of
interpreting Scriptures belongs unto men by virtue of the spirit of God, from
whence Scripture prophecies proceeded, 2 Pet. 1.20,21. 1 Pet. 1.10,11,12.

1 Pet. 4.10,11. 1 Pet. 1.10,11,12.
No man is to minister from God to the Souls of the People, but them to whom
the gift of Ministration is given, and all men have a true right from God to
minister from him to the People, unto whom the gift of Ministration is given,
who are to preach the Gospel with the holy Ghost sent down from Heaven for the
Peoples Salvation; of which Salvation the Prophets have inquired and searched
diligently, who prophesied of the grace that should come unto you, searching
what or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ which was in them did
signify, when it testified before hand the suffering of Christ, and the Glory
that should follow, unto whom it was revealed that not unto themselves but unto
us they did minister the things which are now reported unto you by them that
have preached the Gospel unto you, with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven,
as every man has received the gift, even so minister the same one unto another
as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of God. 1 Pet. 4.10,11, whereby it is
evident that Preaching is not an art, but a gift; and they have a true right to
be Preachers unto whom the gift of Ministration for that end is given, by the
Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven.

The Ministers of Christ unto whom the gift of Ministratio is given, who are to
preach the Gospel with the Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven, they ought not to
be forbidden by Men, nor punished for Preaching the Gospel: And what Law does
prohibit the preaching of Gods Word and the Scriptures, or what is agreeable to
the same? if any Law should do so, would it not concontradict the Liturgy of
the Church, and the Laws and Statutes of England? because both the Liturgy of
the Church, and the Laws and Statutes of England allows of Preaching the
Gospel of Christ (the power of God unto Salvation) the pure Word of God, and
the Holy Scriptures, and what is either agreeable to the same, or evidently
grounded thereupon: Then to preach the Gospel, the pure Word of God, and the
Holy Scriptures, or what is agreeable to the same, is no matter of fact,
because it is not to preach contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom.

What the Liturgy of the Church of England allows of, that the Laws and
Statutes of the Kingdom allows of, but the Liturgy of the Church of England
allows of Christian Religions Meetings, in greater or lesser numbers for the
service and Worship of God, according to the Scriptures; and of Preaching the
Gospel, to render thanks unto God (in Godly Assemblies, or Christian Religious
Meetings) for the great Benefits that we have received at the hands of God, to
set forth his most worthy praise, to hear his most holy Word, and to ask those
things which are requisite and necessary both for Soul and Body; being the
chief ends of Christian Religious Meetings, as the Liturgy allows; therefore
the Scriptures and Laws of the Kingdom allows of the same; what the
Scriptures does allow of, that the Liturgy of the Church of England allows
of; but the Scripture does allow of gifted men to preach the Gospel with the
Holy Ghost sent down from Heaven; therefore, the Liturgy of the Church of
England allows of the same, for it is declared and said in the Liturgy, that
nothing is ordained to be read (or observed) but the very pure Word of God, the
holy Scriptures, or that which is either agreeable to the same or evidently
grounded thereupon: See, that called the service of the Church. See the Order
for Morning P^ayer. See St. Peter's day Collect. 1. Pet. 4.10,11.


To Preach contrary to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom is (it seems)
matter of fact punishable by the late Act, but to preach the Gospel of Christ,
or the very pure Word of God and the holy Scriptures; or what is agreeable to
the same or evidently grounded thereupon is not (it seems) to preach contrary
to the Liturgy and Laws of the Kingdom, therefore it is no matter of fact nor
punishable by the late Act for godly Ministers who are rightly ordained to
preach the Gospel of Christ, and the very pure Word of God (not being contrary
to the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom) because both the Liturgy of the
Church, and the Laws and Statutes of the Kingdom allows of the same, as the
right matter of Preaching.

And as for the manner or places for godly Ministers to pray or preach in, the
Lord has not limited or bound them up to Parish Churches and Chapels to
assemble together to preach and pray in, or else be forbidden and cast out, by
the great God of Heaven for refusing the same; for though Solomon built him an
House, how be it the most High dwells not now in Temples made with hands, as
says (the Lord) the Prophet, Acts 7.47,48,49,50.
Heaven is my throne, and Earth is my footstool, what house will you build me
says the Lord, or where is the place of my rest? has not mine hands made all
these things? Acts 7.47,48,49,50. Is it not therefore plain by the Scriptures,
or may we not learn from hence that the Lord has not limited or bound up his
Preachers and People to Parish Churches and Chapels, or any particular house
for his Service to be performed in under the Gospel dispensation since Christ's
death, Resurrection and Ascension, but rather left them to their freedom
concerning that thing, who has owned and justified his Preachers and People in
forsaking the outward Temple at Jerusalem, Acts 7.48,49. Act. 17.24,25.
in sending his Ministers to preach it down, Acts 7.48,49. Acts 17.24,25. and
has highly owned his. People in Meeting and Preaching in upper Chambers and
private Houses, wherein they have met and assembled together (since Christ's
Ascension) for the Service and Worship of God; but he has not bound them up or
limited them to any one place, as the appointed place of his Worship, under the
Gospel dispensation since Christ's Ascension, that in the Scriptures or Writings
of the Apostles we can any where read of, since he sent them to preach down the
Temple at Jerusalem.

The Liturgy of the Church of England says, nothing is ordained to be read or
observed amongst Christians about the Service of the Church; but the very pure
word of God, the holy Scriptures, or that which is either agreeable to the
same, or evidently grounded thereupon, and that Christ's Gospel is not a
Ceremonial Law, See that concerning the Service of the Church, and that of
Ceremonies, and the Epistle and collect for the 2d. Sunday in Advent.
(as much of Moses Law was) but it is a Religion to serve God, not in bondage
of the figure or shadow, but in freedom of the spirit, and likewise it is
said both in the Scriptures and Liturgy of the Church; that whatsoever things
were written aforetime, were written for our Learning; whereby it is evident
that whatsoever is agreeable to the holy Scriptures and pure Word of God, is
ordained to be read or observed in Christian Assemblies and religious
Practices. 2ly. That Christians are not to be bound up and tied to the
observation of the Figure, shadow or ceremonies, or brought in bondage of the
figure or shadow of things, about the service of God. 3ly. That Christians are
to stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has set them free, and not to be
entangled with figures, shadows or ceremonies, which may hinder them from the
Service of God, which stands in the freedom of the Spirit. 4ly. That the holy
Scriptures which were written aforetime, are to be observed by Christians,
because they were written for our instruction or learning, as both the Liturgy
and Scriptures are evident and plain.

Now seeing it is so, we find it written in the holy Scriptures, and left upon
record there for our instruction or learning, about the true Ordination of
Gospel Ministers, or their call to the work of the Ministry since Christ's
Ascension: Acts 13.
First, That the Holy Ghost is of Council with the true Church, and has a
ruling power therein, for ordering and governing the same, and that the Liturgy
agrees with, because it says, the Church is the household and family of God,
and that the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified by the Spirit
of God; See Good Friday the Collect.
whereby it appears that the true Church is a sanctified body, and under a
Spiritual order and Government, and that Church and Ministry which has Christ's
spiritual Presence with them, is the true Church and Ministry of Christ, Matt.
28.18,19,20.
because he has promised to be always with them, even to the end of the
world; as by the Spirit that is of Council with the Church and the holy
Scriptures, we are instructed and have learned of them the knowledge thereof.

Secondly, We are instructed and have learned, by the spirit from whence the
holy Scriptures proceeded, and by the Scriptures which aforetime were written
and proceeded therefrom: that as the holy Ghost is of council with the true
Church, so the true Church does take council of the holy Ghost, and is obedient
and subject to the holy Ghosts order, authority and appointment: Acts
13.1,2,3,4.
now there were in the Church that was at Antioch certain Prophets and
Teachers, as Barnabas and Simeon that was called Niger, and Lucius of Cyrene,
and Manaen which had been brought up with Herod the Tetrarch, and Saul: as they
ministered to the Lord and fasted, the holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and
Saul, for the mork whereunto I have called them, and when they had fasted and
prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away; so they being sent
forth by the holy Ghost, departed unto Seleucia, and from thence they sailed to
Cyprus, as it is written, and left upon record in Scripture: Acts 13.1,2,3,4.

Whereby we are instructed, or from whence we do observe and may learn; that in
the true Church of Christ (which was at Antioch) there were certain Prophets
and Teachers, which were not Parish Priests, or bound up and tied to one
particular Parish, to stay and continue there, preaching for Tithes, Easter
reckonings, and Midsumer dues; all the days of their lives. Secondly, That
those Prophets and Teachers which were in the true Church, of which Christ
Jesus is head; they attended upon the work of the Lord, and both fasted and
ministered unto him, (and did not sue people for Tithes, nor cast them into
Prison; for we do not learn by the Scriptures, that true Gospel Preachers were
ever found in any such actions) Thirdly, That as they ministered to the Lord and
fasted, the holy Ghost manifested his mind to the Church, being of counsel with
the same, requiring obedience of the Church, as a manifestation of their
subjection to the holy Ghosts Order and Authority; who manifested the right
that he had in the true and right Ordination of Ministers, or calling of them
to the work of the Ministry, and sending them abroad to preach the Gospel; for
the holy Ghost said to the Church, Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work
whereunto I have called them: from whence we are instructed, and do observe or
learn, (First) That the holy Ghost has a true Right and Authority to Ordain
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, or call them to the work of the Ministry,
and send them to Preach: (Secondly) That these Ministers who are called by the
holy Ghost, to the work of the Ministry, and sent forth to preach; as such
were; they are rightly and truly ordained and sent forth to preach, and ought
neither to be forbiden to preach the pure word of God, nor punished for so
doing; because we find in the Scripture, which the Liturgy says, was written
aforetime for our learning, that such as have the word of God to speak; ought
not to be forbiden to preach it: for as much as the Lord commands them to speak
it: Jer. 23.28,29,30,31,32.
is not my word like a Fire says the Lord, and like a Hammer that breaks the
Rock in pieces: therefore behold I am against the Prophets, says the Lord,
that steal my words every one from his neighbor, who use their tongues, and
say he says, whom I never commanded nor sent says the Lord: who has also
said, that such false Teachers do cause the People to err by their lies, and
by their lightness: and such the Lord is against, as you may read, but he that
has my word, let him speak my word faithfully; what is the Chaff to the Wheat
says the Lord: Jer. 23.28,29,30,31,32. (Thirdly) The holy Ghost spoke to the
Church, whereby it is evident that the holy Ghost speaks in the true Church,
and the Church is acquainted with the holy Ghost and his teachings; and
therefore stands not to dispute its commands, or disobey the holy Ghosts Order
and Authority; Acts 13.
but being commanded by the holy Ghost to separate Barnabas and Saul, for the
work of the Ministry, whereunto the holy Ghost had ordained or called them, the
true Church never questioned whether such a Call was sufficient, without a
signification of the consent and allowance of Archbishops, and Bishops, in a
National way, or as the manner now is amongst such as may be, will deny the
way and manner of the proceedings of the holy Ghost in that case of calling and
sending forth Ministers, as aforesaid, to preach the Gospel of Christ: Acts 13
1,2,3,4. 1 Timothy 3.1,2,3,4,5,6,7. Tit. 1 7,8,9.
but if they do, is it not below a true Gospel Bishop so to do; who ought not
to show a dislike unto, and disesteem of, what the holy Ghost and the true
Church of Christ and the Scripture do justify and own, concerning the same, but
I hope it may be well for them who are so in account; to take it into due
consideration, so as not to condemn, but rather allow of the holy Ghosts order
and proceedings, and the true Churches example or practice therein; seeing that
what the holy Scripture allows of: that the Liturgy of the Church of England
allows of; and it is evident that the holy Scriptures allows of the same as
aforesaid; for the Holy Ghost said to the Church, separate me Barnabas and Saul
for the work whereunto I have called them; and when they had fasted and prayed,
and laid their hands on them they sent them away; so they being sent forth by
the Holy Ghost departed, and when they were at Salamis they preached the Word
of God to the People, Acts 13.1,2,3,4. Whereby it is evident that the Holy
Ghost has a true right to call to the work of the Ministry of Christ, and that
they who are called to that work by the Holy Ghost, ought not to be forbidden
to preach, because they are both truly ordained and sent, and have the Word of
God to preach to the people, being also accompanied with a true spiritual power
and filled with the Holy Ghost, that has called and sent them to preach as
aforesaid; after they were at Salamis and had gone through the Island unto
Paphos, they found a certain Sorcerer, a false Prophet, a Jew, with the Deputy
of the Country, a prudent Man, who called for Barnabas and Saul, and desired to
hear the Word of God; but Elimus the Sorcerer withstood them, seeking to turn
away the Deputy from the faith, (as false teachers geting into favor with
Governors and Deputy Governors, and great persons, often times endeavor to
do) then Saul, who is also called Paul, who was filled with the Holy Ghost
(that called and sent him to preach) said unto the false Prophet (that sought
to turn away the Deputy Governor from the faith) Oh full of all subtlety and
all mischief, thou child of the Devil, thou enemy of all Righteousness, will thou not cease to pervert the right ways of the Lord, Acts 13.6,7,8,9,10.
Whereby it is evident and plain, that the Holy Ghost fills true Preachers
with spiritual boldness sharply to reprove and testify against a false Prophet
in the presence of a Deputy or Governor of a Country.

They who are ordained and sent of God, as aforesaid, ought not to be forbidden
to preach, or punished for preaching the word of the Lord to the People,
because they preach the Everlasting Gospel, and thereby do minister the Spirit
and power of God to Salvation unto Believers, and such have not dominion over
the faith of their hearers but are appointed of God to be helpers of the joy of
Believers. 2ly. They ought not to be forbidden to preach the Word of God to the
people, because that by virtue of their preaching (the Lord opperating with
them in their Ministry) ^cts 26.16,^7,18. ^m 5.20.
they do convert people from the evil of their ways and doings by turning them
from darkness unto light, and so from the power of Satan unto God; whereby it
may be observed that to hinder such Ministers from Preaching, would be to
hinder the work of conversion, and so to oppose the work of the Lord, Mat.
18.3. Luke 22.32. 3ly. They ought not to be hindered from preaching who have
the Word of the Lord to speak to the People, and do preach it freely without
Tithes, Easier Reckonings or Midsummer dews, who covet no man's Silver nor Gold
for their Preaching; Acts 20.27,^8,29,30,31,^2,33,34,35.
because God has ordained that they who preach the Gospel should deny Tithes
and live of the Gospel; it is necessary therefore first to know what the Gospel
is. 2ly. Who have a right to preach the Gospel of Christ unto the people: And
3ly. what it is for true Preachers to live on the Gospel.

In Answer to the first as concerning the Gospel of Christ what it is, it is
declared in Scripture, to be the power of God unto Salvation to every one that
believes; wherein the Righteousness of God is revealed from faith to faith, as
it is written, Romans 1.15,16,17. Gal. 1.6,7,8,9,10,11,12,15,16. 2ly. They have a
true right to preach the Gospel who have rightly received the same, so that the
Gospel is to be rightly received before it can be rightly preached, and the
Gospel is not to be received of man, how then can men empower to the effectual
true and right Preaching of the same; for Paul (who was a true Gospel Preacher)
was taught of God how to minister from him to the People, and received the
Gospel by the Revelation of Christ, and not of man, as he has certified to the
Brethren as we said before, so say I now again, If any man preach any other
Gospel unto you then that ye have received let him be accursed, Gal 1.8,9. and
before, that is to say in his Epistle to the Romans he said, Romans 1.16. Gal.
1.11,12.
I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God unto
Salvation to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. this Gospel which is the
power of God is to be received of God by them that are true Preachers of the
same; but I certify you brethren that the Gospel which was preached of me was
not after man, for I neither received it of man neither was I taught it, but by
Revelation of Jesus Christ, as it is written, Gal. 1.11,12.

Whereby it is evident, or from hence we may observe and learn, first, that the
gospel of Christ is the power of God unto Salvation, to every one that
believes, wherein the Righteousness of God is revealed. 2ly. That Revelation
is not ceased, because that in the Ministration of the Gospel which is the
power of God unto Salvation, as aforesaid, Gods Righteousness is revealed. 3ly.
That the Gospel is to be received, before it can be preached, and it is to be
revealed before it can be received or preached. 4ly. That the Gospel of Christ
which is the power of God unto Salvation is neither received nor taught after
Men, but by Revelation. 5ly. That they who deny Revelation, they have neither
received the Gospel, which is the power wherein the Righteousness of God is
revealed; nor the Righteousness of God which is revealed in the Gospel of
Christ as aforesaid; for says the Apostle who received the Gospel of Christ,
Gal. 1.15,16
I neither received it of man, neither was I taught it, but by Revelation, Gal.
1.11,12. And when it pleased God, who separated me from my Mothers womb, and
called me by his grace to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach Him among
the Heathen; immediately I conferred not with flesh and blood, neither went I
up to Jerusalem to them that were Apostles before me; but I went into Arabia,
etc. Gal. 1.15,16. whereby it is evident and from hence we may observe and
learn that the Gospel is known by Revelation. 2ly. That they who deny
Revelation are no true Ministers of the Gospel of Christ. 3ly. That it is the
good pleasure of God to call such as he makes choice of to serve in the work of
the Gospel of Christ. 41y. That the call to the Ministry is not an act of
Nature but of Grace, 5ly. That Christ is revealed in a true Gospel Minister
before he be at fit Preacher, 6ly.. That after a Minister be called by the
Grace of God to the work of the Ministry, and Christ Jesus revealed spiritually
in him he is a fit Preacher without going to Men for their Approbation
concerning the same. Now if either ignorance or wilfulness should object and
say, Mat. 11.27
that things were made known in the Apostles time by Revelation, but it is
ceased since then, and there is no such thing to be expected or looked for now.
I answer thereunto, Christ Jesus has said, Luke 10.22
No man knows the Father but the Son, neither knows any man the Son but the
Father, and he to whom he is pleased to reveal him. Therefore they that say
Revelation is ceased, do in effect say that the way and means to attain to the
knowledge of God is ceased, for no man can come to the knowledge of God but by
Revelation, and if Revelation be ceased then no man can come to the knowledge of
God, but remain in ignorance of him, and perish for want of knowledge, Hosea 4.6.

Thirdly, As to that of Preachers who have received the Gospel, it is ordained
that they who preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel, and not of Tithes,
because they are no Gospel maintenance; for they who are ordained of God to
preach the Gospel, which is the power of God unto Salvation, they do minister
the Spirit and Power of God unto Believers: Therefore, they that live of the
Gospel do live of the free gift of the Power which opens the hearts of their
Hearers freely to communicate to them. Therefore it is said, let him that is
taught in the Word communicate to him that teaches, in all gord things, Gal.
6.6. Whereby it is evident or from hence we may observe and learn, first, that
people are not enjoined by the Gospel to communicate any thing to any man as a
Preacher, by whom they were never taught in the Word: 2ly. That none ought to
communicate any thing upon the account of Preaching but such as are taught in
the Word: 3ly. That Believers are not compelled by the Gospel, nor compellable
to communicate to Preachers, but are left to the powerful opperation of the
Word of God, as it may open their hearts and dispose of them in that respect:
4ly. That they are not to give place to any thing that would obstruct the
office of love begotten in their hearts, by the preaching of the Word of God
unto them, but are to let it show forth its fruit and freeness in the act of
Communicating unto them. ^l. 6.6.


Fourthly, Concerning Christian Religious Meetings, and preaching in Houses,
etc. Whereas it is declared, by Act of Parliament, to be an offense against
Law, and punishable with Imprisonment: Fines and Banishment, for Persons to
meet together to the number of five or above, beside them of the Household,
under pretense of Religious exercise, in other manner then is allowed by the
Liturgy of the Church of England: Then it is no offense against Law nor
punishable thereby, to meet in greater numbers upon the account of Religion and
Worship of God; So that the manner of their Meeting be allowed by the Liturgy.
What is contained in the Liturgy, as to the manner of Christian Religious
Meetings; is allowed by the Liturgy; But the manner of Meeting by Christ and
his Apostles and the Primitive Christians, in other places then Parish Churches
and Chapels, is contained in the Liturgy. Therefore the manner of Christian
Religious Meetings, in other places then in Parish Churches and Chapels, is
allowed by the Liturgy; so that such Meetings ought not to be accounted
seditious Conventicles, nor punishable by Law.

That which is contained in the Liturgy, and ordained to be read, as part of
the practice or service of the Church of England, is owned and allowed by the
Liturgy and practice of the Church. But the manner of the Meetings, Assemblies
and Preachings, by Christ and his Apostles, to and amongst the Primitive
Christians, and such as came to hear the word of God spoken unto them, upon
Mountains and by the Sea side, and also in private Houses and other places is
contained in the Liturgy, and ordained to be read as part of the practice or
service of the Church of England. Therefore such manner of Meetings, Assemblies
or Preachings, or the manner of such Christian Religious Meetings, Assemblies
and practices are no seditious Conventicles; nor punishable by Law; because
they are owned and allowedly the Liturgy and practice of the Church, as
aforesaid.

That the manner of Christian Religious Meetings, Assemblies and practices (in
other places then Parish Churches and Chapels) is contained in the Liturgy and
ordained to be read as part of the practice or service of the Church of
England, and therefore owned and allowed, as aforesaid is very plain and
apparently proved both by the Scripture and Liturgy.

First, By the Scriptures it is apparent and evident that Christ and his
Apostles, did meet and assemble with the primitive Christians, and such as came
to hear the word of God preached, in private Houses, and upon Mountains, and by
the Sea side as well as other places; and they left their manner of Christian
Religious Meetings, Assemblies, and practices (in other places then Parish
Churches and Chapels) upon Record in Scripture, as an example for Christians to
follow. Because the Apostles of Christ, who had the spirit and mind of Christ
Jesus, commands the true Christians and Believers in Christ to walk as they
have them for example, as by the Scripture is plainly apparent: Phil. 3.17. For
Christ and his Apostles met and assembled together with the Primitive
Christians and others, and preached in Houses and out of houses, on Mountains,
and by the Sea side; and in great multitudes: as you may read, Matthew. 5.1,2.
Matthew. 3. Matthew. 8.1. Matthew. 11.1. Matthew. 13.1,2,3. Matthew. 19. Matthew. 24.3,4,
etc. And again he entered into Capernaum after some days, and it was noised
that he was in the House, and straight way many were gathered together, in so
much that there was no room to receive them, not so much as about the Door, and
he preached the word unto them, as you may read, Mark 2.1,2. and he began to
teach by the Sea side, and there was gathered unto him a great multitude, and
he taught them there also, as you may read, Mark 4. see also Mark 10.1. and he
came down with them and stood in the plain, and the company of his Disciples,
and a great multitude of people, out of all Judea, and Jerusalem, and from the
Coast of Tire and Sidon, came to hear him, as it is written, Luke 6.17. and he
arose from thence, and comes into the Coasts of Judea, by the farther fide of
Jordan; and the people resorted to him again, and as he was wont, he taught
them again, Mark 1^.

And when much people were gathered together and were come to him out of every
City, he preached unto them, and he went thorough every City and Village
preaching, and showing the glad tidings of the Kingdom of God, and the twelve
were with him, as you may read, Luke 8.1,4. Whereby it is evident, that Christ
did not limit the people, to come to Parish Churches, to hear the Word
preached, nor the Ministers of the Gospel to preach it there; neither did he
ordain punishments for the Preachers or hearers; if they did not preach and
hear in Parish Churches and not else where, but to the number of three or four:
for when they were gathered together, an innumerable multitude of people, in so
much that they erode one upon another; he began to say unto his Disciples,
first of all, beware ye of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy, for
there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed, neither hid that shall not
be known, as you may read, Luke 12, Luke 15. Luke, 8.1: And after Christ's
Death, Resurrection and Ascension, the Apostles of Christ and Primitive
Christians, did Assemble and meet together, to preach and pray, and perform
religions exercise, to the number of five and above; and not in Parish Churches
nor Chapels: but in private houses and uper chambers, and such like places; and
such godly Meetings were no seditious Conventicles, but according to the
example and practice ordained of Christ Jesus: for he showed himself alive
after his passion unto them by many infallible proof: being seen of them forty
days, and speaking of the things partaining to the Kingdom of God; as you may
read, Acts 1.1,2,3. and being assembled with them, (after his Resurrection,
when he was ready to ascend up into Heaven) he commanded them that they should
not depart from Jerusalem; but wait for (the holy Ghost from Heaven) the
promise of the Father, which says he, ye have heard of me: and they returned
to Jerusalem in obedience to that command, from the Mount called Olivet, after
Christ was ascended; but they did not go into (a Parish Church or a Chapel,
nor into) the Temple at Jerusalem, to wait for the promise of the Father:
Therefore Christ did not command them to go into a Parish Church or Chapel,
nor into the Temple at Jerusalem to wait upon God to receive the promise, for
if he had, no doubt but they would have obeyed his command, in that respect.

They were commanded to wait at Jerusalem, for the promise of the Father, and
they did so in obedience to the command of Christ Jesus: but they were not
commanded by Christ to wait in the Temple at Jerusalem, nor in a Parish Church;
for the receiving of the promise of the Father, (or the holy Ghost) but rather
in a private House: Therefore neither the Temple at Jerusalem, nor a Parish
Church, was the place appointed for them to meet in, to wait for the promise of
the Father; but rather an uper Chamber, or a private House. Then returned they
unto Jerusalem, from the Mount called Olivet; and when they were come in, they
went up into an uper Room, where abode both Peter and James and John and
Andrew: Phillip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, James the Son of Alpheus,
and Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James, these (were met together to
perform service to God, for they) continued with one accord in prayer and
supplication, with the Women, and Mary the Mother of Jesus, and with his
brethren, and there were met and assembled together, upon the account of the
exercise of Religion, to the number of five and above, beside^ them of the
Household, in that upper Chamber where they were together, for) in those days
Peter stood up in the midst of the Disciples and spoak, (the number of Names
together were about one hundred and twenty) and when the day of Pentecoast was
fully come; they were all with one accord in one place, (and the place where
they were when they received the holy Ghost; was neither a Parish Church nor a
Chapel, but a private House) and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven as of
a rushing mighty Wind, and it filled all the House where they were siting, (and
there they received the promise of the Father) for they were all filled with
the Holy Ghost, as both by the Scriptures and Liturgy is apparent and evident;
see for proof thereof, Acts 1. and Acts 2. And to prove that the Liturgy
allows of Meeting in upper Rooms, and private Houses, for the exercise of
Religion as aforesaid; because it allows of such godly Assemblies and
Meetings, (though not in Parish Churches or Chapels) as were practiced by the
Apostles of Christ, and Primitive Christians as aforesaid; for proof thereof,
see in the Liturgy, the Epistle for Whitsunday, and for St. Mathias, day the
Epistle.

The Liturgy also allows of the manner of Meetings and Preaching both in
great numbers and multitudes, and in other places then Parish Churches and
Chapels, because it allows of the manner of Meetings and Preaching by Christ
and his Apostles amongst the Primitive Christians and others.

First, The Liturgy says, it came to pass that as the People pressed upon him
( viz. Christ Jesus) to hear the Word of God, he stood by the Lake of
Genesareth and saw two Ships standing by the Lake, and he entered into one of
the Ships which was Simons, and he sat down and taught the People out of the
Ship. See the 5 th. Sunday after Trinity, the Gospel. Whereby it appears that
the Liturgy allows of the manner of meeting and preaching in a Ship, and by
the Sea side, as aforesaid. Therefore the Liturgy allows of the manner of
Meeting and Preaching in other places besides Parish Churches and Chapels.

Secondly, Great multitudes followed Christ, as by the Liturgy appears; See
the 8 th. Sunday after Trinity the Gospel, and he preached unto them, then drew
near unto him all the Publicanes and Sinners for to hear him, (when he was in a
Pharisees House) and the Scribes and Pharisees murmured at him, saying, this
man receives sinners and eats with them: then Jesus began to speak to them
by a Parable, as you may read, see the third Sunday after Trinity, the Gospel;
see also Luke the 14. and Luke 15. Chap. whereby it appears that Christ was
ready to do good unto Sinners? and refused not to preach unto them (though he
was not in a Parish Church) but in a Pharisees House as aforesaid. The Liturgy
faith, Peter opened his mouth and said, of a truth I perceive that God is no
respecter of persons, but in every Nation he that fears God and works
Righteousness is accepted with him. And where was Peter when he preached this
Doctrine but in the House of Cornelius, and not in a Parish Church or Chapel,
whereby it is evident that the Scriptures and Liturgy allows of both Meeting
and Preaching in private House as aforesaid; see Acts 10. and Easter Monday the
Epistle, for proof of the same.

Again the Liturgy says, Christ preached on a Mountain, and in great
multitudes also; see All Saints day.

All Saints day the Gospel, and Whitsunday the Epistle.
Again for meeting in private Houses upon the account of the exercise of
Religion, the Liturgy says, that when the day of Pentecost was fully come,
they were all with one accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound
from Heaven, as of a mighty rushing wind, and it filled the house where they
were siting, and they were all filled with the holy Ghost and began to speak as
the Spirit gave them utterance. Whereby it is evident and apparent, first, That
it was the practice of the Apostles of Christ and Primitive Christians to meet
in private House to wait upon the Lord. 2ly. That God owned and honored such
Christian Religious meetings, though they were (not in Parish Churches or
Chapels) but in private Houses, and that by sending the Holy Ghost from Heaven
to them, as aforesaid. 3ly. That the Scriptures and Liturgy allows and
owneth the manner of such Christian and religious Meetings and practices,
though not in Parish Churches or Chapels, but in a Houses as aforesaid.
Likewise the Liturgy says, That in those days Peter stood up in the midst of
the Disciples, and said, (the number of them by name being about one hundred
and twenty) Men and Brethren this Scripture must needs be fulfilled which the
Holy Ghost spoke by the mouth of David. And where was Peter (and about one
hundred and twenty more) when he said so unto them? were they not met together
in an upper Chamber; see the Liturgy St. Mathias, for the Epistle, and Acts
1.12,13,14,15, etc. Is it not therefore according both to the manner allowed by
the Scripture and Liturgy for Christians to meet and assemble together upon the
account of Religion to the number of five and above over and besides them of
the household or family, where they do meet and assemble together, as aforesaid.

Many more examples of the manner of Christian religious Meetings might be
instanced out of the Liturgy, but I shall only mention one other instance out
of the Liturgy, which I judge may be sufficient as to that matter, with a few
more Scripture examples concerning the manner of Christian Religious Meetings
and practices to prove the lawfulness of them: That which the Liturgy declares
to be very meet and right to be done must needs be allowed by the same, but the
Liturgy declares it to be very meet and right for Christians to meet together
at all times and in all places for the Service of God; therefore the Liturgy
allows of the manner of Christian Religious Meetings at any time and in any
place for the service of God as aforesaid; that which is declared by the
Liturgy to be the duty of Christians must needs be allowed by the Liturgy;
but it is declared by the Liturgy to be the duty of Christians at all times
and in all places to give thanks, or perform service to the Almighty God:
therefore the Liturgy must needs allow of the same, at any time and in any
place to be performed and done, it is very meet, right, and our bounden duty
that we should at all times and in all places perform service unto the Lord;
for proof whereof, see the Liturgy in that part called the Communion. Seeing
that the Liturgy allows of the manner of Christian Religious Meetings for the
service of God at all times and in all places, it allows of Meetings in
private Houses, and in upper Chambers and other places, as the Scriptures do,
or else the Liturgy would contradict and oppose the Scriptures and practices
of the Apostles and Primitive Christians; but they who have a reverend esteem
of the Liturgy must needs say that what the holy Scriptures allows of, that
the Liturgy allows of, and as the holy Scriptures allows of the manner of
Christian Religious Meetings, Preachings and practices (in other places then
Parish Churches and Chapels) so the Liturgy (that it may be justified by the
holy Scriptures concerning the manner of such Christian Religious meetings and
practices) allows of the same.

First, The Apostles and Primitive Christians did meet together to preach and
pray, and perform duty and service to God, and the manner of their Meetings
were in other places then Parish Churches and Chapels, and such meetings were
no seditious Conventicles but lawful Assemblies.

Secondly, They did meet and assemble together for the service and Worship of
God after Christ's Ascension in private Houses and upper Chambers, as you may
read, Acts, 1.13,14,15. Acts 2.1,2.

Thirdly, And when they had prayed the place was shaken where they were
assembled together, and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and they
spoke the word of God with boldness, Acts 4.31,32.

Fourthly, They were lawful Meetings, though in private Houses, and owned by
the Lord: because he filled them with the holy Ghost, to speak the word of God
with boldness; whereby it is evident that godly Ministers are justified by the
Lord, and may preach the word of God boldly, in uper Chambers and private
Houses, as you may read, Acts 20. That the Apostle Paul preached in a Chamber
on the first day of the Week until midnight, Acts 20.7,8. And Peter preached
boldly and effectually in the House of Cornelius; Acts 10: and Paul preached
two years, in his own hired House, and received all that came unto him:
preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concerned the
Lord Jesus Christ with all confidence, no man forbiding him, as it is written,
Acts 28.30,31. whereby it is evident that God owns and justifies Meetings and
preaching in Houses, and that a Minister of Christ, may preach in other places
besides Parish Churches and Chapels, and in his own hired House also, and there
receive such as come to be instructed by him, in the matters of the Kingdom of
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, as aforesaid.

First, It is evident and plain therefore by the holy Scripture, and also by
the Liturgy of the Church of England, that preaching and meeting in Houses is
owned and honored by the Lord, and ought not to be condemned, but justified by
the true Christians and believers in Christ; for to condemn the Ministers of
Christ, and true Christians for preaching and meeting in Houses upon the
account of Religion and worship of God, would be to condemn the practice of
Christ and his Apostles and Primitive Christians recorded in Scriptures; and it
would be to deny and disallow of what God Almighty and the holy Scriptures do
evidently justify and own, and therefore meeting and preaching in Houses ought
not to be forbiden or punished by men; because such Christian Religious
Meetings, preaching and practices are allowed by the Liturgy, and owned, and
honored by the Lord God of Heaven.

Secondly, That which is allowed by the Liturgy, and owned, and honored by
the Lord God of Heaven, ought not to be forbiden and condemned by men, but
Christian Religious Meetings and preaching, in other places then Parish
Churches and Chapels are allowed by the Liturgy, and owned and honored by the
Lord God of Heaven: Therefore Christian Religious Meetings and preachings in
Houses, or in other places then Parish Churches and Chapels, as aforesaid,
ought not to be forbiden, and condemned by men.

Thirdly, That the Apostles of Christ and Primitive Christians did frequently
meet together after Christ's Ascension, in Houses to preach and pray and perform
service to God, and that such Christian Religious meetings and preaching in
Houses were owned and honored by the Lord God of Heaven, is plain and clearly
proved as aforesaid, and therefore such Christian religious meetings and
preachings are allowed by the Lord to be lawful assemblies and practices; which
ought to be allowed and tolerated by men; because they are owned and justified
by the great God of Heaven.

Fourthly, The Apostles of Christ and Primitive Christians to whom Christ
appeared after his Resurrection, and gave commandment to wait at Jerusalem
until they received the promise of the Father, or the Holy Ghost from Heaven,
did in obedience to that Command return from the Mount Olivet after Christ's
Ascension unto Jerusalem to wait for the Holy Ghost from Heaven, but they did
not go into the Temple at Jerusalem, nor into a Parish Church or Chapel to
wait for the same, but they entered into Jerusalem and went into an upper Room
and was sitting together in a House when they received the Holy Ghost from
Heaven, as by the Scriptures are evident and plain, Acts 1. and Acts 2. Whereby
it appears, or from hence we may observe and learn, first, That the Parish
Churches and Chapels were not the places appointed by Christ at his Ascension
to meet and assemble together in, to wait upon God until they received the
Holy Ghost from Heaven. 2ly. That God is not bound or tied up to Parish
Churches or Chapels to wait upon him therein, as the appointed place of his
Worship. 3ly. That the Lord God Almighty has signally owned and testified from
Heaven that he owns and justifies meetings in Houses to wait upon him, beause
when they were met together as they sat in a House they received the Holy
Ghost from Heaven, and spoke as the Spirit gave them utterance; but we do not
read in the Scriptures that Almighty God did ever at any time so wonderfully
manifest himself to People in a Parish Church or Chapel, as in Houses he has
done, since Christ's Ascension into Heaven.

Fifthly. The Lord has so far owned and honored Meeting and Preaching in
House since Christ's Ascension that the Hearers have received the Holy Ghost, at
meeting and preaching in Houses as by the Scripture is evident and plain;
therefore meeting and preaching in Houses ought not to be forbidden; but when
did the Lord so evidently appear and signally own meeting and preaching in
Parish Churches and Chapels as then and therein to give the Holy Ghost to the
Hearers, as at preaching in Houses he has done; for when Peter was preaching
in the houses of Cornelius the Holy Ghost fell on al them which heard the word,
as you may read, Acts 10. from verse 19. to verse 49. whereby it appears that
meeting and preaching in houses are owned and honored of God, as by the
Scriptures is apparently proved.

Sixthly, And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one
accord in one place, and suddenly there came a sound from Heaven and filled all
the House where they were sitting; whereby it appears, that they were
assembled and met in a House, and that Christian meeting was no seditious
Conventicle; but owned and honored by the Lord from Heaven; though they were
not assembled in a Parish Church or Chapel, but in a House, whereby it appears
that God is well pleased with meeting and preaching in Houses; for they were
filled with the holy Ghost, and spoke, as the spirit gave them utterance,
though some mocking of them, said these men are full of new Wine, but Peter
standing up, with the Elders, lift up his voice and preached unto them, and
when they had heard him preach the word of God unto them, they were pricked in
their hearts; and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand
souls, and they continued steadfastly in the Apostles doctrine and fellowship;
as you may read, Acts 2.1,2. to the 43. Whereby it appears that the Word of God
may be effectually preached in houses; was there ever such a thing known at a
meeting in a Parish Church or Chapel, by the preaching of a Parish Priest in
those places to convert at one Sermon three thousand Souls, as was effectually
done by the preaching of the Word by the Apostle Peter, as aforesaid; therefore
it is apparent arid evident by the Scriptures that meeting and preaching in
houses are lawful meetings and practices, being so highly approved of, and
signally owned of the Lord, and such meetings and preaching in Houses as are
owned and approved of God ought not to be forbidden by men, but rather allowed
and tolerated by them.

Seventhly, Though God Almighty did so evidently show himself well pleased with
meeting and preaching in Houses in the Primitive times as aforesaid, yet the
unbelievers and formal envious Professors who were out of love with the same,
and were against that which God did so signally own by apparent Testimonies
from Heaven, for the Jews which believe not, moved with envy took unto them
certain lewd fellows of the baser sort, and gathered a company and set all the
City in an uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them
out to the people, and they drew Jason and certain Brethren unto the Rulers of
the City, crying, these that have turend the World upside down are come hither
also, whom Jason has received, and these all do contrary to the decrees of
Caesar, saying that there is another King, one Jesus, and they troubled the
people and the Rulers of the City when they heard these things; as you may read
Acts 17.5,6,7,8.

Whereby it appears first that some were against meeting and preaching in
houses, when such Christian religious meetings, and preaching in houses were so
apparently owned by Testimonies from Heaven. 2ly. That if God Almighty should
never so apparently and signally own such Christian religious meetings, and
practices (as meeting and preaching in houses) by never so clear and infallible
Testimonies from Heaven, yet notwithstanding some out of ignorance or
wilfulness will be ready to contradict and oppose the same. 3ly. That they who
were so opposite to the practices of the Apostles and Primitive Christians for
meeting and preaching in Houses as aforesaid, were unbelievers and formal
professors who were moved with envy against them and their practices. 4ly. That
those unbelievers and formal professors that were moved with envy against the
true Gospel, Preachers and Hearers did take unto them certain lewd fellows of
the baser sort and gathered a company; 1. to set the City in an uproar, 2. to
assault the house where the Primitive Christians were met together, 3. to pull
them out of the house and bring them unto the Rulers, and 4. when they had
pulled out the Brethren and Primitive Christians out of the house and brougt
them and the man of the house unto the Rulers, they begun to accuse them before
the Magistrates; 1. for being come into their City after that manner; 2. for
turning the world upside down; 3. they accused Jason (the man of the house) for
receiving of them; and 4. they accused them all for doing contrary to the
decrees of Caesar; and lastly the Magistrates were ready to hear them, or give
credit to their Accusations against the true Gospel Ministers and Primitive
Christians.

Eighthly, Now seeing that envy in the unbelievers was the moving cause of
taking to them the baser sort of people, and certain lewd fellows, to make
such an uproar, and pull out the brethren and primitive Christians to bring
them before the Magistrates to render them odious, and worthy of punishment, in
their apprehensions, and that there was a Magistracy ready to believe such
things, against the servants and people of God; how may this instruct all true
Christians and Christian Magistrates? utterly to abhor, detest, and reject,
such wicked, ungodly, antichristian examples and practices, as envy then moved,
or may now move unto, in the unbelievers and baser sort of people, against the
godly examples and practices of the primitive Christians; and how may this
induce all true Christians and Christian Magistrates, to tolerate, justify
and own, the example and practice of the true Gospel Preachers and primitive
Christians, to preach, and pray, and perform service to God; by the word and
spirit of God as they did; in other places then Pavish Churches and Chapels:
for God that made the World and all things therein; seeing that he is Lord of
Heaven and Earth, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped
with Men's hands, as though he needed anything, seeing he gives unto all life
and breath, and all things: as the Apostle has testified, Acts 17.24,25.

Ninthly, But when he which testified that God dwells not in Temples made
with hands, neither is worshipped with Man's hands, as aforesaid, was a strict
zealous outward professor, and unacquainted with God in the spirit, he was
zealous for the outward Temple, and for the worship performed therein, and
could not endure meeting, and preaching in Houses, and to hear the outward
Temple cried down; for he joined with the chief Priests, and consented with
others to the death of Stephen, for doing the same, (or as you may read, Acts
6. chap. Acts 7.) and as for Saul he made havoc of the Church, and entering
into every House, (where they used to meet together) and haleing out Men and
Women, committed them to Prison, Acts 7.1,2,3. Whereby it is evident that Saul
before his conversion, and whilst he was ignorant of Christ within, was against
meeting and preaching in Houses, and zealous for the outward Temple, (as many
old formal professors, before their conversion in ignorance are) so that he
could persecute the people of God to death for so doing: (as many stich like
thorough ignorance of the way of the Lord are now ready to do) 2. That old
zealous professors before their convertion, and inward acquaintance with Christ
in the spirit, are the greatest persecuters of them that are most acquainted
with Christ Jesus within in the spirit, and are most against meeting and
preaching in Houses, and are zealous for the outward Temple, and
Temple-worship, which God has by his Apostles testified against, Acts 7.47,48.
Acts 17.24,25. is evident and plain as aforesaid.

Tenthly, They who were ignorant of Christ in themselves, were most against
meeting and preaching in houses, and the greatest persecuters of them in whom
Christ Jesus was manifest, so that they in whom Christ Jesus was revealed did
deny the outward Temple, and assembled together to preach and pray in houses,
and were most opposed and persecuted by them that were most in an outward form
of profession, and ignorant of the life and power of Christ Jesus as aforesaid,
though Almighty God did apparently own his people in meeting and preaching in
houses, by signal Testimonies from Heaven, as by the Scriptures aforesaid, is
evident and plain.

Lastly, Though the Apostle Paul before his Conversion, and whilst he had not
the Revelation of Christ in himself, did greatly esteem of the outward Temple,
and highly oppose meeting and Preaching in houses, by making havoc of the
Church, entering into every house, and halling men and women committed them to
Prison, Acts 7.3. yet after his Conversion and when he had the Revelatiof
Christ in himself that he might be a Preacher of him; as it is written, Gal.
1.15,16,17. Then he preached down the outward Temple Worship; as you may read,
Acts 17.24,25. and he owned and practiced Meeting and Preaching in Houses, Acts
20.6,7,8. Acts 28.30,31. Whereby it is evident and plain that the best of the
Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, have preached down the outward Temple since
Christ's Ascension, and have owned and practiced meeting and preaching in
Houses, and the true Gospel Ministers said, walk as ye have us for examples,
Phil. 3.17. who did frequently meet and preach in other places then Parish
Churches and Chapels; therefore to meet and preach in houses is very
justifiable by the example and practices of the Apostles of Christ and
Primitive Christians, and owned by signal Testimonies from Heaven, and ought
not therefore to be condemned or forbidden by Men.

POSTSCRIPT.
MEetings barely and simply considered, as meetings upon the account of
Religious exercise without an intent precedent to do some unlawful action or
mischief when they are assembled together is no offense (it seems) against Law,
or punishable thereby: Anno 16. Car 2. fol. 25 26.
For first the Title of the Act, is to prevent and suppress seditions
Conventicles; so that Conventicles or meetings for the service of God are not
to be prevented and suppressed by the said Act, but seditious Conventicles are
to be prevented and suppressed thereby. 2ly. The remedies or penalties provided
by the said Act, are against the growing and dangerous practices of seditious
sectaries and other disloyal persons; who under pretense of tender Consciences
do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections as late experience has showed; so
that those are seditious sectaries and disloyal persons against whom the
penalties of the Act in that case are made and provided, who under pretense of
tender Consciences do at their meetings contrive Insurrections as aforesaid.
Whereby it may appear that for persons to meet and assemble together upon the
account of Religious exercise to the number of five and above, besides them of
the household in other manner then is allowed by the Liturgy of the Church of
England is to meet and assemble together under such a pretense to contrive
Insurrections, or do some mischievous actions, under so fair a pretense as
aforesaid.

For thirdly the tenor or execution of the Act, Anno 16. Ca^. 2. fol. ^4.
is to prevent the mischiefs which may grow by such seditious and tumultuous
meetings under pretense of Religious Worship: Whereby it is evident that the
meetings punishable by the said Act, are to be seditious and tumultuous
meetings, which tends to mischievous actions; so that the manner of meeting
must be a seditious and tumultuous manner, and the matter enacted, done or
performed at the meeting, must be teaching, or acting sedition, insurrection or
mischief, or else how is it punishable by the said Act aforementioned.

And as to the matter of fact against preaching persons prohibited or to be
restrained from coming within five miles of Cities and Towns Corporate, or
within five miles of any Parish, Town, or place wherein they have been Parsons,
Vicars, Curats, Stipendaries, Lecturers, possessed of any Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual Promotions, etc. is it not to be proved as matter of fact against
such preaching persons prohibited and to be restrained as aforesaid: First,
that they take upon them to preach without any right or authority from God;
2ly. that they preach contrary to the laws and statutes of this Kingdom; 3ly.
that the meetings wherein they so preach are unlawful Assembles or
Conventicles; 4ly. that such preaching persons have been possessed of some
Ecclesiastical or spiritual promotions; 5ly. that they have been in holy
Orders, or pretend to be in holy Orders in a National or Parochial way; 6. that
they are settled persons or have settled themselves sometimes by three or more in
Corporations, thereby taking an opportunity to distill the poisonous principles
of Schism and Rebellion into the hearts of the people to the great danger of
the Church and Kingdom; 7ly. What it is to preach contrary to the Laws and
Statutes of the Kingdom as to the matter of preaching, must it not be to preach
Schism and Rebellion or insurrection and sedition, that is the matter
punishable; because preaching the Gospel of Christ and the pure Word of God is
not the matter of preaching forbidden.

Written from a Principle of Truth, Righteousness and peace on the behalf of
true Christians and godly Preachers, and owned by Christian Moderation

Something more by way of Addition and Confirmation, wherein also is answered
some great Objections, etc.
NOw if Christian Religious Meetings and Preaching in other places then Parish
Churches and Chapels be accounted seditious Conventicles, because of the
manner of meeting and preaching, when both the matter and manner of meeting and
preaching is according to the holy Scriptures, and the practice of the Apostles
of Christ and Primitive Christians, what just ground or reason from the holy
Scriptures can be produced for the proof of the same to make persons guilty of
punishment, either by imprisonment, sines or Banishment for so doing?

Object. Perhaps some may object or say its no matter though the holy
Scriptures and practice of the Apostles of Christ and Primitive Christians do
allow of the manner of Christian Religious Meeting and Preaching in upper
Chambers and in private Houses; so that there is no just ground or reason to be
produced from the holy Scriptures or practice of the Apostles of Christ and
Primitive Christians to prove Christian Regions Meetings and preaching (in
other places then Parish Churches and Chapels) to be seditious Conventicles,
and unlawful assemblies, when both the manner and matter of meeting and
preaching is according to the holy Scriptures; yet there is an Act (or
Ordinance of Man) made against the same, and the Scripture says, Be subject to
every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake; and therefore by that Act or
Ordinance they are punishable for meeting and preaching (in other places then
Parish Churches and Chapels) according to our apprehensions.

Ans. In answer thereunto we say, that forasmuch as every Ordinance of man
ought to be submitted unto for the Lords sake, how careful ought men (in
Authority to be who profess themselves Christian Magistrates too) to enact and
ordain nothing about the Service and Worship of God but what is according to
the mind, spirit and word of God; seeing that the motive to subjection to such
Ordinances of men is for the Lords sake; and how can they be submitted unto for
the Lords sake if they be contrary to the mind, spirit and word of God, because
the Apostle Peter ^ Pet. 2.13,^,15,16.
who exhorts to subjection to the Ordinances of Men, upon that consideration,
(1 Pet. 2.13,14,15,16.) was one of the first that denied subjection to that
Ordinance made against preaching, or was chiefly concerned in refusing
subjection to the command or ordinance of Men, when they commanded Peter (for
one) to preach no more in the Name of Jesus; for the Apostle Peter ^ct
4.17,18,^,20.
could not submit himself to such a command or ordinance of men, for the Lords
sake when he knew it to be contrary to the mind and spirit of God in forbidding
them to preach as aforesaid; therefore may it not be concluded upon just
grounds from the Scriptures and practice of the Apostles of Christ, that they
did not intend a subjection to the Ordinances of Men for the Lords sake, when
they ( viz. men's Ordinances) were against preaching in the Name of Christ
Jesus, and in opposition to the requirings of God and contrary to the Word of
the Lord; for when the Apostles of Christ were forbidden to preach, and
commanded by the Magistrates then not to teach at all in the Name of Jesus,
Acts 4.17,18. they put the Magistrates to be their own Judges, concerning that
thing; however they could not be subject unto them concerning the same so as to
give over preaching, because God requires it of them; for first the Apostles of
Christ spoke to the Magistrates by way of enquiry to make them their own Judges
(of their unreasonableness and injustice) concerning the same, saying, whether
it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you, (so as to give over
preaching in the name of Jesus, when you forbid us to preach) more then unto
God, judge ye? Secondly, they spoke by way of affirmation and justification of
preaching when the Magistrates forbad them to preach, and could not give over
Preaching though men did prohibit them from preaching; (which may serve as an
use of reproof to many hypocritical Priests of this Generation) for said the
true Gospel Ministers, (to the Magistrates who forbad them to preach) We cannot
but speak the thing which we have heard and seen; as by the Scriptures is
evident and plain, see Acts 4. from verse the 1. to the 21.

Thirdly, The Apostles of Christ and true Gospel Preachers did never intend
that Christians and Believers in Christ should be judged as seditious
Sectaries, and punished by Fines, Imprisonment ' and Banishment, under pretense
of being at seditious Conventicles, for meeting and preaching in houses (or
other places then Parish Churches and Chapels) when both the manner of their
meeting and matter of preaching is according to the Scriptures and mind of
Christ Jesus; for it was the practice of Christ and his Apostles to meet
together with the Primitive Christians, and preach in houses and other places,
then Parish Churches and Chapels; and the Apostles of Christ who had the mind
of Christ Jesus, commands us to walk as we have them for example, Phil. 3.17.
and must we be punished for so doing? that is to say, for meeting and preaching
in houses, and out of houses, as Christ and his Apostles and the Primitive
Christians did, seeing it was the practice of true Christians and Ministers of
the Gospel of Christ so to do, whose example is left upon record in Scripture;
and they have given commandment to Christians to walk as they have them for an
example, whose godly meetings were lawful assemblies, how then can such godly
meetings be seditious Conventicles which be according to such good examples?

Object. Now if any object and say that Preaching must not be in Houses, but in
the visible Church of Christ Jesus; in Answer thereunto we may say unto such,
Answer.
That the Parish meeting places are not the visible Church of Christ Jesus;
first, because the Liturgy says, that the Church is the household and family of
God: See the Liturgy on Good Friday, the Collects so called.
2ly. That the whole body of the Church is governed and sanctified by the
Spirit of God, but so are not the Parish meeting places; how then can they be
said to be Christ's visible Church: For 3ly. it is declared by the Archbishops,
and Bishops of both Provinces, and the whole Clergy in the Convocation holden
at London, in the year 1562. in the 19 th. Article of the Church, Article 19.
that the visible Church of Christ is a Congregation of faithful men, in the
which the pure Word of God is preached: is not therefore the preaching of the
pure word of God in a Congregation of faithful men, the preaching of it in the
visible Church of Christ as aforesaid? though they be not met and assembled
together in a Parish Church or a Chapel.

The Bishops and Clergy in that Convocation said, and in the 13 th. Article it
is declared, Article 13.
that works done before the Grace of Christ, and the inspiration of his Spirit
are not pleasant to God: here they own inspiration; and forasmuch as preaching
is a work, do not the Archbishops and Bishops own and declare in effect that
none can preach aright so as to be well pleasing unto God until they be
inspired by the spirit of God, (though they may preach in a Parish Church, or a
Chapel.)

In the 34 th. Article they say, Article 34.
that nothing is to be ordained against Gods Word: now then if any thing be
ordained by men against the Worship of God, is not that ordained against Gods
Word? Again in the 6. Article the Bishops and Clergy have declared, Article 6.
that whatsoever is not read in the Scriptures, nor may be proved thereby, is
not to be required of any man, that it should be believed as an Article of the
Faith, or to be thought requisite or necessary to Salvation.

And in the same Convocation they have agreed and declared in the 20 th.
Article, Article 20.
that it is not lawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to
Gods Word written, and as it ought not to decree any thing against the same; so
besides the same ought it not to enforce any thing to be believed for necessity
of Salvation.

If nothing ought to be ordained that is contrary to the Word of God, Article
34.
then if an Ordinance be made against meeting and preaching in Houses and upper
Chambers, Article 20.
(or in other places then Parish Churches and Chapels) is not that Ordinance
made against the Word of God, because the holy Scriptures are said to be the
Word of God, against which nothing ought to be ordained as aforesaid; and by
the holy Scriptures it is evident and plain, that it was the practice of the
Primitive Christians, and Apostles of Christ to assemble together and meet in
private Houses, and upper Chambers to Preach and Pray, and perform service to
God, and their practice is left upon record in Scripture, as a godly Christian
example for Believers to follow; and they have commanded true christians to
walk as they have them for an ensample, Phil. 3.17.

If it be not lawful for the Church of England to ordain any thing against the
word of God written, Article 34.
then if they ordain that Christians must not meet and assemble together to
preach and pray, Article 6.
and perform service to God in any place, but a Par^sh Church or a Chapel, is
not such an ordinance against the Word of God written? because the Apostles of
Christ says to the Saints and Believers in Christ, Phil. 3.17.
walk as ye have us for an ensample: And they met together to preach and pray
in Houses and upper Chambers, (and not in Parish Churches and Chapels) for
they preached down the outward Temple, Article 19.
Acts 7.41.47. Acts 17.24,25.

If the visible Church of Christ be a Congregation of faithful men, in the
which the pure Word of God is preached, and if none can preach the same, so as
to be well pleasing unto God before they be inspired by the spirit of God, do
not such as be inspired by the Spirit of God most truly preach the Word of God
(though not in a Parish Church or a Chapel) and do not they come to the Church
of Christ who meet and assemble together with a Congregation of faithful men to
hear the Word of God preached, by such as are inspired by the Spirit of God, as
aforesaid; Article 34. Article 6. Article 20.
(though in other places then Parish Churches and Chapels) and if nothing
ought to be ordained contrary to Gods word, is it not plain that every
Ordinance of man which is to be submitted unto for the Lords sake, should
answer the mind of God by being according to the Word of God, as aforesaid;
because the Bishops and Clergy in their Convocation have agreed and declared,
that it is unlawful for the Church to ordain any thing that is contrary to Gods
Word written, and as they ought not to decree any thing against the Word of
God, so besides the same they ought not to enforce anything, as aforesaid; as
by the Scriptures and the said Articles is evident and plain.

THE END.

