Art thou a Ruler in Israel and know not these things? viz.

The great error in that which is called the Apostles CREED.

And the real truth of JESUS CHRIST his glorious conquering personal reign
on Earth, over the Devil, Sin and Death for one thousand years.

WITH Man's salvation by the free grace and favor of God and Jesus Christ. Laid
open by him who heartily desires the manifestation of all the truths of God,
and of Jesus Christ. And the utter extirpation of all the errors of MEN.

WILLIAM FARMER Gent.

That Christ betwixt his burial and his resurrection did not descend into
Hell, nor then preach to the damned spirits in PRISON.
THE Church of England does allow of, and acknowledge 3. Creeds: And the now
Assembly of Divines Their book 19 articles o^ the Church.
have adheringly ratified, confirmed, and manifested them all; that is, the
Nycen Creed, the Apostles Creed, and the Athynasian Creed.

Nothing ought to be counted Apostolical, that is not grounded upon, and
answerable unto the Apostles Doctrine. Our Apostles Creed is, That Christ was
Crucified, dead and buried, he descended into Hell: the third day he rose again
from the dead.

There is no Doctrine of the Apostles, that Christ betwixt his burial and his
Resurrection descended into Hell: therefore it is no Apostolical Doctrine.

Whatsoever is not Apostolical, ought not to be made Catholical. The Nycen
Creed which is counted Catholicall, says, that Christ suffered for our
salvation: descended into Hell; rose again the third day from the dead. That
Christ suffered for our salvation, or rather that Christ suffered for our sins:
was finished when he had received the vinegar, and said it is finished: Father
into thy hands I commend my Joh. 19. 30. Lu. 23. 46.
Spirit: and having said thus, he gave up the Ghost; or his divine Spirit or
Godhead departed out of his humane body: and then was his full sufferings
finished, as Christ himself says. Jesus knowing Joh. 19. 28
that all things were now accomplished that the Scripture might be fulfilled:
as this Nycen Creed says well: Although he be God and man, he is not two
Christ's, but one Christ: so when his Godhead was departed from his manhood,
then he had finished or fulfilled all Scripture as a sufferer: because he was
a perfect Christ no longer then he was God and man, no more then a man that is
a dead man, is a perfect man; for the dead body cannot suffer because it has
no sense: so that it was only the humane body of Christ laid in the grave that
was in Hell: because the grave is the dead bodies Hell: and the grave is called
hell in diverse Scriptures, and so is this Nycen Creed to be understood.

The Athanasian Creed says, That Christ suffered, and was buried, and the
third day rose again according to the Scriptures, and therefore a truth; for
what the Spirit of God has revealed, that only is truth: but the Spirit has
in no Scripture revealed that Christ betwixt his burial and his resurrection
descended into hell: as that which is called the Apostles Creed does affirm;
therefore it is none of the Apostles Doctrine.

This Doctrine, that Christ betwixt his burial and his resurrection descended
into hell, is a hellish, Antichristian, Romish doctrine, derived from their
diabolical error, upon that their misinterpretation of the Spirit of God,
from those words of the Apostle Peter, where he says, That Christ has once
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God,
being put to death in 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20.
the flesh, but quickened by the spirit (the holy Ghost) by which (Spirit) also
he went and preached to the spirits in prison, which sometime were disobedient
(to God) when once (or at that time that) that the long-suffering (or
forbearance) of God waited in the days of Noah while the Arc was preparing.
From which Text do the erroneous Antichristian Doctors of Rome gather and
conclude, that Christ betwixt his death and Resurrection divinely in his
Godhead, went amongst, and preached unto the Infernal damned spirits: and to
this purpose have inserted those their own diabolical words and Doctrine
amongst the Apostles doctrine, and made the same Catholicall as part of a
Church-article, to believe the same as faith unto salvation. This doctrine and
interpretation is antichristian, because it does contradict the Doctrine and
words of Jesus Christ himself, who said to the penitent Thief upon the
cross, To day shall thou be with me in Paradise. To be in Paradise, is to be
in a place of pleasure: Lu. 23. 43.
this Paradise was Gods kingdom of glory, which is Christ's kingdom, as the
Spirit revealed the same to that Thief, who said, Lord remember me when thou
come into thy Kingdom. The humane Lu. 23. 42.
body of Jesus that same day after he was dead, was laid safe in Joseph's Tomb
or grave which is called hell, where there is no pleasure, neither can a dead
body take any pleasure; therefore the humane dead body could not that day be in
Paradise: and for Christ's Divine Spirit or Godhead at all to be, or that day
to be amongst the damned spirits, could not then that day be in Paradise,
because the damned spirits are not in pleasure, but excluded from pleasure, and
reserved in chains of darkness unto the great and terrible day of the Lord
where no pleasure is. Therefore it is an infallible truth, that when Jesus
Christ said to the Thief, to day shall thou be with me in Paradise; he spoke
of his own divine Spirit or Godhead, and of the thiefe's invisible, internal,
immortal, eternal spirit or soul, which came from God, and not of their
mortal bodies which came from the earth, and lay in the earth. And when he
spoke of Paradise, he did not speak of that earthly Paradise in Eden, into
which the man was put after his creation: but of that heavenly Paradise into
which man should be fetched after his redemption by a resurrection; in which
Paradise as Jesus Christ affirms, is pleasure for evermore: and so are the
Romish Doctors and their antichristian diabolical doctrine, with their false
interpreation, confuted.

The true meaning of the holy Ghost in Peter, by those words of Peter, are thus
to be interpreted and understood; that Peter and all others by God appointed
for that purpose, into whom the holy Ghost was sent, and spoke as the Spirit
gave them utterance: did not speak, preach, or reveal the will or mind of God
to the mortal bodies of men, because the mortal bodies of men are to perish,
and so cannot for ever retain the word of God which is to endure for ever, as
Jesus Christ says. Heaven and Earth (that is the whole mortality) shall pass
away: but not one jot or tittle of my word shall pass away. But the Spirit of
God does direct the word of God to the immortal, eternal souls or spirits of
men; because the souls or spirits of men, and the word of God are to endure for
ever: and so the souls are able to retain the word for ever. And every soul of
man is an immortal, eternal living spirit from God, whose Kingdom,
habitation and dwelling from whence the soul came is Genesis 2.
boundless, endless, and limitlesse: and therefore a place of liberty,
because it is without any restraint: and every soul while it is in the mortal
body of clay is confined and bounded with its mortal wall of earth the body,
and chained in by the natural corruptions of the sinful flesh. And so every
soul while it is in the body, is in prison, because it is by the body
restrained from its former liberty it had in heaven from whence it came into
the mortal body, which former liberty was boundless and limitless. Therefore it
was those souls that were in the mortal bodies of those wicked men of the old
world, that lived in the days of Noah, before the flood that Peter speaks of:
that were the spirits in prison preached unto by that quickening spirit or
lively spirit of God the holy Ghost, by which the dead body or flesh of Jesus
Christ, was quickened or raised the 3d day again to life from the dead. It was
that same Spirit or holy Ghost sent by Jesus Christ into Noah, that did preach
in Noah to the spirits or souls of those wicked men that lived in the days of
Noah, before the flood, which were in prison, then imprisoned in their mortal
bodies, by their finfull flesh: whose sins were so provoking of the Almighty,
that the Lord said, It repented him that he had made man on the Earth, and it
grieved him at the heart. These men's souls or spirits were so imprisoned in
(...). 6. 6.
their bodies, and so chained in by their corruptions of the flesh, that they
could not hear the Spirit of God preaching unto them in Noah for repentance and
amendment of life: but were like the deaf Adder that stops his ear against
the Charmer, charm he never so well, Peter says, that God did suffer their
disobedience long: and with patience Pet. 3. 20.
waited for the repentance and amendme^t of life all that while and time. Noah
was preparing of the Arc. And thus is this Text to be interpreted and
understood to the glory of God, because it sets forth his truth: and therefore
that clause in the Apostles Creed ought to be razed and for ever put out, and
no longer suffered for Catholicall, as from an Apostolical Author, being it
was from a Papisticall, Antichristian, Diabolical, Jesuiticall Author, the
Devils chief erroneous instruments on earth.

That Jesus Christ shall reign one thousand years on Earth.
Says the Apostle Peter, No prophecy of the Scripture is any private
interpretation; neither came it by the will of man: but holy ^et. 1. 22.
men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. The Scripture is not
the word of men, but it is the word of God. And says the Text, the Prophecy
of John is, The revelation of Jesus Christ to show ^ 1. 1, 2.
unto his servants things that must shortly come to pass. Therefore Christ
sent and signified the same by his Angel to his servant John. One and the same
holy Ghost delivered the whole word of God, though by diverse Instruments,
amongst whom John was one, and the last, who says, I saw an Angel come down
from heaven, having the key of Rev. 20. 1, 2, 3.
the bottomless pit, and a great chain in his hand. And he laid hold on the
Dragon that old Serpent, which is the Devil and Satan, and bound him a
thousand years: and cast him into the bottomless pit, and shut him up, and
set a seal upon him, That he should deceive the Nations no more until the
thousand years should be fulfilled. John does not prophecy of any thing to
come, but what was answerable and agreeable to former prophesies, and promises.
Therefore let men in these days try the prophesies of John with other
Scriptures, as the noble Bereans in the Apostles days, tried the Apostles
doctrine, and then the very truth of God will appear, according to the promise
of Jesus Christ, Whatsoever you shall ask the Father in my name, hewill give
it unto you. Therefore ask and you shall receive. Ask by prayer for heavenly
wisdom in faith, and you shall receive a good understanding. Seek and you
shall find. Seek by searching of the Scriptures for the truth, and you shall
find eternal life. Knock and it shall be opened unto you. Knock at heaven
gates by a fervency in heart for the spirit of God, and the gates of heaven
shall be opened, and the holy Ghost shall come in unto you: and he shall reveal
all things unto you that be written, whether past, present, or to come. God in
the beginning created the whole works and creatures that be mortal within the
first fix evenings and mornings: And lo all things were very Genesis 1.
good. But when that old Serpent, the Devil and Satan, that enemy of man by
his subtilty, had beguiled Eve, and by her Adam, and so in them all mankind,
by sowing tares of disobedience in the whole mortality of God. The Lord said,
the whole earth and creatures were so corrupted through the deceit of the
Devil, that it repented Genesis 6. 6.
God that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at the heart. And
still even so long as the Devil shall have power over the whole mortality of
God, he will deceive the Nations: but Jesus Christ by his servant John has
promised: the whole mortality, a whole deliverance from the power of the Devil
for a thousand years, by sending an Angel with power from heaven down into
this world, to lay hold on, and arrest the Devil at the suite of Jesus Christ,
with an action from God Almighty out of the Court of Gods glorious justice
without bail or main prize to cast him into the bottomless pit, and to shut
him up, and to set a seal upon him, because he by his instruments shut up the
body of Jesus Christ in the grave with a great stone, and sealed him up with
the signet of the Scribes and Pharisees: Mat. 27. 66.
that he should not rise again according to the Scriptures, for the redemption
of his redeemed ones. And for the Devils deceiving of the Nations from the
creation unto that time, shall he be kept in, and shut up for one complete
1000. years; during which thousand years, all the mortal creatures on the
earth at that time shall be so freed from the Devils evil power, according to
former prophefie, and the promises of God by the Prophet Isaiah. That the
devouring Lion Isa. 11 7, 8, 9. Isa. 65. 25.
shall eat grass as an Ox, and all creatures shall be atpeace; even at the
same peace they had in the day of the creation before man sinned: by reason
whereof the Devil had a power to work in all creatures the evil of malice and
death: and this 1000. years of the Devils confined and restrained power from
his working and acting of evil in any wise, either by tempting to evil, or
dying for evil, or by evil. There shall be no death, neither shall there be
any children gotten or borne; for getting of children is an act of sin,
because it is acted by lust, and lust is an act of sin; for although Adam and
Eve were matrimonially lawful man and wife before they sinned; yet did they
not get Cain the seed of the Serpent, before they had sinned; for if they had,
he could not have been wicked; for the Text says, all mn were conceived in
sin. And this Text may very well be granted, because Cain the first man that
was conceived, was a bloody murdering sinner; for if Cain had been righteous,
then might some have disputed whether Cain had not been conceived before Adam
and Eve had sinned, as well as they to be married before they had sinned;
therefore and thereby is Jesus Christ only and alone known to be the Son of
God, because he was not conceived by the sinful and lustful seed of sinful
man: but as the text says, he was, and none but he was conceived by the holy
Ghost, and horn of the Virgin Mary. A virgin, because with Child, and her womb
not defiled with sinful seed of lust.

The Devil is said to be the God of this world, because of his princely power
overal the mortal works, and creatures of God in this world through man's sin;
gained by the Devils subtle temptation: therefore Jesus Christ, though the
Son of God, by the love of God to the world, must take upon him sinful
flesh, that thereby he might redeem sinful man from the sins of the flesh;
under which work of Redemption, Jesus Christ, though perfect God, as well as
perfect man, during the time of his mortal flesh which he did receive from
the Virgin, must be, and was subject to the Principalities and powers of this
world, even to the Devil himself, and his wicked isntrumental members,
saying, Give unto Caesar that which is Caesar's; for my Kingdom is not of this
world, during the principality of the Devil; for God and Belial cannot dwell
both together, that is, God and the Devil, cannot be both Kings in one
Kingdom at one time, because God is light, and the Devil is darkness, as the
Text says, light and darkness cannot abide together; for either light
comprehends the darkness, or else the darkness comprehends the light, as
every night and day makes it appear unto us: But Pilate the Governor said
unto Jesus Christ, are thou the King of the Jews: he denied not, saying, thou
have said it: as if Christ should have said, Pilate. Wise Solomon says, there
is a time for all things under heaven: although a son in his nonage or
infancy, by reason he is under subjection, differs not from a servant; yet the
time will come Rev. 19. 16.
when it will appear he is Lord of all things. So Pilate, though I now by
reason of my sufferings at the present, in the time of my mortal flesh,
nonage, and infancy, of my not being risen from the dead: and again, being not
yet glorified of my Father in heaven, but am here counted as a servant. The
time will come when it will Rev. 21. 1, 2, 3. Isa. 65. 17, 18, 19. Isa. 66. 22.
appear that I am he that shall be the King of the Jews, and King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords; as my Father has said, sit thou at my right hand, until I
have made thine enemies thy foote-stool, even when all power shall be given me
of my Father, both in heaven and in earth, then Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel
shall be right-glad, because of the new heavens and the new earth, and the holy
City new Jerusalem which John saw, and Isaiah prophesied of, coming down
from 1 Kings 8. 27. 1 Timothy 6. 15, 16. 1 John 4. 12.
God out of heaven: And because Christ, Gods Tabernacle, shall be with men, and
dwell with them on earth, and they shall be his people: And God himself shall
be with them, and be their God, as the Text by the Spirit in Solomon says,
from God as a promise to the children of God. It is true indeed, that God will
dwell on the earth, as Paul says of Christ at the present, saying, who only,
(and none but he) has immortality, and dwells in that light that none can
attain unto (which is in the glorious presence of God Almighty) whom never man
saw, neither can see; as the Text says, No man has seen God at any time,
neirher can see him, while he is clothed with sinful flesh: but when the
sinfulness of the flesh shall be done away, then men shall see God, and Jesus
Christ on earth in such a glory, as mortal sinful flesh cannot behold for the
exceeding brightness thereof, as God himself says, No man can see my face and
live; that is, no man who is corrupted by transgression or sin, can behold
the righteous face of God, because that transgression is darkness from the
Devil the Prince of darkness, whose darkness cannot stand before the
righteous glory of God Almighty. For as the presence of the suns glory does do
away the darkness of this world; so the presence of Gods glory does do away
all the spiritual darkness of the Devil and sin; therefore says John,
that an Angel from heaven must first by his power shut and chain up the
Devil, and then behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
Isa. 11. 6, 7, 8, 9.
with men, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them,
and be their God. That is, God shall wholly be their God, because the Devil
shall wholly with all his power be taken away, and confined as close prisoner
for a thousand years: during which thousand years all the mortal creatures
shall be at peace as the Prophet Isa says, The Lion shall eat grass like an
Ox, and leave devouring: because the Devil, by whose power in all the mortal
creatures (all the mortal creatures were set at an evil odds) shall be
totally done away for that thousand years; that he should deceive the Nations
no more until the thousand years should be fulfilled. 2 Pet. 3, 4.


Qu. What reason is there grounded upon Scripture that Christ shall come and
dwell on earth, and reign King of Kings and Lord of Lords a thousand years.

Answ. First, for his promise-sake, who has promised the same in diverse
Scriptures, as Peter says. That in the latter days there shall be scoffers,
that shall say, where is the promise of his coming. (We do not believe it)
for all things continue as they were from the beginning. These scoffers do not
regard what Solomon says, That there is a time 2 Pet. 3. 8.
for all things under heaven. But because such scoffers will not stay Gods
time, but expect that time sooner then God has appointed the same: and for
that they want patience to wait upon God, will fall into unbelief, and say,
where is the promise of his coming, as though he would never come: but unto
such says the same Apostle. Beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that
one day is with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day.
As if Peter should say, scoffers, if through impatience you will not believe
the promises of God for Christ his coming, who is faithful in all his
promises, and who is in all his promises yea and amen. I will confirm the
promises of God by the works of God thus. God within the first six Evenings
and Mornings in the beginning made and created the whole mortality: even all
the works and creatures, and when he had done, he looked on the whole, and
behold all was very good. And therefore God adds to his six days of labor,
one day, or a sanctified holy day of rest from all labor: but when man (by the
temptation of that old Serpent the Devil and Satan) had disobeyed the
Commandment of God. Then God cursed the whole mortal works and creatures for
man's transgression, with giving the Devil power over them all. And so thereby
became the whole mortal works and creatures corrupted, and that made God say,
That it repented him that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at
the heart. Because that man by sin had corrupted, Genesis 6. 6*
and made all that evil (in one or two hours) by expostulating with, and
yielding to the Devil. That God himself was six days making very good: and
because the Devil had power given him over the whole mortal works and
creatures, as a just judgment for mortal man's sin: therefore during that time
of the Devils power, the Devil is called the God, (or chief prince) of this
world; the Prince of darkness, and the Prince that rules in the air. The
Devil is not for ever to reign as God of this world, Prince of the air, and
Prince of the darkness of this world: but shall be curbed at a time by God
appointed: as the Devil himself confesses, saying to Jesus Christ: Art thou
come to torment us before the time? As if the Devil should have said, Jesus
Christ, why do thou command our power out of mortal man, knowing that the
time of our power over mortality is not yet to be taken away: therefore if thou will not suffer us to be in man, give us leave to go into yonder heard of
swine. And because the Devil is not always to have power over mortality: but
by the power of Christ is to have his power taken off of mortality by Jesus
Christ his coming down from heaven, and to dwell with men on earth for a
thousand years to deliver the whole mortal works and creatures of God on
earth under heaven from the whole Principalities and powers of the Devil, for,
and during that thousand years, according to promise, does Peter say to these
unbelieving scoffers: but Beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing, that one
day is with the Lord as a thousand years. Therefore as the Lord was 6 days
making the whole mortality very good: and man by his finne did provoke God to
curse the same, with giving the Devil power over the whole. Man must also
labor under the power of the Devil with the whole mortality for 6000. years.
Therefore does Peter say, that in the latter days, or toward the end of the
6000. years. Near to that coming of Christ there shall be impatient unbelieving
scoffers, that shall say, where is the promise, or the fulfilling of the
promise of his coming; unto whom Peter says, Be not ignorant of this one
thing, that one day is with the Lord as a thousand years with man, or man
cannot accomplish that under six thousand years, that God did in six days,
ev^n his working will. And as God did add a seventh day of holy rest unto his
six days of labor: so man was from the beginning to celebrate every seventh
day a holy day of rest from labor, in remembrance of the sure promise of
Christ his coming to deliver man and the whole mortality, as Paul says, the
creature shall be delivered from the tyrannical power of the Devil for a
thousand years, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of Romans 8. 21, 12, 23.
Rev. 21. 1, 23.
God, even for that thousand years in which John saw a new heaven and a new
earth, and the holy City new Jerusalem coming down from God out of Heaven,
with a great voice out of heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with
men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people (because the
Devil in, or during that time, 2.
shall have nothing to do with them) and God himself shall be with them, and
be their God. Therefore faith John, Blessed and holy is he ^ev. 20. 6.
that has part in the first resurrection: because on such the second death
has no power: but they shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign
with him a thousand years; according to the promise of God to Jesus Christ:
Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy foote-stoole. Even
the Devil and all his power and wicked instruments, who are the enemies of
Jesus Christ and his members, and 2 Pe^
so taking the six days of Gods account, in which he made the whole
mortality: and according to Peter's account, six thousand years of Man's misery
under the power of the Devil, by reason of sin: and taking the seventh day
of Gods account, in which he, with all the works of his hands, rested and kept
a holy day unto himself, and account a thousand years deliverance from the
power of the Devil, sin, and death, in which God again will with man keep on
earth a holy Sabbath or rest, then and thereby are the promises of Christ his
coming by Peter, confirmed by the works of God, under Gods account, of seven
days in the beginning: but Peter for more certainty of this truth,
notwithstanding those impatient unbelieving scoffers, questioning the same in
the behalf of 2 Pet. 3. 13.
himself, and all the believing members of Jesus Christ of the promises of God
in Christ, says, Nevertheless we according to his (that 2 Pet. 3. 14.
is Gods) promise, look for a new heaven and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness. Unto such says Peter, Beloved, seeing that ye look for such
things, be diligent that ye may be found in peace, without spot, and
blameless; because they that shall enjoy such things says Peter, Are a chosen
generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar 1 Pet. 2. 9.
people. Being made so by the righteousness of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, the coming of Christ is manifested by the glory of God as the Text
says. If Christ had not risen from the dead, then had Christ dyed in vain. So
likewise may it be said, if Christ be perfect God, as well as perfect man, (who
for man took upon him the nature of man: by which on earth he was by his
perfect obedience to redeem man from that power of the Devil, which the
Devil gained over man by man's disobedience) it stands with the glory of God,
for Christ, God on earth, to triumph over the Devil and all his power on
earth, as well as to suffer under the Devil and all his power on earth. Jesus
Christ as he was a mortal man, it was a glory to him to suffer for sinners,
who himself sinned not, as the Text says, The just suffered for the unjust.
But if Jesus Christ as he is God should not triumph over his enemies as a
Conqueror, his sufferings would be counted in vain on earth: therefore Jesus
Christ as he is God, for the glory of his Godhead, by his servant John
reveals to His, who shall partake of that glory that shall be on earth, when
the power of the Devil shall be done away. And when new heavens and a new
earth, and the holy City new Jerusalem from heaven shall appear, then shall
Jesus Christ glorify himself as God, over the Devil and all his works and
powers, as that God by whom all things were created both in heaven and earth,
equal with the Father as a son and heir of all things, and second person in
the Colos.
Trinity: in that Trinity which is so un^ted in the Godhead, that cannot be
d^vided in the persons: as the Nyc^n Creed very w^l^ sets see N^ Creed.
forth. And thus is Christ's coming to reign on the earth proved by the promises
of God, the works of God, and the glory of God.

Quest. What manner of glory will that be that Christ will have on earth
amongst his Saints, and what habitation will he reside in.

Answ. It will be a heavenly glory, according to that which Christ desired as a
son from God, as a Father, saying, Father glorify thy son with that glory,
which he had with thee: Jesus Christ amongst men on earth prayed to be
glorified amongst men on earth, with a heavenly glory, that men on earth might
see him a glorified God, and a conqueror of his enemies, as well as they did
see him a despised and a suffering man under his enemies: therefore and
according to this does John after the prophefie of Isay say, I saw a new heaven
and a new earth, and the holy City new Jerusalem coming down from God out of
heaven, with a loud voice, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men,
and he will dwell with them. This glory for the fullness of it is not revealed,
nor shall it be manifested unto men, until men's corruptions shall be done
away: and that shall not be until the power of the Devil by the power of
Christ shall be taken off of mortality, according to that of John; I saw on
Angel come down from heaven, and he laid hold on the Devil, and bound him a
thousand years, that he should deceive the Nations, or corrupt mortality no
more, until those thousand years should be fulfilled, or accomplished.

This heavenly glory is within the apprehension of no corrupted flesh, further
then the things of the flesh does behold: and the brightest glory of mortality
is the Sun: and John says that that glory shall pass the glory of the Sun;
insomuch that that holy City new Jerusalem, shall not need the light of the
Sun, neither shall there be any night in it. But as in the Land of Egypt
there was an exceeding darkness at noonday: but in the Land of Goshen there
was no darkness: so likewise during those thousand years in all the world
there shall be night as well as day: but in the new and heavenly Jerusalem
there shall be no night at all. And this is all that God has revealed
concerning the fullness of that heavenly glory, because corrupted mortality can
apprehend no more: as Paul says, If our hope were only in this mortal life,
then we were of all men most miserable to suffer affliction for hope of a
better life: if we should miss of it: but says he, Yet it does not, or here
it does not appear what we shall be: but when mortality shall put on
immortality, and corruption shall be changed into incorruption, then it will
appear; for here we know but in part: but then shall we know as we are known.
That is, we who know Jesus Christ as a sufferer, and rest upon the promises of
God by faith in Jesus Christ for a rewarder: though now we here with Christ
suffer for the same, shall then know God and Jesus Christ in a heavenly glory,
conqueringly, as they knew us here sufferingly.

Secondly, besides this heavenly glory which will in brightness pass the
glory of the Sun. Christ will be glorified by new created heavens and earth,
as Peter says; That is, by restoring of the firmamentall heavens, whereof now
the Devil is Prince, into that same condition they were by God created in,
when God saw them to be very good, before man had sinned: and they therefore
corrupted by those evil Inhabitants, the Devil and his Angels. And by
restoring of the earth with all the creatures created of it by God in the
beginning within the fix first days: and that God when he had looked: saw them
to be very good, to that same condition they were by God ceated in, before man
had sinned: and they therefore and thereby were by the power of the Devil
corrupted. This restoration after so long a continuance as almost six thousand
years, shall by men be such a strange alteration, as though it were rather a
creation then an alteration: and they who never did see no other but the
corrupted heavens, and earth, to see an uncorrupted heaven and earth, will be
to them as a new created heaven and earth. And none, male nor female, from Adam
and Eve, ever saw any but a corrupted heaven and earth: because the heavens and
the earth were corrupted before they had any issue: therefore does the Text
say, that God will create new heavens and earth, because the sons of Adam
never saw that very good condition the heavens and the earth were at the first
created in, and into which they shall be again restored.

Thirdly; God, Christ on earth, will be glorified by a a holy City, a new
Jerusalem from God out of heaven; which shall in largeness so far pass that
old Jerusalem builded by the Jews, though it was in Solomon's time, the
greatest City in the whole world, as a City of twelve thousand furlongs
square; which is by eight furlongs to a mile, fifteen hundred miles square, can
pass the largeness of that old Jerusalem: and this City shall so far pass
the old Jerusalem in glory, as precious stones can surpass in glory ordinary
stones, wood, brick, mortar, iron, steel, and brass, in the foundations,
walls and gates thereof: and the pavements of this City shall so far surpass
in glory the pavements of the old Jerusalem, as polished gold like transparent
glass does surpass pibble stones: as John at large expresses the same. And
the Temple in this City shall so Rev. 21. and 22.
far surpass in glory Solomon's Temple, that was the glory of the old
Jerusalem, as the glory of God and Jesus Christ does surpass the glory of fine
gold, which was the glory of that Temple, as the Text says, The gold
beautified the Temple. And this holy and great City shall be the refiding place
of GOD and Jesus Christ on earth with all the faithful members of Jesus Christ
from Abel to that day.

Object. This relation of John is to signify and figure out Gods glorious
Kingdom to eternity: and not that there shall ever be here on earth any such
glorious place or being.

Answ. That which is impossible with man, is possible with God, who is able to
do all things. And has any man found God a liar at any time; who is faithful
in all his promises, and just in all his ways. But Peter says, That in the
latter days there shall be seoffers, who shall say, 2 Pet. 3. 4.
where is the promise of his coming; for all things continue as they were from
the beginning; and so deny the word of truth. But says Peter, We who are
written in the book of life. Nevertheless we according 2 Pet. 3. 13
to his promise look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein dwells
righteousness, which is Jesus Christ, as John says, I heard a great voice out
of heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle of God is with men, Rev. 21. 3.
and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people: and God himself
shall be with them, and be their God: as Solomon says, It is true indeed, that
God will dwell on the earth. And for a sure evidence of the same ^ Kings 8. ^7.
Rev. 22. 16.
says the Text, I Jesus have sent mine Angel to testify unto you these things
in the Churches: which things Peter questioned not, but to his Church said.
Beloved, seeing that ye look for such things, be diligent 2 Pet. 3. 14.
that ye may be found in peace, without spot and blameless. And to any Church
that shall question these things, says John. These sayings are faithful and
true: for I John saw and heard these things: and I testify unto every man that
hears the words of the prophecy of this 2 Rev. 22. 6. ^6. 18.
book, (wheresoever it is published) that if any man shall add too, or take
away from the words of the prophecy of this book: God shall take away his part
out of the book of life: and also take away his part out of the holy City;
which City says the T^x, lies apiece, the length is as the breadth,
twelve thousand furlongs; the squares lie East, West, ^^v. 21. 16.
North, and South. The East and West are derived from the antipodes of the
rising and setting of the Sun in the firmament all heavens: created on the
fourth day. The North and the South are derived from the antipodes of the two
ends of the worlds Axletree, called the North and South pole, or the two frozen
zones of the earth by reason of the Suns obscurity and distance. This City is
to be on earth, because it lies apiece, East, West, North and South; It
is walled about, and so bounded: the length is as the breadth, twelve thousand
furlongs, which is fifteen hundred miles. The text says, in it there shall be
no need of the Sun. But the Text does not say that it is not within the
compass of the Sun therefore on earth; For in heaven Gods glorious kingdom,
habitation and dwelling place is no Sun: and where there is no Sun, there can
be no East, West, North nor South; therefore this City cannot be meant nor
understood to be heaven: but is meant and to be understood that such a City
shall be on earth.

Now the reason why these things of the Devils confinement or imprisonment for
a thousand years; and the glorious new Jerusalem with all its glorious
accommodations promised, are not believed by us Gentiles, is this; As the
Devil by his power in mortality deceived the Jews of the suffering coming of
Jesus Christ for man's redemption, though promised and prophefied of by the only
looking for Jesus Christ a conqueror, and King of Kings, according to the
promises of a conquering Savior by the Devils deceit, esteeesteeming his
suffering Redeemers condition to be too mean a condition for the Son of God:
and so therefore did not believe him to be the Son of God: but upon the Cross
said unto him, If thou be the Son of God, come down from the Cross, and then
we will believe thee. And so the Devil deceived the Jews, from their benefit
of Jesus Christ, his redeeming condition. And so also the Devil by his power
in mortality goes about to deceive us Gentiles of Jesus Christ his glorious,
conquering, Princely condition, by putting on this mask of infidelity upon us
Gantiles, notwithstanding all the sure promises of God, that for Christ to come
down out of heaven, and on earth to dwell in a walled City that is bounded,
is too glorious a condition for man to behold, and for the earth to bear; and
therefore through unbelief and the Devils deceit do scoffingly say, where is
the promise of his coming. Expecting no other coming, but his coming to
judgment: and so does the Devil go about to deceive us Gentiles of our
benefit of Christ his glorious conquering reign and condition here on earth in
that great and holy City new Jerusalem. Noah had three sons, Shem, Ham and
Japhet. Noah was drunk, Ham jeeres at his Fathers nakedness, and threfore is
cursed and deprived of all the precious promises made to Noah and his seed.
Shem and Japhet were sorry and ashamed to see their Fathers nakedness: and
therefore going backward, covered their Fathers nakedness, upon whom the
promises of God to Noah were confirmed; notwithstanding the said confirmation
of promises: inasmuch as the Devils original power in, and over mortality by
Adam is not taken away, his deceit cease not; for as he did deceive the Jews
of Christ's suffering coming, so he labors to deceive us Gentiles of Christ
his conquering coming, as he does deceive the Heathen of both, who neither
have had in the one, nor shall have in the other any more benefit then the
bruit beasts; therefore says John, without this City shall be dogs, murderers,
whoremongers, adulterers and liars, into whom the Devil when he shall be let
loose for a little season, shall again enter into under the name of Gog and
Magog, to make them more wicked then ever they were before, according to that
Text: Out of whom the Devil is cast, and returns again: he carries with him
seven worse spirits then the former, and so the latter end of that man is worse
then the beginning: because they have no share or part in the book of life,
nor in this holy City.

Quest. When will the time of the coming of Christ be to reign on earth for
1000. years.

Ans. That man that will declare more then God has revealed, must be wiser
then God made him; for says the Text, If an Angel from heaven teach any other
doctrine then what is delivered, believe him not: and as is also said, If they
will not believe the Law and the Prophets, neither will they believe if one
should rise from the dead. The precise time God has concealed, therefore no
man can declare it. But so far as God has revealed, and prefidents of
Scripture do make out, so far may a man suppose thus. Man was tempted by the
Devil to disobey God, whose disobedience God suffered from the ^en. 3.
creation of Adam to Noah's flood, which was 1656. years. ^en. 5. 3.


And as God waited with patience on Satan's deceived ones, 1656. years. In
relation by comparison to that may be supposed (...). 7. 6.
that John does declare the time of Christ his patience, and waiting on Satan
the deceiver; for as God in vengeance did not destroy the old world, until he
with patience had suffered their evil manners 1656. years. So may it be
supposed that Christ will not destroy the power of Satan the deceiver, until
with patience he has waited, and borne and suffered in himself and members,
Satan's evils, 1666. years from his own birth; for John says, Here is
wisdom; let him that has understanding count the number of the Rev. 13. 18.
beast; for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666. David in his
days did number the days of a man to be 70. years, and John here to 66.
years, because of the decay of nature; for it cannot be thought that man's life
toward the end of the world, of which John treates, should be 666. but 66. may
be, and also is commonly seen: by which supposition it may be gathered, that
Christ with patience will wait and forbear Satan's evils ten years longer then
God did bear with the old world. The one was 1656. years; and the other will
be 1666. years, according to this collection. Christ will bear and suffer the
evils of Satan, before he take vengeance on the Devil, to destroy or confine
his power for a thousand years until 1666. years from the birth of Jesus
Christ, to deliver the whole mortality from the power of the Devil, as Paul
says, The fervent desire of the creature waits when the Sons of God shall be
revealed; Romans 8. 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
for the creatures earnestly desire the revelation of the time that the Sons of
God shall be delivered, because the creature is subject to vanity, not of its
own will, but by reason of him which has subdved it under hope. The creature
did not offend, it was the man, male and female, Adam that did offend: but the
creature because it was created for man, must abide the curse with man;
therefore the creatures also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption
into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God; for we know that every creature
groaneth with us also, and travelleth in pain together unto this present: and
not only the creature, but we also which are the first fruits of the Spirit,
even we do sigh in our selves, and wait for the adoption, even for the
redemption of our bodies, or an assurance of our parts in the blessed first
resurrection, which shall bring us the redemption of our bodies, who are the
adopted Sons of God in Jesus Christ; by which blessed first resurrection shall
our bodies be delivered out of the Devils prison, the grave, and the bodies
hell, to Gods Saints: against whom the Devil had no further power, but to kill
our bodies, and to imprison them in the mortal hell, the grave of earth, from
whence our bodies came, and unto which we did expect they should return again
for a time: and as the corn there lies in the earth, waiting with the
Husbandman; for the first fruits of the spirit, which is that blessed first
resurrection of all that are dead in Christ, from Abel the first that dyed, and
all others dead before, and the living then in the year of Christ, from the
birth of Christ, 1666. shall be partakers of Jesus Christ his glorious reign
for that 1000. years of the Devils confinement or imprisonment.

That man is only and alone saved by the free favor or grace of God and Jesus
Christ, and not at all by man, nor of any thing that man can do.
THe grace of God is the favor of God: and the free grace of God is Gods free
favor. And that which is free, is complete and absolute of it self, and has
no partner nor partaker, neither is under any control: And so it was the free
favor or grace of God which did arise or spring from the love of God in Jesus
Christ, to choose some in the second Adam Jesus Christ, out of the Romans 8. 29.
Ephesians. 1. 4, 5. 11.
All that was lost in the first Adam. For God who has an al-seeing eye, did
see, or foresee all men lost in the first Adam, before the world was, and that
was before man was a living creature, and man was a living creature before he
was a lost creature, and therefore God did before the world was, through his
love in Jesus Christ and mere mercy toward poor lost man, predestinate by his
power, elect or choose through his love, such as should be saved. God did
predestinate by his power such as should be saved, by pulling of Predestination.
poor lost man out of the snares and thraldom of Satan: by the perfect
obedience and satisfactory sufferings of Jesus Christ for man's sins, who
himself sinned not. And this was a free favor or grace of God to man, to give
Christ his Son unto the death, to ransom sinful man from sin: because man
in himself had nothing worthy to move God thereto: and therefore was it the
free grace or favor Romans 8. 32.
of God. And as Paul says, That God did give up Jesus Christ for us all to the
death. Says Christ, Father if it be possible, let this cup (of thy fury, wrath
or indignation) pass from me: nevertheless not my, but thy will be done. And
as Jesus Christ the Son and second person in the Trinity is God, as well as
God the Father and first person in the Trinity. So Jesus Christ as he was God,
did give up himself to the death for sinners, because in them there was
nothing worthy that could, or did move him thereunto: and therefore was it the
free favor or grace of Jesus Christ to dye for man's redemption: And that
Christ did freely lay down his life a ransom for sinners; says Christ (know
this) that if I did not lay down my life freely, all the Devils in hell, and
all the men on earth could not take it away from me.) For if I should pray unto
my Father (for a rescue, because I am unjustly condemned) he would give or
send me more then twelve legions of Angels. And so are all such as shall be
saved by the free favor or grace of God, and of Jesus Christ, through the
power of God in Jesus Christ predestined unto salvation by the free grace and
favor of God, and of Jesus Christ, and not by any thing at all in man; for if
there could be any thing in man toward his own salvation. Then were not the
salvation of man from the free grace and favor of God and Jesus Christ, if man
had any share or part in his own salvation: but that the salvation of man is
wholly and alone from the free grace and favor of God, and of Jesus Christ, is
thus proved. God did predestinate, elect and choose man unto salvation before
he was created; therefore man could have no share or part in his own salvation.

God did elect and choose through his love in Jesus Christ before the world
was, such as should be saved; as the Text says, God so loved Election. Joh. 3.
16.
the world, that he gave his only begotten Son. God did not so love the world
for any thing in the world that could, or did move God so to love the world:
but as the Text says, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased. So
that God is well pleased with his elected chosen ones in Jesus Christ, because
Jesus Christ has trod the wine press alone, by a sufficient suffering of the
wrath of God, unto Gods full satisfaction, and has wrought out the perfect
work of righteousness by his perfect obedience to all the commandments of God,
and so is God through his love in Jesus Christ well pleased with his elected
ones, who receive their salvation according to election from the free grace of
Gods love in Jesus Christ.

Quest. If salvation be by the free grace of God, and nothing of man: Then
wherefore does God command duties, and promise rewards.

Answ. God does not command duties from man, because God does need any thing
that man can do; neither can man do any duty, until, or except first God
work in man both the will and the deed to enable him thereby to do the duty
which God commands: neither does God promise a reward, because man does
deserve the reward for doing of the duty; for when man has done all that he
can, he is but an unprofitable servant, by which Text God is a Master, and may
command what he please: and man is but a servant, and so does but his duty in
doing what God has commanded; therefore man cannot deserve or merit the
promised reward. For he that breaks but one commandment, although he could
keep or perform all that is commanded in all the rest but one, he is guilty of
all: And so no man as he is of the seed of Adam, according to the lust of the
flesh can possibly keep or perform all the commandments of God; therefore none
of the seed of Adam, according to the lust of the flesh, can deserve or merit
for doing of a duty, that reward which is promised for the duty.

But inasmuch as God has promised a reward for doing of a duty, the reward is
a due reward to him that can do all the duties that God has commanded, and to
none else. And so no man but Jesus Christ only, and alone, ever did, or could
keep and perform all the commandments of God; therefore none but only Jesus
Christ could deserve or merit the reward promised for doing the duty commanded.
And no man was, but Jesus Christ alone of the seed of Adam, and not according
to the lust of the flesh. Therefore in the first place, that man in whom God
does work both the will and the deed, to enable him to will, and also to do a
duty. And in the second place, that man whose duty is accepted of God in Jesus
Christ In the third place, that man may by and for the perfect obedience of
Jesus Christ, expect the promised reward, as Paul says, have respect to the
recompense of reward, because he looks not for the promised reward in, and
for his own, but in and for the perfect righteousness of Jesus Christ. As for
example, Jesus Christ has promised a Disciples reward to him that shall give a
cup of cold water to a Mat. 10. 42.
Disciple in the name of a Disciple. The duty commanded, is but a cup of cold
water to be given. The party to whom the water is to be given, must be a
Disciple, or child of God, that wants the same. Now he that will, or shall
expect to receive the reward, must not think to receive it for the richnes of
the gift, neither because he has done the duty; For neither of these, nor both
these are of a valuable consideration, to deserve such a reward, because a
Disciples reward is eternal life, as the Text says, Master we have left all
and followed thee, and what shall we have. Says Jesus Christ, not only you,
Mat. 19. 27. 29.
but also whosoever shall leave father, mother, wife, children, house or lands
for my sake, shall receive in this world an hundred fold, and in the world to
come life everlasting

But he that for such a small duty as the giving of a cup of water, and for so
small a value as a cup of water is of, must find out a more valuable
consideration why he should receive such a great reward as Everlasting life,
before he do receive the same: And that must be, if it be aright, thus, Jesus
Christ is God, unto whom all power was given both in heaven and in earth. And
thereby was Christ made able to perform whatsoever he should promise, both in
this world, or the world to come. And Christ is God, in whom all the promises
of God are yea and amen, as the Text says, who has found God a liar at any
time?

Now that man that will or shall expect such a great reward for so small a
duty, and of so small a value, must do this; He must know that God has
wrought that will or good affection in him toward the poor members or little
ones of Jesus Christ for to help them in their need. And he must likewise
know, that although a cup of water be but of a small value or esteem, where
there is enough; yet it is the gift of God to him, and that he himself does
receive the water from God, before he can give the water to another: and that
he does give the water to a child of God: because he esteems him to be a
child of God, and that the love of Jesus Christ constrains him to love the
members of Jesus Christ. And when it is so given, then may a man expect that
God will accept of the duty in and through Jesus Christ, and for his perfect
obedience sake: who has merited from God ability from God to perform
whatsoever he has promised. And so will make good all his promises, If the
duty be done in Christ, and for Christ his sake, and the promised reward
expected; not because the duty is done, nor for the things sake: but because
Christ, who is an able and a faithful God, has promised the same. Therefore
man ought to yield obedience, and to do the duty commanded, and to expect the
reward promised for these reasons.

First, because God has commanded the duty as a Master, man ought to yield
obedience because he is a servant.

Secondly, because God, (and not man himself) works both the will and the
deed in man, to enable man to do the duty commanded.

Thirdly, because God who makes the promise, is able and faithful, and will
keep Covenant. And fourthly, Because God in a God of Justice: and as the Text
says, will come in flaming fire, rendering vengeance on them that know not God,
and that obey not the Gospel of our 2 These. 1. 8.
Lord Jesus Christ: who requires nothing of man toward his own salvation:
but my son give me thy heart; or believe that thy salvation is by the free
grace of God, and of Jesus Christ, as Jesus Christ said to the Jews; O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered you together as a hen
gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not. That is, how often
would I have taken you into my protection out of the snares of the world, the
Devil and the flesh by my Gospel, to take you off of the rudiments of the
Ceremonial law, and have saved you by my precious blood and perfect obedience:
and ye would not. Therefore thy destruction is of thy self O Israel, because I
offered my self unto thee, and thou would not receive me as the Text says,
He came unto his own, and his own received him not.

FINIS.

