GOSPEL LIBERTY Sent down from Heaven in a suffering Time.

OR Christian Tolleration given and granted by the Lord, about the Worship of
God, and in matters of Faith and Salvation, to the people of God, and primitive
Christians, which is matter of comfort to them that are acquainted with God in
the Spirit, and have the Testimony of his Love, and the signification of his
acceptance who are true and faithful to God, In the principles and practices
of the Saints in Christ Jesus: and primitive Christians, according to the
perswasisions of God upon their hearts and consciences, though for so doing
they be attended with a suffering condition, which aforetime was and now is
annexed to believing.

Philip. 1.29. For unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ not only to
believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. 2 Timothy 3.12. Yea and all that
will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. Written the 14th of
the 3d month 1664. By R. F.

FOr as much as God who is absolute in himself, who has jurisdiction over all
flesh and spirits, principalities, and powers, thrones and dominions, created,
Colos. 1.16.17. Act. 17.26.27.
ordained, and established by him, and for him, does give, grant, and allow of
a liberty to men and Christians, as men and Christians. First, as men in the
creation to answer the end for which they were created: and Secondly, as
Christians in communion and covenant with him, Gal. 4.31.
being children of the free woman, and are commanded and required by the Lord
as a people in covenant with him, to stand fast in the liberty (of their tender
consciences to Godward, in point of Religion and worship of God) wherewith
Christ has made them free, Gal. 5.1. They ought not to be denied or hindered of
that liberty which is given, granted, and allowed unto them, by the Lord as men
(to hinder them for answering the end of their creation) neither ought the true
Christians and people in covenant with God, to be denied of liberty of
Conscience, in point of Religion and worship of God, but to have liberty of
conscience in matters of Faith and Salvation given, granted, and allowed unto
them: Gal. 5.13.14,
Because they are thereunto called of God, and it is against the doctrine of
the Apostles, contrary to the mind and will of the Lord, and in opposition to
the Scriptures, and the practice of the primitive Christians, to deny and
refuse to grant it.

First, because the Saints and true Christians are commanded by the Lord to
stand fast in the liberty (of conscience allowed in the gospel) wherewith
Christ has made them free. Secondly, because they are forbidden to be
entangled again with the yoke of bondage (in point of religion and worship of
God) as by the Scripture is evident. Gal. 5.

To deny liberty of conscience in point of Religion and worship of God to any
persons or people, Act. 17.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31. Gal. 5.1. Ioh. 4.23.24.
is to deny that right which is given and granted unto them by the Lord, for
Religion and worship, is that wherein Gods honor and glory is concerned: and
as it is God who is to be worshipped, so the worship is the worship of God,
wherein conscience is concerned, and not the worship of man, and it belongs to
the Lord to prescribe, declare, reveal or make known his own worship both in
matter and manner, and after made known to the conscience or a capacity in man,
conscience ought to stand free, and not be forced threfrom, that God may
persuade it to own, allow of, and close in with the same, and every man ought
to be fully persuaded in his own heart, as by the Scripture is evident and
plain, and who has the like right, power, wisdom, and skill to inform, reform
and persuade the heart of a man to him who made it, and knows best the frame,
temper, and disposition of it, and has absolute power to punish it, or be
merciful unto it, as it is disobedient or obedient to him in discipline,
worship and government: for the right of heart searching and trying does
properly belong to the Lord, and not unto man as by the Scripture is plain.

Therefore God ought to have his own right preserved and kept unviolated, that
he may inform, reform, and persuade the heart and conscience of man, both to
answer the end for which he was created, and to fear, reverence, honor, and
obey him in conscience to Godward, as a worshipper of him, and the right of
men ought to be preserved, that they may not be forced from but left to their
liberty, to receive and retain the truth and teachings of God, in matters of
Faith and Salvation, that they may continue therein, and not be persuaded or
forced therefrom by any man, for the Apostle declares to the Galatians, that
they did run well, but some hindered them, that they should not obey the truth,
and they that hindered them did not well in so doing: for says he this
persuasion comes not of him that calls you, as by the Scripture is plain.
Gal. 5.7.8.

They who are against liberty of conscience in matters of Faith and Salvation,
and would either by persuasions or threatenings hinder people from obeying and
walking in the truth of the Gospel, which God makes known unto them, and
persuades them to walk in, do not well in so doing, and though he that was born
after the flesh did persecute him that was born after the spirit, he did it
without any right or authority from God, and therefore the son of the bond
woman must be cast out, and not be heir with the son of the free woman, as
says the Scripture. Gal. 4.29.30.

Christ has purchased a liberty, Gal. 5.1.
and fredome for the Saints and believers in him in point of religion, and in
matters of faith and salvation, and therefore they ought not to be deprived of
it: but ought to have it granted and allowed unto them, by such as are
professors of him, that as they have begun in the spirit, Gal. 3.1.2, 3.
they may not be forced and carried back again into the flesh. But may have the
liberty of their consciences in matters of Faith and Salvation allowed and
granted, to obey the truth of the gospel according to the manifestation and
persuasion of the word and spirit of God, and that they may run well in the way
of the Lord without molestation or hindrance by them that profess the truth.
For in Jesus Christ neither Circumcision avails any thing, Gal. 5.7.8.
nor uncircumcision but a new Creature, and Faith which works by love Gal.
5.5.6. Gal. 6.15.16.

And as many as walk according to this rule, that is to say the rule of the new
creature, Gal. 4.1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Gal. 6.15.16,
which is the spirit of Christ Jesus. Gal. 4.6. Peace be on them and mercy, and
upon the Israel of God. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are
the Sons of God. Romans 8.14.

So many and no more, as by the Scripture is evident. Romans 8.9. Romans 8.15.16.17.
And as the children of God are led by the Spirit of God, so therein they are
in the liberty given and allowed of God, 2 Cor. 3.5.6.7.8.
2 Cor. 3.17.18. To serve and worship him in the glorious ministration of the
spirit, which exceeds and excels that of Moses in a far greater glory, and
therein they ought to continue, and not be forced from it by men.

And as for the people of God (reproachfully) called Quakers, they have under
every government peaceably demeaned themselves ever since they were brought
into covenant with God, and have suffered for their obedience and faithfulness
to the Lord, more then any people in this Nation for many years by past: and
the Lord has hitherto tried them, and they have been found faithful to the
Lord upon trial, and they have been tried by men, and by the power and
authority of the kingdom, and do appear upon every trial to be a people true
to their principles to Godward; and honest and upright in their dealings with
men, and it is well known to the Nation, that they are a harmless people, and
very industurous and profitable to men, and of an honest and good conversation,
unwilling to be burden some unto them, wherefore there is no just cause why
they should be injured, wronged, or destroyed, either in their principles,
persons or estates for their tender consciences and faithfulness to God in
matters of Faith and Religion, but ought to be defended and preserved therein.

And as for their meetings upon the account of religion to wait upon God as his
people, there is as much and more of the spirit and life of truth, and of the
refreshing virtue of the word and power of God amongst them made known from the
Lord unto them, for their satisfaction, and souls consolation, as amongst any
professing people in the Nation. And it does appear after several years trial
had of that people, that their meetings never produced any bad effects either
to the terror of the people, or endangering the peace and safety of the
kingdom. And therefore they ought not to be suppressed and broken, but rather
countenanced and preserved in their principles and practices, which are so
faithful and honest both toward God and man.

And whereas it has been said by some of them in authority, that the Quakers
are in some part of their principles much like unto the primitive Christians,
who would not take up arms to fight either for or against the best of Kings or
worst of Tyrants. And therefore the Quakers say they are to be commended in
that, and others of the Magistrates have said as concerning the Quakers having
any hand in plotting or designing mischief against the King and his government,
they are so innocent and harmless that they durst put them into the Magazin,
so that me thinks they should have no cause to suspect them, for indeed they
are a people that wishes no man any harm, but would rather do good unto all
men; therefore they ought not to be destroyed or banished, but countenanced and
preserved in their principles and practices which are good and answers to the
witness of God in the consciences of men.

It is more consistent with truth, and well pleasing to God, and agreeable to
the other part of the principles of the people of God and primitive Christians,
2 Timothy 3.10.11.12.14.
to suffer persecution for their faithfulness to God, and their continuation
in the truth of the Gospel, and meeting together to wait upon God, in the way
of his worship, and have the love and favor of God, then to be unfaithful to
God, and untrue to their principles: by forsaking the same, for fear of the
frowns and rebukes of the spirit of the world, or an outward suffering from
men, and incur the Anger and displeasure of God for so doing, Heb. 10.26.
Heb. 10.24.25.26.27.28.29.30.31.

God had a people in Egypt under great bondage, Exodus 3.1.2. to the 13.
and in great captivity, bowed down and oppressed, but he remembered them in his
mercy: and sent his servant Moses as his messenger to acquaint them with it,
Exodus 8.1. Exodus 9.1.
and also to speak to Pharaoh then King of Egypt, by whose power they were
oppressed, Exodus 5.1.2.3.4.
to require of him their liberty and freedom in the worship which God made
known and required to be performed and done. But King Pharaoh denied the Lord
in that thing, Exodus 8.8.12.13.14.15.
and gave the Lord an occasion against him, who brought great judgment upon
his kingdom, because he refused to give liberty to the people of God in the
worship or service of God, and said they were idle, Exodus 8.8 12.13.14.15.
and yet when he was under the sense of the judgments of God, he promised them
liberty, but he did not regard to make good his promise, which signified
nothing but as a testimony against him, and to provoke the Lord to wrath, Exodus
8.25.26.27.
who renewed his judgments, and weakened the power and policy of Egypt, for
withstanding the liberty which God required of Pharaoh, on the behalf of the
oppressed Israel: Exodus 12.29.30.3^.32.33.
and in his own time made Pharaoh to know that he was too strong for him, and
by his power alone wrought their deliverance after many trials, that they might
give glory unto him, as by the Scripture is plain, Exodus 12.40.41.42.

Though Pharaoh the King, Exodus 1.15.16.17. Exodus 1.20.21.
commanded the Hebrew Midwives to destroy all the male children of the Hebrews,
when they did the office of a Midwife, yet because the fear of God was in their
hearts, they durst not do it: so that they rather chused to obey God in
preserving the lives of the innocents, then to obey the command of the King,
which was so contrary to the mind of the Lord, who would have had the seed
destroyed, which the Lord preserved and blessed.

King Pharaoh could have been content to have letten the old stock of Israel
have lived, Exodus 1.8.9.10.11.12.13.14. etc.
if there had been no increase, but policy taught him to put a stop to that,
and if the Lord had not put a stop to that design, Israel had been cut off and
destroyed in the seed. Exodus 1.17.
For if the Hebrew Midwives had not feared and obeyed God rather then man, the
male children had been destroyed, when they had come out of the womb.

Daniel was a man beloved and blessed of the Lord, and there were such as
sought an occasion against him, with an intent and purpose (under the color of
transgressing a known Law) to have cut him off and destroyed him: as there have
been and are now such as seeks an occasion against the Daniels and beloved
people of God, with an intent to destroy them. And as they could find no
occasion against Daniel but for the law and worship of his God, so they can
find no occasion against the Daniels, or beloved people of God now, but for
their obedience to the law and worship of their God, according to the
manifestation and persuasion of the spirit and word of God.

And when they wanted a Law to destroy Daniel by for his worship of God, then
all the Presidents of the Kingdom, the Governors, and the Princes, the
Counselors, and the Captains Assembled together to the King, Dan.
6.4.5.6.7.8.9.
and consulted together to establish a Royal Statute, and to make a firm
decree, and the King signed the same, (against liberty of conscience, in
matters of faith and religion) to bind the conscience, and force it from the
worship of God for a certain time under pain of death, or by being cast into
the Lions den, as by the Scripture is plain.

Now when Daniel knew that the law was made (against liberty of conscience in
point of religion and worship of God) or the writing as aforesaid was sealed;
Dan. 6.10.
he was faithful to God, in disobeying such a Statute law against liberty of
conscience, rather then disobey God, and offend his tender conscience, as by
the Scripture appears. Dan. 6.5.6.7.8.9.10.11. etc. And God did own and
countenance Daniel in that thing by preserving of him, forasmuch as innocence
was found in Daniel before the Lord in so doing, Dan. 6.22.

Whereby it appears and remains true, that Daniel was innocent and justified
in the sight of the Lord, for disobeying the Statute or decree which was made
against liberty of conscience in point of religion and worship of God. And it
is not unwarrantable or without Scripture example, for the people of God to
obey God rather then man, in matters of Faith and Salvation, when a law is made
against Liberty of conscience in point of religion and worship of God as
aforesaid.

The Priests were grieved at Peter and John, because they taught the people,
Act. 4.1.2.3.4.
and after the Priests and the Rulers had taken knowledge of Peter and John,
that they had been with Jesus, they was unwilling that the truth should spread
any further, and to the intent that the truth might be suppressed and spread no
further. Act. 4.15.16.17.
First, they consulted together, and said, let us straightly threaten them that
they henceforth speak to no man in this name, as if Peter and John had been
afraid of threatening to have left their Ministry like the Priests of this time.

And secondly, Act. 4.18.
they commanded them not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus (for
the Priests would have none to be teachers but themselves, and whom they
appoint) but Peter and John answered and said, Act. 4.19.20.21.23.
whether it be right in the sight of God to hearken unto you more then unto
God, judge ye, for we cannot but speak the things which we have seen and
heard, Act. 4.

Whereby it is evident and remains true that the people of God are to obey
God, in matters of faith and salvation, though they be threatened and commanded
to the contrary by men, and it is right in the sight of God to obey God in such
cases rather then the commands of men, that are contrary to the mind of the
Lord, and it would be wrong to disobey God because of the threats of men as
aforesaid, and it was the principle and practice of the primitive Christians so
to do, and rather suffer by Priests, Rulers and Magistrates for their obedience
and faithfulness to God in matters of faith and salvation, then to deny their
testimony, and comply with the sins of the times, for any by ends, and to avoid
a suffering condition.

Concerning the Primitive Christians both Ministers and People.
The Ministers of the gospel in the primitive times, were called in question
about their doctrine and Ministry by the Priests, Rulers and Magistrates, and
threatened and commanded to preach no more in the name of Jesus, Act. 21.13. to
the end Act. 22. 2 Cor. 6. Act. 4.
which was indirect opposition to liberty of conscience granted and given by
the Lord unto his Ministers in matters of faith and salvation, but obstructed
and denied by Priests, Rulers and Magistrates then, who commanded them contrary
to the commands of God in such cases, but the Ministers of the gospel in the
primitive times could not be subject to such commands of men, as would have
forced conscience from performing its duty and service to God in matters of
faith and salvation, and they said in plain terms without any evasions, we
cannot but speak the things which we have seen and heard, Act. 4.18.19.20.
it was matter of conscience to them, and they would rather suffer by men then
disobey God and offend a good conscience to God-wards as aforesaid, as by the
Scripture is evident and plain.

The Ministers of the gospel and primitive Christians, was no persecutors, but
were persecuted, for said Paul to Timothy thou have fully known my doctrine,
manner of life, faith, long suffering, charity, patience, persecutions,
afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra, what
persecutions I endured, but out of them all the Lord delivered me, yea and all
that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution 2 Timothy 3. But
evil and seducers shall wax worse and worse, 1 Timothy 3 10.11.12.
2 Timothy 3.13. So it appears and is plain by the Scriptures, that the godly
were and are attended with persecutions, both Ministers and people, and that by
reason of evil men and seducers, which are and were persecutors.

The Ministers of the gospel in the primitive times were to continue in the
things, which they had learned of God, and were assured of as by the Scripture
appears 2. Tim. 3.14. So were the Primitive Christians to continue in the
word and doctrine of Christ, by which it might appear that they were disciples
indeed and lovers of Jesus.

And said the Apostle stand fast in one spirit with one mind, striving
together for the faith of the gospel, and in nothing terrified by your
adversaries, which is to them an evident token of perdition, but to you of
Salvation, and that of God, for unto you it is given on the behalf of Christ,
not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake. Philip. 1.27.28.29.

Whereby it is evident and remains true, that the true Christians are not
persecutors, but are true believers in Christ, and subjects unto him, and a
suffering condition is anexed to believing, and as none can truly believe unto
salvation, but them to whom it is given, so none can truly suffer for Christ
and the Gospel, but them to whom it is given and therefore they need not to be
terrified by their adversaries, for it is to the persecutors an evident token
of perdition, but to the true believers in Christ who are the true sufferers it
is to the man evident token of salvation and that of God as by the Scripture is
plain as aforesaid. Phil. 1.27.28.29.


The Ministers of the Gospel of Christ who have received their ministry of God,
to minister from him to the souls of the people, are in preaching the word to
be instant in season and out of season, according to the charge given before
the Lord, as by the Scripture is plain. And when is preaching the word out of
season, but when it is either forbidden by men, 2 Timothy 4.1.2.3.4.
or when they will not endure sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall
heap up to themselves teachers having itching ears, as by the Scripture appears.

The Scriptures declare that the time will come, when people will not endure
sound doctrine, but after their own lusts shall heap up to themselves Teachers,
having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the truth, and
shall be turned unto fables, and if that time be already come, (or be yet to
come) at such a time, the Ministers of the gospel of Christ who have received
their ministry of God, are not to change their religion, and turn away from the
truth and worship of God, (like the Priests of this Priest turning time,) but
the ministers of the gospel, are to watch in all things, and endure
afflictions, do the work of Evangelists, and make full proof of their ministry
as it appears 2 Timothy 4.1.2.3.4.5.

Concerning the godly meetings of the Primitive Christians and Saints in Christ
Jesus, and people of God in former Ages.
We do not read in the Scriptures of truth that the people of God and true
Christians did ever imprison, fine, and banish, or sell one another for their
religion and worship: but we read that Haman did envy the good and welfare of
the Jews, and said unto the King, there is a certain people scattered abroad,
and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy Kingdom, and their
laws are diverse from all people, neither keep they the Kings laws, therefore
it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them, if it please the King let it be
written that they may be destroyed, and I will pay ten thousand talents of
Silver to the hands of those that have the charge of the business, to bring it
into the Kings treasuries, and the King consented unto him, and they were
designed for destruction as by the Scripture is plain, Ester,
3.8.9.10.11.12.13.14.15.

But it pleased the Lord to let the King know the innocence of his people, and
how they were not so dangerous unto the welfare and safety of his Kingdom, as
Haman had informed him, and the King changed his purpose, revoked what he had
signed against them, and became under God a preserver of them, and the King
declared and said, oftentimes fair speeches of those that are put in trust to
manage their friends affairs, has caused many that are in authority to be
pertakers of innocent blood, and has enwrapped them in remediless calamities,
beguiling with the falsehood and deceit of their lewd disposition, the
Innocence and goodness of Princes: now ye may see this, as we have declared,
not so much by ancient Histories, as ye may, if ye search what has been
wickedly don of late, through the pestilent behavior of them that are
unworthily placed in authority, and we must take care for the time to come,
that our kingdom may be quiet and peaceable for all men, both by changing our
purposes, and always judging things that are evident with more equal
proceeding, See it in the Apocrypha.
as appears in the letter of Artaxerxes, wherein he taxes Haman and revoketh
the decree procured by Haman to destroy the Jews, Ester. 16 Chapter,

Would it not be good in the sight of God, and very profitable to this
Kingdom, and commendable also, if the King and the Parliament did under God
take such a care for the time to come, as that the Kingdom might be quiet and
peaceable for all men, both by repealing that law made against liberty of
conscience, and allowing an equal liberty to all men, in the exercise of their
consciences as to God-wards in matters of faith and salvation: and always by
judging things that are evident with more equal proceeding,

There was a time in the days of the Prophet Malachi, wherein the words of
some were stout against the Lord, Mal. 3, 13.
yet they would have excused themselves, saying, what have we spoken so much
against the Lord? to the which the Lord answered them by his Prophet saying, Ye
have said it is in vain to serve God, and what profit is it that we have kept
his Ordinance, Mal. 3.14.
and that we have walked mournfully before the Lord, and they called the proud
happy, Mal. 3.15.
and they that wrought wickedness were set up, and they that tempted God were
delivered.

Then they that feared the Lord separated from the Iniquities of the time, met
often together and spoke one to another, and the Lord was present in their
assemblies after a spiritual manner, Mal. 3.16.
and did own them and their meetings, for he both hearkened and heard them, and
a book of remembrance was written before the Lord, for them that feared him,
and thought upon his name, and the Lord made promise to such for their
encouragement and comfort: Mal. 3.17.
and they shall be mine says the Lord in that day when I make up my jewels,
and I will spare them (that serves me) as a man spares his san that serves
him, then shall ye return and discern between the Righteous and the Wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Mal. 3.16.17.18.

When Christ Jesus was come in the days of his humiliation and were conversant
amongst men, after that John was cast into prison, for preaching and performing
the Office and duty of a Minister, Math. 4.12.13.14.15.16.17.
or delivering that message which he was sent about from the Lord to perform,
as a foreruuner of Christ, then Christ Jesus himself began to preach, and say,
Repent for the kingdom of Heaven is at hand, and there followed him great
multitudes of people from Galilee, and from Dicapolis, Mat. 4.25.
and from Judea, and from Jerusalem, and from beyond Jordan, and seeing the
multitude, he went up into a mountain, and when he was set, he opened his mouth
and taught them, as you may read, Mat 5.1.2. etc.

But if there had been a law made against meeting to the number of five or
above, (and not in Parish Churches or Chapels, and contrary to the common way
of meeting, preaching and hearing, under pain of Imprisonment, Fines, and
Banishment,) then Christ and the multitude must either not have met after that
manner, or else they might have suffered as his Saints and servants are like to
do now, but it is evident by the example of Christ, that he never intended any
such law to be made in such direct opposition to his example and practice, and
though the people came from many places, and parts of the Country to that
meeting with Jesus upon the mountain, there was no danger to the safery and
happiness of the government, though suspicion might arise in the minds of
some, and be ready to judge it unsafe to suffer such meetings.

And it came to pass that when Jesus had finished these sayings, he departed
from Galilee, Mat. 9.1.2.
and came into the coasts of Judea, beyond Jordan, and great multitudes
followed him, as by the Scripture is plain, But if Christ was here now and did
so, he must be imprisoned, and banished by a law, and by that law the people
might be kept from following Christ, or else suffer imprisonment and banishment
for following of him, and that by such as pretends to be friends unto him. But
it is not every one that pretends love to him, or says Lord Lord, that shall
enter into the kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the will of the Father, as
Christ Jesus has declared and said.

And Jesus came at another time nigh unto the Sea of Galilee, and went up into
a mountain, and sat down and great multitudes came unto him, Mat. 5.29.30.
as by the Scripture is plain, whereby it is evident and remains true, that
there either was no law that prohibited such great meetings on mountains, and
to keep the people back from following of Jesus, after that manner, or if there
were any such laws then in being, they were not regarded by Christ, and the
followers of him, in matters of faith and salvation.

And at another time Jesus entered into Capernaum, and it was noised that he was
in the house, and straitway many were gathered together, insomuch that there
was no room to receive them, no not so much as about the door, and he preached
the word unto them, Mark 2.1.2.
as you may read in the Scripture of truth. But if Jesus was here now and did
so, might not he and the people be imprisoned and banished or sold for so
doing, consider well of it, and let the Lord judge in this case.

And before Christ's ascension, being assembled together with his disciples and
friends which were about the number of five, he commanded them that they should
not depart from Jerusalem, but wait for the promise of the Father, which says
he, ye have heard of me, Act. 1.1.2.3.4. And when they were come in, they went
up into an upper room, where abode both Peter and James, and John, and Andrew,
Philip, and Thomas, Bartholomew, and Matthew, James the son of Alpheus, and
Simon Zelotes, and Judas the brother of James, (which were above the number of
five) and they did not disperse themselves into numbers under five, but these
all continued with one accord in prayer and supplication with the women, and
Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren as you may read Act. 1.13.14.

And if there had been such a law that they might not have met upon the account
of religion (from a parish Church) to the number of five or above under pain of
imprisonment and banishment, as now, Act. 1.3.4. Act. 1.13.14.
they might either have disobeyed the commands of Christ, or else have broken
such a law, as is directly against that command of the Lord Jesus, as by the
Scripture is evident.

And when the day of Penticost was fully come, they were all with one accord in
one place, (and not dispersed into companies under the number of five) as you
may read Act. 2.1. And suddenly there came a sound from Heaven, as of a rushing
mighty wind, and it filled the house where they were sitting, Act. 2. 2. (so
that they were not met in a parish Church or Chapel) but in a house, and God
mightily honored their meeting, for they were filled with the Holy Ghost, and
began to speak as the spirit gave them utterance, as by the Scripture is
evident. Ast. 2.1.2.3.4.

And the Servants of Jesus did meet together in houses and in great numbers
also, or else how should there have been three thousand souls added unto them
on one day, as there was by the preaching of Peter, Act. 2. And in private
houses they met often, and also in multitudes, as by the Scripture appears,
and some of them believed and consorted with Paul and Silas, Act. 17.4.5.6.7.8.
and of the devout Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few,
but the Jews which believed not moved with envy, took unto them certain lewd
fellows of the baser sort and gathered a company, and let all the City on an
uproar, and assaulted the house of Jason, and sought to bring them out to the
people, and they drew Jason and certain of the brethren unto the Rulers of the
city, crying these that have turned the world upside down are come hither also,
whom Jason has received, saying, that there is another King, one Jesus, and
they troubled the people and the Rulers of the city, when they heard these
things, so you may see how the old envious professors, and the baser sort of
people, did trouble the people and Rulers by haling out and abusing the
primitive christians and reporting of them as aforesaid, but the true
christians did not persecute any but were persecuted, as by the Scripture
appears. Act. 17.4.5.6.7.8,

And after the uproar was ceased, Paul called unto him the Disciples, and
embraced them, and departed for to go into Macedonia, Acts 20.1. And upon the
first day of the week the Disciples came together, and met neither in a Parish
Church nor a Chapel, Act. 20.8.
but in a private house, and Paul continued his Speech until midnight in the
Chamber where they were gathered together; Acts 20.7, 8.

Whereby it is evident and remains true, that it was the practice of Christ and
his Apostles to meet together in private houses, and in great numbers, and they
never made any uproar, nor abused any, but they were abused, and suffered, as
those do who follow their examples, Ephesians. 5. Gal. 5.16.22, 23, 24, 25. Heb.
10.22, 23.
and live in the Spirit as they did. It was the practice of the primitive
Christians to assemble themselves together, and wait upon God in the way of his
Worship, and they were to hold fast their Profession without wavering, because
he was faithful that promised, Heb. 10. though they were persecuted for meeting
and worshipping contrary to the custom of the envious Jews, and contrary to
the way and worship of the World, as aforesaid.

Whereby it is evident and remains true, that it is the duty of true
Christians, Saints, and Believers in Christ Jesus, to be true and faithful unto
God, in meeting together in the Way and Worship of God, and mind their
continuation with God in the same, though they be attended with a suffering
condition from men for so doing: and as it is their duty to meet together as
the Worshippers of God, according to the manifestation and persuasions of God,
so it is a danger to neglect the same, as by the Scripture is evident and
plain, Heb. 10.22, 23.24,25.

And as Preaching is not an Art of Nature, but a spritual gift, so none are
required by the Lord to minister from him to the people, but them to whom it is
given, and all have a true right given and allowed of God, to minister from him
to the people, to whom that gift of Ministration is given, and such ought not
to be forbidden, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.
because there is a toleration to such given and granted in heaven, as every
man has received the gift, so let him minister the same one to another, as
good Stewards of the manifold grace of God; If any man speak, let him speak as
the Oracles (or Sayings) of God: If any man Minister, let him do it as of the
Ability which God gives, that God in all things may be glorified, as (...) is
written 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.

Order of Baptism.
And for as much as it is a Fundamental of the Episcopal or Protestant
Religion, and according to the Constitutions and Canons of the Church of
England, that all who are Admitted into Church fellowship, must in order to
their Admission, and in order to the obtaining to themselves the honorable
Title of Christians, promise and vow unto God before many witnesses, to forsake
the Devil and all his Works, and to keep Gods holy Will and Commandments, and
walk in the same all the days of their lives: Are not the Protestants or
Episcopals hereby bound from persecuting any for Conscience toward God, in
matters of Faith and Salvation? Because it is acknowledged to be a work of the
Devil, and contrary to the will of God to persecute Christians for matters of
Faith and Salvation in point of Religion and Worship of God.

And for as much as it is declared in the Common Prayer Book or Liturgy of the
Church of England, 2 Coll. for Peace.
that the Service of God is perfect freedom, whether ought any to be forced
either to it or from it by outward compulsion, but rather left to their
freedom, that God may convince and persuade them? Because whatsoever is not of
Faith is sin, and every man ought to be fully persuaded in his own heart, in
matters of Faith and Salvation, and it properly belongs to she Lord to make
known his own Worship, who knows how to persuade the heart both to believe, and
close in with the same.

And whereas it is said in the Common Prayer, that God is the Author of Peace,
and Lover of Concord, ought not the Episcopals or Protestants to be like minded
unto him? If so, they would see it to be below the life and spirit of a true
Christian, to force Conscience before they convince it: And so ought to seek
their peace and welfare, and not their destruction and Ruin, who are yet
unconvinced or persuaded by them, who themselves do not walk up to their
profession.

Com. upon the Feasts of Trin.
And whereas in the Liturgy of the Church of England it is acknowledged that
it is very meet, right, and our bounden duty, that we should at all times, and
in all places, (worship and serve the Lord) or give Thanks unto the Almighty
and Everlasting God, why then should we be bound from doing that which is
accounted and declared to be very meet, right, and our bounden duty at any
time, and in any place, especially by them who do own and profess the same as
aforesaid.

And whereas the Priests, Bishops, and Curates do declare and confess by the
Liturgy of the Church of England, that there is no health in them, meaning no
souls health, nor saving health in any of them, because it is generally
acknowledged by them, and upon a spiritual Account, what Reason can be produced
in Reason why any man should be forced against his Conscience to come to seek
Cure of them, who plainly say they have no health in them; and if they have no
health in them, as they say they have not, Have they any Cure of Souls in them?
If not, to whom must the wounded souls go to be cured? Is it not best to leave
them to their freedom, that the Lord may direct them to whom to go to be
cured, when they are wounded by sin, and the Temptations of Satan, that they
may also be delivered from under the bondage of Corruption.

Concerning the Church according to the Constitutions and Canons, or Liturgy;
And al o of practicing according to the Liturgy of the Church of England.
1. AS to the Church, who are accounted true Members thereof, and the Condition
of their being admitted into Fellowship therewith, according to the
Constitutions, and Canons, or Liturgy; None are to be Admitted into
Church Fellowship, neither can any obtain to themselves the honorable Title of
Christians, but such as do Covenant with God by Promise and Vow before many
Witnesses, to be perfect and free from sin; First, by forsaking the Devil and
all his Works: And secondly, by keeping Gods holy Will and Commandments, and
walking in the same all the days of their lives. And seeing that none can be
Admitted into Church Fellowship nor obtain to themselves that Honorable Title
of Christians, but upon the aforesaid Conditions, Have, and Do not all thereby,
who have Entered and are Admitted as aforesaid, both Covenanted, and do
Covenant with God against Persecution about masters of Religion? And if they
persecute any upon that Account, Do they not break Covenant with God, and
Violate the Fundamentalls of their Religion?

Secondly, None are accounted Members of the Church, according to the Liturgy,
but such as are born again of Water and the Spirit, and are by Regeneration
made Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven. If it be true that the Priests did Regenerate and Invest us into a
Right to God's Kingdom, by that Act of Baptism, so called, as they have told
us they did, What true Spiritual Power and Gospel Authority have the Bishops
and Priests to dispossess us of that Right to Gods Kingdom again, either by
Church Censure or Excommunication.

And if they made us Children of God, Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, by that Act of Baptism, so called, as they say they did;
Then what Spiritual Right and Gospel Authority have they to persecute the
Members of Christ, and Children of God, about matters of Faith and Salvation,
and things appertaining to the Kingdom of God? Is not that to act contrary to
the Liturgy of the Church? And do not such actions stain their Profession,
and violate the Fundamentals of the Episcopal and Protestant Religion?

And if they made us Children of God, Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, by that act of Baptism, so called; Did they but mate us so
for that present time only, or for continuance and perpetuity? By their own
account they did not make us so for that present time only, but for
continuance and perpetuity; for they say they made us Inheritors of the Kingdom
of Heaven, and their Faith and Judgment is, that we cannot Inherit the
Kingdom of Heaven whilst in this Life, till after Death; and therefore it must
needs be understood that they intended to make us so for continuance and
perpetuity: Then what Right have they to Excommunicate and Persecute us? For if
they cut off the Members of Christ either by Excommunication or Persecution, do
they not destroy Christ in his Members in so doing? And is not that contrary to
the Mind and Will of God, and against the Innocence and true Intent of the
Liturgy of the Church of England? And does not such proceedings beget a
dislike and dis-esteem to them who so openly and manifestly err from their
own Principles or Fundamentals in matters of Religion and Practice as
aforesaid?

And for as much as the Bishops and Priests do promise to People, that by the
Act of Baptism (so called) they do Regenerate their Children, and do thereby
conclude them Regenerate, saying Dearly Beloved, Seeing this Child is
Regenerate and Borne again, let us give Thanks; Then if by that Act they do not
Regenerate them, they do neither truly Baptize them, nor Admit them into
Church Fellowship; Do not they therefore pretend to do that which they neither
intend, or really do not perform? And is it not time for people to take notice
of them? For if no Priest in England can Regenerate any, then no Priest in
England can Baptize any, who promise and pretend to Regenerate them by that
Act, as aforesaid, and do not.

And seeing that by the Liturgy of the Church of England, the Church is
declared to be the Household and Family of God; and by the Act that none may
meet out of their own Family, above the number of five, under pretense of
Religion, and Worship of God, contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of
England; Then it seems that they who are of that Family, and the whole Household
and Family of God may meet together by that Act, and not above five amongst
them that are not of the Household and Family of God.

And the Liturgy of the Church of England does plainly say, that the whole
Body of the Church is governed and sanctified by the Spirit of God: So that the
Household and Family of God are under the Teachings, Sanctification, and
Government of the Spirit of God: And by the Act it seems all such may meet
together to Worship God; and not above five join with them, that are not
Governed and Sanctified by the Spirit of God; for they are not Members of the
Church, nor of the Household and Family of God, who are not Governed and
Sanctified by the Spirit of God: because the whole Body of the Church is said
to be Governed and Sanctified by the Spirit of God, and that according to the
Liturgy, as aforesaid.

Is it not evident then, or may it not be concluded that by the said Act there
is a toleration given, for all to meet together, who are under the
administration, and teachings of God, who are governed and sanctified by the
spirit of God, and then what will this be against the meeting of the Quakers,
and innocent people of God, if rightly understood, and not perverted, because
they are the only people that meet together in point of religion and worship
of God, according to the Liturgy, because they are under the administrations,
and teachings of God, and are governed and sanctified by the spirit of God.

And does it not remain true, that those who are prohibited by the act to meet
above the number of five, contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England,
under pretense of religion, are such as are not of the household and family of
God, that is to say such as daily errs and goes astray from the ways of God,
and are not governed and sanctified by the spirit of God as aforesaid.

Concerning Infants Baptism.
And as concerning Baptism, if the thing thereby promised and pretended be not
effected, the end does not answer the means as they call it, or indeed the
means does not lead to the end, so that it is more a pretense and show or
shadow then any thing of substance, and as necessary unto salvation, and when
the means leads to the end, or the end answers the means, so that the Priests
do make it appear that they really can, and do regenerate people by that act of
baptism so called, as they pretend, then we shall be^^^^^ them, and bring
children unto them, to have that conferred upon them, and in the mean time it
is but reasonable to be excused for not bringing little children unto them,
whilst that part is more pretense then real practice or substance, and we judge
it a reasonable thing to be freed, and clearly acquitted from all
Ecclesiastical censures, and temporal punishments concerning the same, and if
you think otherwise, let the Lord and all true experienced, sound, upright
hearted Christians judge between you and us in this case.

Concerning the Sacrament so called.
Is there any true spiritual right or gospel authority whereby any should be
punished by Ecclesiastical censures or temporal punishments for not receiving
that as an Ordinance of Christ, which the Scriptures no where makes mention
off? if you say no;

Then we say the Scripture nowhere makes mention of the word Sacrament, in any
place that we ever read of, and if you can produce any place of Scripture, that
plainly makes mention of the word Sacrament, when you have produced that
Scripture, we shall take it into due consideration, and if you say there is no
such Scripture to be produced, but the word sacrament is a significant word,
and it signifies the receiving of Christ Jesus, and of an inward and spiritual
grace which are holy things if so? then to receive Christ Jesus in spirit and
the grace of God is to receive the signification of the word Sacrament, and so
effectually to receive the Sacrament or the thing signified, which is the end
of the sign, and we have received and do receive Christ Jesus, and the inward
grace of the spirit of God, and so in effect do receive the Sacrament, or
signification of the sign, and ought to be freed from all Ecclesiastical
censures, and temporal punishments concerning the same.

1. Then to meet together in point of Religion and worship of God with them
that are governed and sanctified by the spirit of God, is to come to the
Church, and that according to the Liturgy or common prayer book, therefore
such are to be tolerated, and ought not to be molested or troubled, but rather
freed from all Ecclesiastical censures and temporal punishments concerning the
same.

2. To meet together to preach and pray, and perform duty to God in point of
Religion and worship of God, is not to meet contrary to the practice of the
Liturgy of the Church of England, because they pretend to do the same,
therefore they who meet together in the fear, wisdom, and spirit of God, to
preach, pray, and perform duty to God, in point of Religion, as worshippers of
him, ought not to be molested, disturbed, or called in question for so doing.

THE END.

