THE Liberty of the Subject BY Magna Charta: OR, Several weighty things to be
considered of by the Jurors and Judges, seeing the Law of ENGLAND is said to be
a Law of Mercy, and does take care that Jurors be of the next Neighborhood,
most sufficient Men, and Persons that are least suspicious: And that Judges and
Ministers of Justice are to do even Law and Execution of Right to all Men, rich
and poor, without respect of persons.

And, That MAGNA CHARTA, and the Charter of the Forest are to be allowed in
all their points; and that if any Judgment be given contrary to the Points of
the Charters by any of the Kings Ministers of Justice, it is to be undone and
holden for naught. 25. Ed. 1. c. 1.2.

Likewise, No man is to be put to answer without presentment before Justices,
or matter of Record by due process, or by Writ Original, according to the old
Law of the Land, and if any thing be done to the contrary it shall be void in
Law, and holden for error. 42 Ed. 3. cap. 3.

Written in the 6th. Month, 1664.

THE Liberty of the Subject BY Magna Charta: OR, Several serious and weighty
confiderations, as hereafter follows.
1. Because the Innocent shall not be worn and wasted by long Imprisonment.

2. That Prisoners for criminal causes when they are brought to their Trial be
humanely dealt withal.

3. The Judge ought to exhort him to answer without fear, and that Justice
shall be duly administered unto him, etc.

FOrasmuch as the Law of England is said to be a Law of Mercy, and that three
things are favored in Law. 1. Life. 2dly. Liberty. And 3dly. Dowre. And That
there are two things which the Law delights in. First, To have things openly
and solemnly done. Secondly, Certainty, Cook 2. part. Institut. fol. 315.316.
for Truth is said to be the Mother of Justice, and Certainty the Mother of
quietness and repose: Cook 1. part. Institut. fol. 224.39.
What care therefore ought the Jurors and Judges to have in executing the late
Act, made for preventing and suppressing seditious Conventicles, that they may
not do things uncertainly nor unjustly and without mercy, nor that they may not
seek to suppress the Truth, and People of God, instead of suppressing Sedition,
and preventing Insurrection; nor that they may not punish the Innocent instead
of the Guilty. Ought they not in order to the Executing of the said Act, to
take these things hereafter following into due and serious consideration.

First, That religious and godly Meetings which are only for the Service and
Worship of God, are neither accounted unlawful Assemblies, nor prohibited, or
punishable by the said Act. But seditious and ungodly Meetings are prohibited
and punishable thereby. For it is sedition and contriving Insurrection at
Meetings under color of Religious Worship, that makes Meetings to be unlawful
Assemblies, and seditious Conventicles punishable by the said Act, and not such
godly religious Meetings as are far off and free from Sedition in word or
action, and also from designing or contriving any Insurrection.

Secondly, That such Meetings upon the account of Religion and Worship of God
as are not contrary to the manner allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the
Church of England are not prohibited, nor punishable by the said Act, but ought
to be freed from the force of the penalties in that case provided.

Thirdly, That for people to assemble and meet together without any intent
either to sow Sedition, or to contrive Insurrection, but only to wait upon
the Lord in the way of his Worship, and to preach and pray, and to perform duty
and service to God at any time, or in any place, according to the gift and
requirings or teachings of the Word and Spirit of God, is not contrary to what
is allowed by the Liturgy of the Church, because the Liturgy allows the same.

Fourthly, That for persons and people to assemble and meet together under
color of religious Worship, with an intent to contrive Insurrection, is to
meet in other manner then is allowed by the Liturgy or practice of the Church;
because neither the Liturgy nor practice of the Church allows of any such
things.

Fifthly, Otherwise, ought not the Jurors and Judges to consider whether
according to Law, and in order to a certain legal determination of the matter
in a legal manner, it ought not first to be determined by the Spiritual Judges?
viz. What Meetings upon the account of Religion and Worship of God are allowed
by the Liturgy of the Church or contrary to the manner allowed by the Liturgy
or practice of the Church, before the Jurors or temporal Judges ought to find
a verdict, and pass Judgment accordingly to punish the persons and people for
such matters and causes, seeing it is a spiritual matter and cause, being about
the Service and Worship of God.

Sixthly, Ought they not to consider whether it belongs unto them to judge and
condemn persons for spiritual causes and matters of Conscience in things
appertaining to the Worship of God? or whether they ought not to disclaim it as
not belonging to their jurisdiction, because they do not sit and act as Judges
in a spiritual capacity, but in a temporal; for is not the body politic
divided into two parts, the one part called by the name of spirituality, and
the other called the temporality; and are not their powers distinct, the one to
hear and determine spiritual matters, and causes, and the other to hear and
determine temporal causes and matters: and has not the body spiritual power
when any cause of the Law Divine happens to come in question, or of spiritual
learning, to declare and determine all such doubts, and to administer all such
offices and duties as to their room spiritual does appertain? and are not the
Laws Temporal for trial of property of Lands and Goods, and for the
conservation of the people of this Realm in unity and peace without ravine or
spoil by the Temporal Judges, and the other by the Spiritual Judges? 24. H. 8.
c. 12.
or as by the Statute appears: see the Statute, 24. Hen. 8. cap. 12.

Seventhly, Ought they not to consider that people are not to be punished (by
the late Act) for the Service and Worship of God; but for meeting together to
sow Sedition, or to contrive Insurrection under pretense of Religious Worship;
and must it not be made apparent and evident that they do so. viz. sow
Sedition, or contrive Insurrection, before they can or ought truly according to
Law be found guilty, or condemned by the late Act so as to suffer the penalties
thereof.

Eighthly, ought not they to consider, 1. Against what persons and practices
the remedies by the said Act are provided. 2. Who they are that come within the
reason of the Act. 3. For what end the penalties are to be executed. And 4.
What Meetings are accounted and declared by the said Act to be unlawful
Assemblies, and punishable thereby, that those may not be punished but
acquitted who are not guilty thereof?

Ninthly, It is not evident, first that the Title of the Act is to prevent and
suppress Seditious Conventicles (and not godly religious Meetings.) 2. That the
remedies provided by the said Act are against the growing and dangerous
practices of sedition. Sectaries and disloyal persons, who do at their Meetings
contrive Insurrections, as late experience has showed; but neither former nor
present experience has showed any such things to be done or intended at the
godly Meetings of the innocent people reproachfully called Quakers, who are
utterly and absolutely against sowing of Sedition, or contriving of any
Insurrection, and ought therefore to be cleared, and clearly acquitted from the
penalties of the Act in that case provided, as not being persons that comes
within the reason of the Act, against whom the remedies are provided as
aforesaid.

Tenthly, Does, or may it not clearly appear, that for persons to meet together
(in greater or lesser numbers) really to serve and worship the Lord, is no
offense against Law, nor punishable by the said Act: but for persons to pretend
to meet together under color of religious Worship, and do not intend it, but
makes a religious pretense a color to cover and persecute a wicked intention
under, so as to sow sedition, and to design or contrive insurrection under so
fair a pretense.

Eleventhly, Ought not the Jurors to enquire of that, to find out the
certainty and truth of the matter in issue or question, in order to judgment
or final determinations, viz. Whether such a thing can be found out upon
enquiry, and so clearly and evidently appear that persons are guilty of
contriving Insurrection at Meetings under so fair a pretense as aforesaid, that
they may suffer according to their deserts who do appear to be guilty thereof:
but if no such thing appear upon trial, is it not the duty of Jurors and Judges
to acquit them that are not guilty either of sowing Sedition, or contriving
Insurrection at Meetings as aforesaid? consider well of it.

Twelfthly, Ought not the Jurors to consider what Meetings are accounted and
declared (by the late Act) to be unlawful Assemblies and punishable thereby?
and does, or may it not appear that seditious and tumultuous Meetings are
accounted and declared by the Statute it self to be unlawful Assemblies. 1.
Because the Title of the Act is to prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles.
2. Because the remedies provided by the said Act are against the growing and
dangerous practices of seditions Sectaries and disloyal persons, who under
pretense of tender Consciences do at their Meetings contrive Insurrections, as
late experience has showed. And 3dly. Because the execution of the penalties,
or the Act it self is for the preventing of the mischiefs that may grow by such
seditious and tumultuous Meetings, or as by the Statute appears.

Thirteenthly, Is it so, that seditious and tumultuous Meetings are declared by
the said Act to be unlawful Assemblies that are to be prevented or suppressed
as aforesaid, ought it not to be made clearly apparent and evident to the
Jurors, That the godly and religious Meetings of an innocent people,
reproachfully called Quakers, are seditious and tumultuous Meetings, or else
how can the Jurors justly condemn them as unlawful Meetings, or Assemblies, to
suffer the penalties of the said Act? ought they not rather in duty to
Godward, and in discharge of their Office to clear them in the face of the
Country, and to free them from the force of the penalties; consider well of it
in the fear and wisdom of God, unto whom all must give an account, who has
punishments for the wicked, and rewards for the righteous.

Fourteenthly, Ought not the Jurors further to consider, that for persons
simply to meet and assemble together with out any intent to break the Peace (in
a seditious and tumultuous manner) or to do any unlawful act with force or
violence, is not an unlawful Assembly; but for persons to assemble and meet
together with an intent to break the Peace (in a seditious and tumultuous
manner) or to do some unlawful act with force or violence; is an unlawful
Assembly.

An Assembly of an hundred persons or more (yea* though they be in armor) yet
if it be not in terror or affright of the people, and were assembled without
any intent to break the peace, it is not prohibited by these Statutes, 1 M. 12.
1 El. 17.
nor unlawful says Dalton in his Justice of Peace: See Dalton fol. 279. It
seems (says he) it can be no unlawful Assembly except there be an intent
precedent to do some unlawful act, and with violence, or force: see Dalt. I. P.
fol. 279.

And their being together (when they are assembled) and their demeanor must be
such, as shall or may breed some apparent disturbance of the Peace, either by
threatening speeches, turbulent gesture, show of armor, or actual force or
violence, to the terror and fearing of the peaceabler sort of people* etc. or
elce it can be no riot, rout, or unlawful Assembly, says Dalton in his Justice
of peace: see Dalton fol. 281.

If little private Assemblies be Conventicles, does not the Act it self allow
of Conventicles, because it allows of little private Meetings, to the number of
four, besides them of the household: it seems it is not Christian Meetings, but
seditious Conventicles that are prohibited and punishable as aforesaid. Ought
not therefore the Jurors to enquire whether the persons assembled did sow
sedition, discord, debate, and strife, did they speak any seditious words, or
use any threatening speeches, show of armor, or actual force or violence, to
the terror and fearing of the peaceabler sort of people, or how can it appear,
that they are guilty of seditious and tumultuous words and actions, (or of
being at seditious and tumultuous Meeting.) and if no such things appear and be
evident, is it not the duty of the Jury to acquit them from the force of the
penalties, to all intents, constructions, and purposes?

Ought not the Judges or Justices to consider what they are commanded and sworn
to do, that they may perform their duty in respect of their Office, and not
break their Oaths. Are not they commanded and sworn to do even, or equal Law,
and Execution of right to all men, rich and poor, without respect of persons.
2dly. Are they not to allow the great Chartars of the Liberties of England in
all their points. 3dly. Are they not to do Justice and Right to all men,
freely, without sale, fully without denial, and speedily without delay. 4thly.
Are they not to do all men Justice and Right, according to Law, and the usage
of the Realm. 5thly. Is it not according to Law, and the usage of the Realm to
convict or try Fellons, Traitors, and the worst of men by the verdict of a Jury
of good men and true? And how can persons properly (according to Law and the
usage of the Realm) be said to be offenders for a third offense in one and the
same cause, matter, and thing, if they were never convicted of, and tried by, a
Jury of good men and true, for the first and second offense, according to Law
and the usage of the Realm.

It is enacted by Magna Charta (confirmed by 32 Acts of Parliament) that no
Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, 9 Hen. 3. cap 29. Cooks Proeme to the 2
part Instit.
or dis-seized of his Freehold, or Liberties, or free Customs, or be outlawed
or exiled, or in any wise destroyed, nor we will not pass upon him, nor condemn
him, but by lawful judgment of his equals, or by the Law of the Land, we shall
sell to no man, we shall deny or defer to no man either Justice or Right. Magna
Charta. cap. 29.

First, No man is to be taken or imprisoned, but by the Law of the Land, that
is, by the Common Law, Statute Law, or custom of England. Secondly, No man
shall be disseized, that is, put out of seizen, or dispossessed of his
Freehold, that is, Lands, Livelihood, or of his Liberties, or free Customs;
that is, of such Franchises and Freedoms, and free Customs as belong to him by
his free Birthright, unless it be by the lawful judgment, that is, verdict of
his equals (that is) men of his own condition, or by the Law of the Land, that
is, to speak once for all by due course and process of the Law. Thirdly, No man
shall be outlawed, made an Ex lex, put out out of the Law, that is, deprived of
the benefit of the Law, unless he be outlawed according to the Law of the Land.
Fourthly, No man shall be exiled or banished out of his Country, unless he be
exiled and banished by the verdict of his equals, or according to the Law of
the Land. Fifthly, No man shall be in any sort destroyed except it be by the
verpict of his equals, or according to the Law of the Land. Sixthly, No man
shall be condemned at the Kings Suit, either before the King in his Bench,
where the Pleas are Coram Rege, nor before any other Commissioner or Judge
whatsoever, but by the judgment of his Peers, that is, equals, or according to
the Law of the Land. Seventhly, We shall sell to no man Justice and Right.
Eighthly, We shall deny to no man Justice or Right. Ninthly, We shall defer to
no man Justice or Right: see Cook upon the 29. chap of Magna Charta, 2. pt.
Instit. fol. 45.46, 47, 48, 49, 50.

No man shall be in any sort destroyed, unless it be by the verdict of his
equals, or according to the Law of the Land. And no man shall be condemned at
the Kings suit before the King in his Bench, nor before any other Commissioner,
or Judge whatsoever, but by the judgment of his Peers, that is equals, or
according to the Law of the Land, says Cook upon Magna Charta.

Nisi per Legem terra] but by the Law of the Land; for the true sense and
exposition of these words, see the Statute of 37. Edw. 3. where the words, 37.
Edw. 3. cap. 18.
by the Law of the Land are rendered without due process of Law, for there it
is said, though it be contained in the great Charter, That no Man be taken,
imprisoned, or put out of his Freehold without process of Law, that is by
Indictment and Presentment of good and lawful men, 25. Edw. 3. cap. 4.
where such deeds be done in due manner, or by Writ Original of the common Law:
see Cook upon Magna Charta, fol. 50.

Item. Whereas it is contained in the great Charter of the Franchises of
England, that none shall be imprisoned, or put out of his Freehold, nor
Franchise, nor free Customs, but by the Law of the Land, it is accorded,
ascented, and established, that from henceforth none shall be taken by
petition, or suggestion made to our Sovereign Lord the King, or to his Council,
unless it be by Indictment or presentment of his good and lawful Neighbors
where such deeds be done, in due manner, or by process made by Writ Original at
the common Law; nor that none be put out of his Franchises, nor of his
Free-holds, unless he be duly brought in to answer, and fore-judged of the same
by way of Law: And if any thing be done against the same, it shall be redressed
and holden for none. see the Statute 25. Edw. 3. cap 4.

No man shall be taken and imprisoned without being brought in to answer by due
process of Law: for it is enacted by a Statute made in the eight and twentieth
year of the reign of King Edward the third, that no man of what state and
condition soever* he be, shall be put out of his Lands or Tenements, nor taken
nor imprisoned, nor disinherited without, being brought in to answer by due
process of Law: 28. Edw. 3. cap. 3.
see the Statute it self, 28. Edw. 3. cap. 3

And no man is to be put to answer without presentment before Justices, or
matter of Record by due process of Law: for by a Statute made in the two and
fortieth Year of the Reign of King Edward the third, 42 Ed. 3. c. 3
it is assented and accorded for the good governance of the Commons, that no
man be put to answer without presentment before Justices of Record by due
process, or by Writ Original according to the old Law of the Land: and if any
thing be done from henceforth to the contrary, it shall be made void in Law,
and holden for error, as by the Statue appears 42 Edw. 3. c. 3.

Is it not contrary to Magna Charta, and the Law of the Land, to take men and
imprison them, and pass judgment upon them in any case without due and legal
proceedings? And if they have due and legal proceedings, are they not to be
indicted or presented by good and lawful people of the same neighborhood where
the fact or offense is committed in due manner as aforesaid; or else by
process made by Writ Original at the common Law: and if that be denied, and
men be condemned before they be imprisoned, and without verdict of their
equals, and without being duly brought in to answer, and tried by the course of
the Law, are they not destroyed contrary to Law? or ought not such things to be
redressed and holden for none, as are against Magna Charta, and the Law of the
Land as aforesaid. And if any man be imprisoned, and be not duly brought in to
answer according to Law as aforesaid, ought not the proceedings against him to
be void in Law and holden for error.

If men cannot legally according to Law, and the usage of the Realm, be tried
as offenders for the third offense for one and the same cause, matter, and
thing; if they were never legally convicted of, and tried for a first and
second offense, according to the great Charters of the Liberties of England, or
the former Statutes and Laws of the Land as aforesaid; may not that offense
whereof they are first convicted and tried by due process of Law, according to
the former Statutes of the old Law of the Land, be in Law taken and deemed to
be the first offense, and the other be void in Law, seeing the Law takes care
and provides that all men shall have even Law and execution of right without
respect of persons; and if they have not, where is the fault in the Law, or in
the executors thereof, who are commanded and sworn to do even Law and Execution
of Right to all men, rich and poor, without respect of persons, 20. Ed. 3. c. 1
or showing favor to one more then unto another? they are not to withold Law
and Right from men (for differences in judgment in matters of Religion) but
they are to let them have even Law and right as well as others: see Magna
Charta, cap. 29. And see the Statute 20 Edw. 3. chapter 1. and 25. Edw. 3.4. and 5.
Edw. 3.9. and 28. Edw. 3. cap. 3. and 42. Edw. 3. cap. 3.

The Law takes care and provides that Jurors be of the next neighborhood, most
sufficient men, and persons that are lest suspicious, as by the Statute
appears, 28. Edward 1. cap. 9.

And no man is prohibited, but allowed by the Law of the Land to have Counsel
of Pleaders, of learned men in the Law (for his fee) or of his next friends: so
that a man may plead for his friend: see the Statute 28 Edward 1. cap. 11.

The Laws and Customs of England shall be pleaded, showed, and defended,
answered, debated, and judged in the English tongue in all Courts within this
Realm, and are only to be entered and enrolled in Latin: see the Statute for
that, 36. Edw. 3. cap. 15.

Is it not the duty of a Judge to discern what is just by the rule of the Law,
and so to make the Law his rule, his line, his measure, his weight, his yard,
and balance, which is called right it self and common Law, because it judges
common right by a right line, which is the judge of it self, and its oblique,
says Cook in his second part Institut.

1. Are not the Judges to do justice and right according to the rule of the Law
and Custom of England, Cook 2. pt. Instit. fol. 56.

2. They are not to sell, deny, or delay Justice and Right, neither the end
which is justice, nor the means whereby the end may be obtained, which is the
Law, says Cook in his 2. part Instit. fol. 56.

3. The Court ought to be of council with the Prisoner, to see that nothing be
urged against him contrary to Law and Right, says Cook 3. part Instit. fol 29.

4. The Judge ought to exhort the Prisoner to answer without fear, and that
Justice shall be duly administered unto him, says Cook in his 2. part
Institutes, fol. 316.

5. The Judges of the Court who ever, are to be of council with the Prisoner,
to give him Law and Justice ex ossicio, ought to enquire whether he be the same
person, and of all other pleas which he might have pleaded, etc. says Cook in
his 2. part Institut. fol. 178.

Nay, says he, any learned man that is in the Court may inform the Court for
the benefit of the Prisoner, of any thing that may make the proceedings
erroneous, Cook 3 part Instit. fol. 29.

Also, says he. It is lawful for any man that is in the Court to inform the
Court, lest the Court should err, and the Prisoner be unjustly proceeded with:
see Cook 3. part Instit. fol. 137.

6. The Judges and Ministers of Justice are to allow the great Charters of the
Liberties of England in all their points: for by a Statute made for the
confirmation of the Charters 25 Edw. 1. cap 1. It is enacted that all Majors
Sheriffs, Justices, 25 Ed 1. c. 1.
and other Ministers which have the Laws of the Land to guide them, shall allow
the said Charters pleaded before them in judgment in all points: see the
Statute it self 25. Edw. 1. cap. 1.

7. The Judges and Ministers of Justice are not to give Judgment against the
great Charters; for whatsoever judgment is given against the Statute of Magna
Charta, or of the Charter of the Forest, is made void by the Statute 25 Edw.
1. cap. 2. because (says Cook) the judgment is given against the Law; and the
Statute it self says, If any Judgment be given from henceforth contrary to
the points of the Charters aforesaid, Cook 2 part Instit. fol. 226, 227
by the Justices or by any other, our Ministers that hold Plea before them
against the points of the Charters, it shall be undone and holden for naught:
Statute 25. Edw. 1. cap. 2.

And by a Statute made the 42d. year of the Reign of King Edward the third, it
is assented and accorded that the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest
be holden and kept in all points; 42 Ed. 3. cap. 1.
and if any Statute be made to the contrary, that shall be holden for none: see
the Statute it self, 42 Edward 3. cap. 1.

The great Charters are to be read four times a Year in the Counties, and twice
a Year in the Cathedrals, that the people may know they are confirmed, and are
to be kept in all points: 25 Edw. 1. c. 1, 2, 3.
see the Statute 25 Edw. 1. cap. 1.2, 3.

And it is enacted by the Statute of the 25 Edw. 1. cap. 4. that all
Archbishops, and Bishops shall pronounce the sentence of excommunication
against all those that by word, deed, or Council do contrary to the aforesaid
Charters, or that in any point do break or undo them, and that the said curses
be twice a year denounced and published: see the Statute 25. Edw. 1* cap. 4.

All men are enjoined to uphold and maintain the great Charters: see the
sentence of the Clergy given against the breakers thereof: In the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. Amen.

Whereas our Sovereign Lord the King, to the honor of God, and the Holy
Church, and for the common profit of the Realm, has granted for him and his
heirs for ever, those Articles above written, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury,
Primate of all England, admonished all his Province once, twice, and thrice,
because shortness will not suffer so much delay as to give knowledge to all the
people of England of these presents in Writing: We therefore enjoin all persons
of what State soever they be, that they and every of them, as much as in them
is, shall uphold and maintain these Articles granted by our Sovereign Lord the
King in all points, and all those that in any point do resist or break, or in
any manner hereafter procure counsel, or any wise assent to resist or break
those ordinances, or go about it by word or deed, openly or privily, by any
manner of pretense or color. We the aforesaid Archbishop by our Authority in
this Writing expressed, do Excommunicate and Accurse, and from the Body of our
Lord Jesus Christ, and from all the company of Heaven, and from all the
Sacraments of holy Church do sequester and exclude.

And as concerning liberty of Conscience about matters of Religion, The King
has been pleased to promise and declare a liberty to tender Consciences, viz.
That no man shall be disquieted and called in question for differences of
opinion in matters of Religion, so long as they do not disturb the Peace of the
Kingdom. Now forasmuch as the innocent people called Quakers have never
disturbed the Peace of the Kingdom by designing or contriving any Insurrection,
etc. They never yet forfeited their interest in the Kings promises; and the Act
entitled An Act to prevent and suppress seditious Conventicles, provides
remedies against the growing and dangerous practices of Seditious Sectaries and
disloyal persons, who under pretense of tender Consciences do at their Meetings
contrive Insurrections, as late experience has showed: so that the remedies
are provided by the said Act against the growing and dangerous practices of
such persons as have forfeited their interest in the Kings promises by
disturbing the Peace of the Kingdom in contriving Insurrection, and not against
the Innocent Meetings of the people of God, reproachfully called Quakers, or
such as never yet forfeited their liberty therein, because neither former nor
present experience has showed that they ever contrived any Insurrection, who
are utterly and absolutely against designing or contriving any such thing.

Of the Assemblies and Congregations of the faithful St. Hillary against
Auxentius, says, I pray you, O ye Bishops, which do think your selves to be
so, what suffrages have the Apostles used for to preach the Gospel? Act. 5.
Act. 16.
with what power were they aided for to preach Christ, and as if it were to
change all Gentiles from Images to God? have they taken any dignity of the
Palace, in singing of Hymns and Psalms unto God in prison, being in Irons and
Chains, and afterward to be whipped and scourged. Did Paul assemble the Church
of Christ by the Kings Edict, when he was as a spectacle in the Theater? they
nourishing and keeping themselves with their own handy labor, in assembling
themselves together within Chambers and secret places, and by the Streets and
Villages, did environ and compass about almost all people by land and by water,
against the Decrees and Ordinances or the Senators and Edicts of the Kings.

Tertullian in his Apology against he Gentiles, chapter 29. says, This
Assembly of the Christians should be very unlawful, if it were like or equal
unto the unlawful things; it should be worthily condemned, if it were
complained of as of a Faction or Sect: but whom have we endamaged or hurt by
our assembling and meeting together; we are the very same, as when we were all
dispersed asunder every one by himself, not hurting any man When wise men, and
good and faithful people do assemble themselves together, we must not call that
a Faction or Sect, but rather a Court: and on the contrary, we must apply the
name of Faction unto those which hate good men, that cry against the blood of
the innocent under color of their unity, and for defense of their hatred:
Forasmuch as they do esteem and judge that the Christians are the causes of all
losses and common mishaps. If the River Tiber mounteth or swells above the
walls, if the River N^las do not descend upon the fields, if the heaven do
stand still, if the earth tremble, if there be Famine or Pestilence; by and by
they cry after the Christians for to cast them into the Lions Den.

And as Tertullian in his Apology against the Gentiles says on the behalf of
the Christians, so may I say on the behalf of the people of God, reproachfully
called Quakers. This assembling of theirs should be very unlawful if it were
like or equal unto the unlawful things of Sedition or contriving Insurrection;
or if they did meet with any intent to do some unlawful act with force or
violence, either against the peace, or persons of another, in a seditious and
tumultuous manner: But whom have the Quakers, so called, endamaged or hurt by
their assembling and meeting together; they are the very same (when they are
met) as when they were all dispersed asunder every one by himself, not hurting
any man.

Ensebius Bishop of Cesaria in his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 6. chap. 11.
Alleging the Epistle of Alexander Bishop of Jerusalem against Demetrius, and
rebuking him, thus says, That which thou have added in thy Letters thou say
That it was never seen that the lay and secular people should dispute of the
Faith in the presence of the Bishops: I marvel what moved thee to affirm a lie
so evident; insomuch that as often as there is found any man that is sufficient
and apt for to give good counsel, and to instruct the people; the Bishops have
accustomed to desire him to do it, as our Brother the Bishop Neon did unto
Evelpius in the City of Laranda, and the Bishop Celsus unto Paulinus in the
City of Icomum, and the Bishop Atticus unto Theodosius in the City Sin^as. And
there is no doubt but the other Bishops may do the like in their Diocesses when
they find any one which is a man for to profit the people.

And Chrysostom upon the first Chapter of Genesis, Hom. 8. says, I desire
most earnestly and do pray, that ye be all in the order of Doctors, and not
only to be hearers of our words; but also that ye would report and declare
unto others our doctrine, and that ye would correct those that do err or go
astray, to the end they may return into the way of truth; as St. Paul says,
Exhort one another, and edify one another, etc.

And a little after he says, God would not that the Christian should be only
content with himself, but that he do also edify others, and not only with
Doctrine, but also with good life and conversation.

And when he was come into the Temple, the chief Priests and the Elders of the
people came upon him as he was teaching, and said, By what authority do thou
these things, and who gave thee this authority.

They declared (says Chrysostom) That there was some which did give power
unto men, be it corporal or spiritual, as if they had said thus, thou art not
engendered of the sacerdotal family, the Senate has not permitted thee to do
this, Caesar has not given it thee: But if they had believed that all power is
from God, they would never have asked who has given thee this power, knowing
that every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of Lights; 39. Hom.
and that a man can receive nothing at all except it be given him from above:
see Chrysostom upon the 21. chap. of Matthew, 39. Hom.

Antoninus Pius was a great defender of the Christians: for Speed in the
History of Great Britain speaking of the care that this Emperor generally had
for the distressed and persecuted Christians; in whose defense he wrote to his
deputies in Asia, and published an Edict against their Accusers: the effect
whereof (says he) from Eusebius is this.

An Edict of Antoninus for protection of the Christians.
THe Emperor Caesar, Marcus, Aurelius, Antoninus, Augustus, Armenicus, Eusebius.
Eccles. Hist. l. 4. c. 13.
Pontifex, Maximus, fifteen times Tribune, thrice Consul unto the Commons of
Asia sends greeting: I doubt not but the gods themselves have a care that
wicked persons shall be brought to light; for it much more does appertain unto
them then it does unto you, to punish such as refuse to yield them worship: but
this course which you take does confirm them whom you persecute in this their
opinion of you, that you are impious men, and mere Atheists; whereby it comes
to pass that they desire in the quarrel of their God, rather to dye then to
yield to the wills of such as you are, and to embrace the form of Religion, etc.

In the behalf of these men ( viz. the Christians that were banished and
persecuted to death for the service of the Immortal God) many of the principal
Presidents have written before unto our Father of famous memory: to whom he
answered, That they should not be molested, unless they were proved to have
practiced Treason against the Emperial State: and touching the same matter,
some, have given notice unto me, to whom I have answered with the like
moderation as my Father did before: And by this our Edict do we ordain, That if
any hereafter be found thus busy in molesting these kind of men without any
their offense, We command that the hat is accused upon this point be absolved,
albeit he be proved to be such a man as he is charged to be, that is, a
Christian: and he that is his accuser shall suffer the same punishment which he
sought to procure upon the other.

This Edict was promulged at Ephesus in the general Council of all (...). So
favorable was this good Emperor (says he) to the true professors, and
(indeed) to all sorts of men, having that Apothegm of Sc^cio As^rcanus rife in
his mouth, That he had rather save one Subjects life then kill a thousand
Enemies. Speeds History, fol. 100.


