CESARS Penny to be paid by CESARS Friends.
AND Jesus beheld them, and said, What is this then that is written? The stone
which the builders rejected, the same is become the head of the Corner,
Whosoever shall fall upon that stone, shall be broken; but on whomsoever it
shall fall, it will grind him to powder, Luke 20.17, 18. verse.

Then the chief Priests and the Scribes, the same hour sought to lay hands on
him, but they feared the people, for they had perceived that he had spoken this
parable against, them. And they watched him, and sent forth spies, which should
fain themselves just men, that they might take hold on his words, that so they
might deliver him unto the power and authority of the Governor, v. 19, 20, 21.

And out of their subtilty, They asked him, saying, Master, we know that thou
say and teach rightly, neither respectest thou the person of any; but
teach the way of God truly. Is it lawful for us to give Tribute unto Caesar
or no? verse. 21.22.

But Jesus perceived the subtilty of those spies which the chief Priests and
the scribes had sent out, who feined themselves just men, and came to him to
see if they could bring him under the power of their Law, that they might have
wherewithal to entrap him; for they could not ensnare him in his words that he
spoke to them in his doctrine; therefore the subtilty of the Serpent caused
them to flatter Jesus, and called him Master. And secondly, that they knew he
taught the way of God truly, that could not be denied by them. And thirdly,
that he regarded no man's person. Then fourthly, they put forth their question
as a case of scruple to him, Tell us say they, Whether is it lawful for us to
give tribute unto Caesar or no?

For Caesar was their governor, and they were under his government, and they
thought thereby to ensnare him in his words, if he did but give them counsel
against him, ( Caesar their Governor.)

Then the wisdom of God foresaw the intent of their minds, and their
deceitful hearts, how they lay in wait to ensnare the innocent, to bring him
under their law, that they might have had him before Caesar their Governor; for
that was their desire, and the desire of the chief Priests and Scribes to have
got something against him, thereby that their Law might have taken hold on him,
because that they could not tax him in his Doctrine, and were afraid to do any
thing at him then because of the people: and so were brought to confess the
truth in their words; and said that he had taught they way of God truly, and
that he regarded no man's persons; and sub^^^ly came they to tempt the Lord
Jesus Christ with that earthly Question, that they might have had wherewithal
to accuse him.

But the Lord frustrated their ends, and the wickedness of their design: and
then said Jesus unto them (perceiving their craftiness) Why do ye tempt me?
Here was their subtilty and policy discovered by that blessed Spirit, and laid
open unto their shame; for says he, Show me a penny: whose Image and
Superscription has it? they answered and said, Cesars, Luke 20, 23, 24.

And he said unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar the things that are Cesars,
and unto God the things which be Gods; And they could not take hold of his
words before the people, and they marvelled at his words and held their peace,
Luke 20.25, 26. And so the tempters were discovered, their ends frustrated, and
the innocent by wisdom preserved out of the enemies hands at that time.

But now in this generation the same subtle spirits take the same thing to
accuse the innocent withal, and say, Render to Caesar the things which are
Cesars; and would have the friends of Christ to do that which is contrary to
Christ's mind; for they are under Christ's command, and therefore under his Law
and Government, and are to be subject to him, and obey his Fathers will, that
they may give unto God the things that are Gods, that he may be honored by
them; for Christ himself did not regard Cesars person, as they said that were
sent unto him, thou regardest no man's person, and he that is Christ's follows
his example, and honors those that are in him, and regards him above all,
knowing this, that he that respects persons commits sin, and he that commits
sin transgresses the Law, and he that transgresses the Law, must appear
before the Governor, there to answer before Sions King, and suffer punishment
for every transgression; For the Lord is of purer eyes than to behold iniquity,
and he will not suffer sin to go unpunished. Then,

Let me ask you one question? you that are Tempters as the spies were who
fained themselves just men, as you do, who cries, out unto the innocent, to
give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars; was it the friends of Christ that
showed him the Image and Superscription, or was it the enemies to Christ, that
came under the pretense of friends to have ensnared him, that he spoke too, and
said, Give unto Caesar the things that are Cesars? Answer me this, and tell me
then if it were ever required of the friends of Christ, to do any such thing,
yea or no?

And if not, why do you require it of them? do you set your selves in Cesars
room, was not he an enemy to Christ? and was it not Cesars Government that
they came to have brought him under, who by the wisdom of God was preserved? Is
there any Cesars in Christ's Kingdom amongst the Saints, or are they not in the
Gentiles Court? what says Christ in Mark 10. to his Disciples and Friends; Ye
know, says he, that they which are acc^^^ted to rule over the Gentiles,
exercise Lord-ship over them, and their great ones exercise Authority upon
them; but, says Christ, so shall it not be amongst you, Mark 10.42, 43.

They that are Cesars friends gives Caesar his Penny: but the friends of Christ
are compeld also to do the same; for there are now many spies, who faineth
themselves just men, and seek to ensnare the innocent, Rev. 15.3, Heb. ^3. 1 John 3.1. Re. 1. 1 to 5
and bring them before Caesar, and would have them to stoop under him but Christ
is born King of the new converted Jews, and all that will not that he shall
reign over them, must be brought before him that he may slay them; for he is
the express image and brightness of his Fathers glory, and the saints penny
that they are to give unto their Lord and governor, who are not of this world,
but of God, out of the world, born again, and redeemed by the blood of the Lamb
from under Caesar, to sing all Honor and Glory, and thanks be unto Sions King,
now and for evermore, Amen.

Hallelujah to the Highest.

Civil Respect.
FIrst, There is in this generation a sort of proud people, called by the name
of Gentlemen and Gentlewomen; Isa. 3. Isa. 2.7, 8 to 12.
but they want the Nature of their name, and are hasty, choleric, proud,
lofty-minded people: But the loftiness of man shall be brought down, and his
haughtiness laid low, that the Lord alone may be exalted, Isa. 2. It is the
children of the light and Saints of the most high God, though poor in spirit,
that have right to the Kingdom of God, and are gentle, and meek, and
long-suffering, Mat. 5.2, 3. Gal. 5.22. to 25. 2 Pet. 1.6, 7 8. Col. 3. 12. to
15, v. Ephesians. 4. 17, 18. 19. Ephesians. 5.11. Prove. 16.18, Jer. 13.17. Joh. 5.42, 43,
44. Ju. 16.
kind-hearted and lowly-minded; the other proud people have stolen the name of
Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, but they are not in the nature; for it is proper to
the Saints alone, and they are gentle and meek, and of quiet dispositions, and
are in order to the Spirit of Truth; But those lofty, proud, hasty, scornful,
high-minded people, called Gentlemen and Gentlewomen, they are in the flesh,
and the lust, and are disorderly, contrary to the Spirit of truth; and Gentiles
they may well be called that name, and their nature is very agreeable, pride,
covetousness, the love and honor of the world, having their understandings
darkened, and being alienated from the life of Christ, who was, and is gentle,
and meek, Lamb-like, and suffers the contradiction of sinners, I Pet. 4.
Secondly, These lofty proud people cries out, now that their pride and vanity
is discovered, and declared against by the Spirit of truth, and they are very
unwilling to hear of the downfall of it, but pride goes before destruction, and
they shall weep in secret, for their pride and covetousness is idolatry, and
draws their hearts from the Lord; and how can they believe that seek honor
one of another, and not the honor that comes of God; so showing themselves to
be uncivil, glorying in pride, riches and the wisdom of the flesh, and
respecting men for their greatness in the earth, having men's persons in
admiration because of advantage, disrespecting and not regarding the commands
of the Lord. Thirdly, Yet notwithstanding they cry our against the people of
God, who regard the commands of God, and testifies against pride,
covetousness, the love and honor of the World, in obedience to the Lord Jesus
Christ, whose Kingdom is not of this world. Fourthly, But these proud, high and
tall Cedars cries out of that, and says, that they should show them some
civil respect, not knowning the Nature of the name; for civil respect is a just
divine Right, and so to do as they would be done by, according to the sight of
Christ, and the righteous Law of God, and not to flatter people in their sins,
but to speak plainly according to the Word of the Lord, and Woe to the Crown of
Pride, Isa. 28.1.
R. Farnworth.

What it is to give offense, and what it is not, and who are offended, and by
whom now in these latter days that Christ is appearing in spirit.
GIve no offense to the Jew, 1. Cor. 10.33. Romans 2 2^.29.
nor to the Gentile, nor to the Church of God, and let all things be done
decently and in Order; Thus says the Apostle Paul, the man of God, and
Minister of the Lord Jesus Christ, and so say I.

Now he is not a Jew that is one outwardly, whose praise is of men: But he is a
Jew that is one inwardly, whose praise is of God; but the Jews outwardly who
seek the praise of men, they cry out against that which was the Apostles
practice and order, and calls it uncivil, disorderly and raising of tumults,
not being acquainted with the guidings and leadings of the Spirit of truth.

For had they looked carnally at things, and the leadings out of the Apostles
at that time, they might have said that he said, give no offense in any thing,
neither to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, and who did offend the Jews more then
he did in opposing them in their way of worship, and they were in great enmity
against him for it; for they were informed of him, that he taught all the Jews
that were amongst the Gentiles to forsake Moses, saying, That they might not
circumcise their children, neither walk after their customs, Acts 21, 21. And
what was more offensive to the Jews than this was; yet he said, give no offense
unto the Jews. Now carnal people in this generation say, It is an offense to
them that their Ordinances (as they call them) is cried down, as sprinkling of
Infants, which they have no Scripture for, Acts 20.28.
and for holding up a Steeple-house, which they call a Church, and the Church is
in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, (...) These. 1.1. And Christ came to
redeem his Church with his blood, and not a Steeple-house, which they call a
Church; 1 Pet. 2.5. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Rev. 13 16, 17, 18.
for the Curch is made all of living stones, elect and precious, and Christ is
the Head of his Church, and not the Head of a Steeple-house; and this may be
offensive to some, to call it a Steeple-house and sprinkling of Infants to be a
mark of the Beast, as John says, Rev. 13.16, 17, 18. ver.

As it was an offense to the Jews that Paul should say, that Circumcision, and
those things which the Jews had been formerly commanded by God to observe,
were then of no account with God, for the substance of all Types, Shadows and
Figures were then come, which was Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4 5, to 11.
which he then preached and held forth, 2 Cor. 4.5, 6, 7.

Paul said, Give no offense to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, and he did
exceedingly offend them in declaring against their observations, Acts 21.28. to
31.
and in going into the Temple, insomuch that they cried out, Men of Israel,
help: This is the man that teaches all men every where against the people, and
the Law, and this place: that was their Temple, and all the City was moved, and
the people ran together: and the took Paul, and they draw him out of the
Temple, and forthwith the doors were shut, etc. Acts 21.28, 29, 30, 31. to the
end.

In this generation, natural and carnal people, Jews in knowledge, whose praise
is of men and not of God, they cry out of the Apostles order, and say, it is
disorderly to come into their Temple, or Steeple-house, which they call a
Church; and if any come in thither to testify against their deceits, and false
worships as Paul did, they are moved with envy as the Jews were; and cry out
help, or take him away, he is a turbulent fellow, and says, that it does
disturb them: and the deceit will be ready to take Paul's words, and say you
ought to give no offense to the Jew, nor to the Gentile, etc. And they call
that offensive which were the Apostles practices, as it is left upon Record.

For he went into their Synagogues, and three Sabbath days together reasoned
with them, Acts 17.1, 2. He did not go to stand up in a Pulpit as the Priests
do now, but he went in amongst them, Act 19.1, 2.
as if one might come into the Steeple-house and sit him down, and afterward
speak to the Priest that stands up in the Pulpit, to declare against those
things which he practices contrary to the Scriptures, Christ and his Apostles;
but they cry away with such a one, he does disturb us, etc. and says, it is
disorderly or unmannerly, and it was the Apostles manner so to do Read Acts 17.
and see Acts 13. Now when Paul and his Company were come from Paphos, they came
to Perga in Pamphilia; and John departed from them, Acts 13.13. to 16. etc.
and returned to Jerusalem; but they came to Antioch in Pisidia, and went into
the Synagogue on the Sabbath day, and sat down; and after the reading of the
Law and the Prophets, they had freedom to speak. And Paul stood up, and
beckning with his hand said, Men of Israel, and ye that fear God give audience,
etc. Acts 13.13, 14, 15, 16. to the end.

And in this generation, it is counted disorderly, unmannerly, and tumultuous
to follow the Apostles order, and rule, and manner, as it was to go into the
Synagogues to dispute with them, and lay open their deceits; so you call it
uncivil and turbulent for to speak in your Markets, if any be moved by the Lord
so to do, and say that it is offensive; and the Apostle who said, Give no
offense to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, did not count such things offensive,
as to reason with them in their Synagogues, and to dispute daily with them in
their markets, though they took it as an offense done to them; yet it was
according to the workings and leadings of the Spirit of Truth then, Acts 17.16,
17, v.
and it is the same now: For Paul whilst he waited at Athens his spirit was
troubled within him, to see their false ways of worship; therefore disputed he
in the Synagogue with the Jews, and with the devout persons, and in the Market
daily with them that met him, Acts 17.16, 17.

And certain of the Philosophers of the Epicurians, and of the Stoics,
encountered him, and said, What will this babbler say? Then they called Truth
babbling, and the wisest of men in their natural learning do so now, and they
said, that he seemed to be a setter forth of strange Gods; therefore they took
him, Acts. 17.18.19, 20. Acts, 17.32, 33.
that they might know, as they said, what the new doctrine meant: and as it was
then, so it is now, Acts 17.18, 19, 20. And they said, that he brought many
strange things to their ears, and when they had heard him speak, some mocked,
and others said, we will hear thee again, Acts 17.32, 33, 34.

And at Corinth Paul wrought on his Trade, and was with Priscilla and Aquila
there; for Claudius had commanded all the Jews to depart from Rome: and whilst
Paul was at Corinth, he went into the Synagogue, and reasoned every Sabbath
day, persuading both the Jews and the Greeks. And as Paul testifies by the
Spirit, to the Jews, and witnessed the truth of God, Acts 18.1^ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
contrary to their carnal reason; then they were so moved and offended at him,
that they opposed themselves, and blasphemed; and when they did so, he shook
his raiment, and went away from them, Acts 18.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, ver.

And now they cry out in this generation as they did then, John. 1.5.9. John
8.12. Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.31. to 34.
if any go into their Steeple Houses to speak the Truth of God, and testify by
the Spirit against their deceits, and hold forth Christ the light of the world,
and the way to the Father, to God alone Teacher of his people, according to his
promises both by the Prophets and Apostles, as they are left upon record; then
they cry out as the Jews did, and say, they are against Church and Church
Ordinances, and so incense the people, and stir them up in a great rage, as it
was in the time of the Apostles, Ezekiel. 34.11. to 16. Joh. 6.45. Heb. 8.10, 11.
Acts 19. and are ready to set all on an uproar, as they did; and cry out
against those that follow the Apostles rule, order and manner; and say they,
what uncivil and unmannerly people and disturbers of the peace are these; and
then they beat them, and hale them before the outward Authority, and stocks and
imprison them, as the Apostles were, Acts 4 to v. 21. and Acts 5.17, 18. Acts
5.27, 28. to the 36.

Now in this generation the Jews in knowledge and outward profession cry out
against the children of Light and servants of the Lord, 1 John 2.20, 27. Acts 4
to 21. Acts 5 17, 18. Acts 5 27.28.
that testify against the deceits of the world, and calls them turbulent
fellows; so did the Jews by Paul, and they call that way of Truth which
differs from the worlds minds, and is contrary to carnal reason and fleshly
wisdom, they call it Herefie; so did the Jews by Paul; but says he, In that
way which ye call heresy do I worship the God of my Fathers: And Ananias the
high Priest and the Elders with a certain Orator who informed the Governor
against Paul, said, that he was a pestilent Fellow, and a mover of sedition
amongst all the Jews throughout the World, and a ringleader of the Sect of the
Nazarenes, who also have gone about to profane the Temple, whom we took and
would have judged according to our Law, etc. Acts 24.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. and in
Acts 28. the Jews did desire to hear of Paul, what he thought concerning that
Sect, as they called it, which was the life and power of Truth held forth by
him? for say they to him, As concerning this Sect, we know that every where it
is spoken against. Acts 28.22.

And yet he said, give no offense in any thing; Act, 24. 1 to 6. Act. 28 22.
now they were mightily offended with his manner of life and practice; for it
was contrary to the world, and so they said that he sought to turn the world
up-side down: and so they called the Truth turbulent, and him pestilent, and
the Truth a Sect, and him a ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarenes.

Now say they the Sect of the Quakers, as they call it, is the pestilentest
Sect, and they are the turbulentest people that ever was, crying out both in
Churches and in Markets, and so the Truth does trouble the deceit now as it did
then. And Paul who said, give no offense, he did offend the deceit most, and
said, be not conformed like the World, but the transformed by the renewing of
your mind, Ro^ 12.1, 2. Ephesians. 5.11.
and have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather
reprove them, Ephesians. 5.11. And this is orderly and according to the spirit of
Truth, Romans 12. 1, 2.

But in this generation the deceit cries out for order, when they live in
disorder, and are in the offense; for he that is proud is out of the order and
government of the righteous Spirit of Truth, and is an offender, and
transgresses the righteous Law of God, and he that is covetous is disorderly,
and an offender, transgressing the righteous law of God: and he that is a
drunkard is disorderly, and is an offender, transgressing the righteous Law of
God; and he that is a swearer is disorderly, and transgresses the Law of God,
and does greatly offend and grieve the righteous Spirit of the Lord; and such
as these are not cried out against, nor restrained from their ungodliness;
neither by the Jews in knowledge, nor Priest nor Professors of these times, but
are encouraged in their wickedness; and that is counted disorderly, to declare
against pride, drunkenness, lying, swearing and unjust dealing openly in
Steeple Houses and Markets; but the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6 9.10. Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. Romans 1 28. to the end Romans 2 8, 9. 1 These. 1.8. Re. 20.1.15. Re 21.27.
Re. 22 11. to 16.
that the unrighteous and such as these shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, 1
Cor. 6.9, 10. Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. And because they do not like to retain God in
their knowledge, therefore does he give them over to a reprobate mind, to do
those things that are not convenient, being filled with all unrighteousness,
fornication, wickedness, covetousness, maliciousness, full of envy, murder,
debate, deceit, malignity, whisperers, back-biters, haters of God, despightful,
proud, boasters, inventers of evil things, etc. Romans 28, 29, 30. to the end.

But such shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, but be rewarded according to
their deeds, tribulation and anguish, indignation, wrath, is the portion of all
such, Romans 2.8, 9. and none shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, whose names
are not found written in the Lambs book of life, so says Jesus Christ, and he
has sent his Angel to testify the same, Rev. 20.14, 15. Rev. 21.21. Rev. 22.
from 11, to 16 verses.

The Apostles order is now by the Professors of these times called disorderly,
and the Apostles manners is by them couunted unmanerly; therefore

To give no occasion of offense is to act righteously in all things, as thou
art convinced in thy conscience according to the Law of God, and not to do any
evil, nor speak any guile, that thou may be without guile before the Throne
of God, Rev. 14.4, 5.

Now to act righteously, and to speak in plainness of speech, it does offend
the world, and the generation of evil doers; and to use the word Thou is hard
to be born by the proud self-seeking people, although it be the word of the
Lord, and hard to be used in reality without respect to persons, but by the
honest hearted who love God above all, 1 John 5.3, 4.

Now thou that art convinced of the truth of God in thy conscience, by the
light of Christ, and do not act according to that in thy conscience, thou
do offend and grieve that which is pure of God in thee; and if thou would
seek to find out a way by thy reason; to flatter with the Worlds minds, rather
than lose their love and favor for thy one ends, and disobey that in thy
conscience, thou offends the truth in thy self, and the truth in thy self, and
the truth in others suffers by thee, then woe will follow after.

THE END.

