THE Priests Ignorance, AND CONTRAY-VVALKINGS TO THE SCRIPTURES: OR, THE
PRACTICE OF THE APOSTLES, Who were the true Ministers of JESUS CHRIST; Together
with thirty seven ERRORS of the Priests Discovered.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
Black-spread-Eagle, near the West end of Paul's, 1656.

THE Priests Ignorance AND Contrary-Walkings TO THE SCRIPTURES. etc.
THe Teachers of this World profess the Scriptures to be their Rule, and
Touchstone to try withal, 2 John 4.9. Isa. 8.20.
and he that walks contrary to the Scriptures is a Seducer, and has the Spirit
of ERROR.

That which makes a Minister of the world, is Oxford, and Cambridg, 2 Pet.
1.21. Gal. 1.12. Ezekiel. 3.1. Jer. 23.33. and 22.
and they are so long there, give so much for their Learning, and when they
have done, they have so much for their Preaching: the Prophets and the Apostles
did not so, Christ gave no such command; and here they act contrary to the
Scriptures, and have the Spirit of Error: and they will let none Preach but
themselves, and such as come from Oxford and Cambridge; here they act contrary
to the Scripture, for the Scripture says, You may all prophecy one by one,
and if any thing be revealed to him that stands by, let the first hold his
peace: here they limit the Holy One of Israel, and show the Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world have a set maintenance of the world, 1 Cor. 6.6.
Acts 20.23. 1 Pet. 5.2. Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove. 30.32.
and if any man refuse them, they sue him at the Law; the Prophets and Apostles
did not so; these act contrary to the Scripture, and have the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the World take a Text, raise Doctrines, Uses; Points, Trials,
Motives, and have a Clark to say, Amen: the Apostles did not so, these act
contrary to the Scripture, and show the Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world sing David's quakings, tremblings, cryings, wakings,
Psalm. 6.5, 6, 7. 1 Cor. 14.15. Psalm. 131 1.
praises, prayings, prophesies, in Meeter, and have a Glass to preach an hour;
and when they read the Psalms, Hats must be on: when they sing them, Hats must
be off; but the Priest has own or two Caps on his head: the Apostles did not
so when they spoke to the world: these act contrary to the Scriptures, and have
the Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, Let us sing to the praise and glory of God: and
give the ignorant profane people words to sing, as, I am not puffed in mind, I
have no scornful eye, when as they are puffed in mind, and have scornful eyes:
herein they dishonor the Lord, causing people to lie, showing the Spirit of
Error.

The Teachers of the world have the chiefest places in the Assemblies; called
of men Masters, Mat. 23.6, 7, 8; 9, 10, 11. Mat. 6.5, 6, 7, 8
laying heavy burdens upon the people, stand praying in the Synagogues, Jesus
Christ forbad such things: The Teachers of the world now act such things,
contrary to Christ's command and practice, so showing themselves Antichrists,
Seducers, and Dissemblers, and have the Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world holds up outward Temples, and calling them Churches,
1 Cor. 8.10.
whereas the Church is in God, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. and calls it the House of God, and
thus act contrary to the Scriptures; they are Seducers, having the Spirit of
Error.

The Teachers of the world sprinkle Infants, telling people it is an Ordinance
of God, Gal. 3.1. Luke 1.26.36.
which is contrary to the Scriptures, never commanded by the Lord; but these
hold it up, and so bewitch the people, and are Seducers, and show forth the
Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world call people unto a Sacrament, for the which there is
no Scripture; Genesis 10. Genesis 29.28.
here they act contrary to the Scriptures, teaching people lies, contrary to
the Scripture, a Declaration of God: here they are Seducers and show forth the
Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world marry people, and take money for it, the Apostles
did not so here they act contrary to the Scripture, showing forth the spirit of
Error.

The Teachers of the world take money for burying the dead, the Apostles did
not so: Matt. 10.8. Matt. 8.12.
here they act contrary to the Scripture, showing the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world take money for churching of women, the Apostles did
not so: thus these act contrary to the Scripture, showing the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world have Easter reckonings, and Midsummer dues, and money
out of servants wages; the Apostles did not so: these act contrary to the
Scriptures, and show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world preach Funeral Sermons over the dead, Matt. 10 8. 1
Cor. 16.17, 18.
and have ten shillings, more or less, for their pains, as they can get it; the
Apostles did not so: these act contrary to the Scripture, and show the spirit
of Error.

The Teachers of the world agree with the people for so much in the year for
preaching; the Prophets and Apostles did not so, 1 John 2.16, 17 Romans 12.2.
Deuteronomy. 29.12.
it is contrary to Christ's command, Freely ye have received, freely give: thus
they act contrary to the Scripture, showing the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world go in Cuffs, and double Cuffs, and Boot-hose-tops,
living in the lust of the flesh, following the fashions of the world, which the
Apostles spoke against: here they act contrary to the Scripture, showing the
spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world take tithes, the tenth of men's Estates: Nehem.
10.48. Nehem. 13.13. Nehem. 12.44. Nehem. 11.10.
In the old time Levi, who received tithes, the Fatherless, Widows; and
strangers were to come and be relieved within his gates: but the Priests of the
world do not fill the fatherless, the widow, and the strangers; here they act
contrary to the Scriptures, and show the spirit of Error,

The Teachers of the world say, men shall never be perfect, Matt. 5.48. 1 Cor.
2.6. Phil. 3.15.
when the Scripture says, Be ye perfect; even as your heavenly Father is
perfect; and we preach wisdom to them that are perfect; and every one that is
perfect must be as his Lord; as many as be perfect be thus minded, stand
perfect and complete in all the Will of God; here they deny the Scripture, and
show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, men shall never overcome their sins as long as
they are here, nor be made free from the body of sin; Romans 6.22. Col 2.11. 2
Cor. 2.17.
and the Scripture says, We are made free from sin, and have put off the body
of sin, and they that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the affections
and lusts thereof, and all things are become new: here they act contrary to the
Scripture, and show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, that men shall not be sanctified throughout, in
body, soul, and spirit, but in part, Jude 1. 1 John. 3.7, 8.
so long as they are here; herein they plead for a hold for Satan in them, and
are seducers and deceivers, for the Scripture says, Ye are sanctified
throughout in body, soul and spirit, and he that does righteous, is righteous,
even as he is righteous. Let no man deceive you; he that sins is of the
Devil, and never knew God Here they go about to keep people in their sin, when
Christ comes to take away sin, speaking contrary to the Scripture, and shows
the spirit of Error.

The Teathers of the world say, the Letter is Light, when the Letter says,
Christ is the Light, and the Letter is the declaration of the Light, which was
in them that spoke forth the Scriptures: John 8.12. 2 Cor. 4.6.
here they speak contrary to the Scripture, and show the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, that the Letter is the Word, which is false, 1
John 1.1. Romans 8.10.
for the Letter says, that God is the Word; the Letter is a declaration of
the Word, which is fire, and sharper then a two edged sword, and the Word is
nigh thee, in thy mouth and in thy heart; and so they that draw people to the
Letter, telling them it is the Word, are Dissemblers, Seducers, no Ministers of
the Word, but are in an Error.

The Teachers of the world say, that the Spirit is the Letter, and they are
inseparable, 2 Cor. 3.6. Ezekiel. 13.3.6.17.
when the Spirit says, The Letter kills, and is death; and thou that
would raise the Spirit out of the dead Letter, thou art a Diviner, and
Conjurer, following the imaginations of thine own brain; here thou art a
seducer, and shows the spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, 2 Cor. 5.18, 19
that salvation is in the Scripture and that the power goes along with the
Letter, which is death; God is the cause of men's salvation: here thou art a
seducer, and shows the Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world say, 1 Thessalonians. 1.5. 1 Pet. 1.19, 20. Mat. 23.27, 28.
Romans 8.14.
that the four Books, Matthew, Mark, Luke and John is the Gospel, which is but
the Letter, a declaration of the Gospel; Jesus Christ, the Lamb of God, which
takes away the sins of the world, is glad tidings to imprisoned souls, 2 Pet.
4.6.

The Teachers of the World pretending the Scriptures to be their rule and guide
to walk by, and acting contrary, they show themselves to be seducers,
dissemblers, and hypocrites, and shows the Spirit of Error.

For they are the Sons of God, that are guided by the Spirit of God, to live
the life that they did that gave forth the Scriptures.

Richard Farneworth.

Cease from your Idol Shepherds, Rev. 13.
for they are the Beasts that all the world worships and wonders after; hold
them not up, the Lord is against them. Christ is the true Shepherd, and his
Sheep hear his voice, but the voice of strangers they will not hear.

Tho. Aldam.

Luke 23.38. John 1.1.
THe Teachers of the world told us, that Hebrew, Greek and Latin was the
Original, and such might open the Scriptures who had that Original; and we do
see that Pilate had that Original and could not open the Scriptures, but
crucified Christ, and when he had so done, he wrote in Hebrew, Greek and
Latin, and set it over Christ; and thus they are contrary to the Original,
showing the spirit of Error, for in the beginning the Word was.

Luke 1.
And Luke, a Minister of the Word, said, that they that was Ministers of the
Word, took in hand to set forth in order a Declaration, and thus they are
contrary to the Scriptures, showing the spirit of Error, and go about with a
form of godliness to blind people.

Romans 1.16. Gal. 3.8.
And the Apostle says, that the Gospel was preached by Abraham, before the
Letter was written, and this Gospel are they ashamed of, which is the power,
showing that spirit which is erred from it.

John 1.
And the Teachers of the world says, that Christ has not enlightened every man
that is come into the world, whenas the Scripture says he does, and John bare
witness to it that he did, and thus they are erred from the spirit that gave
forth the Scriptures, showing the contrary, a spirit of error.

And the Teachers of the world have told us, that the steeplehouse is the
Church, which was in the days of Queen Mary a place for all her Jesuit
Priests, and the made a Decree, that whosoever did disturb any of her Priests
in the time of their service, whilst they was at their Mass or Ministering, as
they call it, in their Church, or Churchyard; or did deface any Cross or
Crucifix, they was to suffer three months imprisonment, and she was called a
Defender of the Faith who gave forth this Decree, which is quite contrary to
Scripture and Faith, as you may read, 1 Cor. 14. which says, You may all
prophecy one by one, 2 Thessalonians 1
that all may learn, that all may be comforted; and thus the Papists and the
Priests now are contrary to the Faith, and contrary to the Scriptures, and the
Church, showing the spirit of error, for the Scripture says, The Church is in
God; and the Minister of God says, If any thing be revealed to another that
sits by, let the first hold his peace: 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. 1 Cor. 14.30.
and the practice of the Ministers of God and the Church disturbs the Ministers
of the World, now in our days, as it did the Papist Priests, which makes them
prison and persecute, manifesting the spirit of Error.

And the Teachers of the world told us, that Cambridge and Oxford is the two
Fountains, and those was the Ministers of Christ that came from thence, which
we see, through the mercy of the Lord, Gal. 1.
that they are the Ministers of the world, made by the will of man, and so are
contrary to the Scriptures, showing the Spirit of Error.

And the Teachers of the world told us, that they was Ministers of God, and
they was to open the Scriptures, and yet they told us they had not that spirit
that gave forth the Scriptures; so then another, the Spirit of Error.

The Teachers of the world told us, they was Ministers of Christ, and they do
take Tithes of men, and if they will not give it them, 2 Pet. 3.3. Jude 11.
Genesis 4.
they sue them at the Law, and take treble; but we do not read in the
Scriptures that the false Prophets, false Shepherds, false Apostles, and false
Teachers and the persecuting Magistrates, that they ever did use such
oppression: and here these Teachers are contrary to the false, and contrary to
the true, showing the Spirit of Error; therefore you that fear the Lord God, be
awakened.

The Teachers of the world do manifest themselves to be in the Error, for how
many Goals in the Nation are the Servants of God cast in, by and through their
means, which shows that they are the Teachers that goes in Cains way, and
Balaams way, and so in the Spirit of Error, which their fruits makes appear out
of the Faith of Abel the sufferer.

Did ever any persecute that was in Abels faith, whom God has respect to, but
such teachers as goes in Cains way, and Balaams way, as you may read in Jude
and Peter; and is not here marks of the worlds Teachers, that all the honest
hearted may see, that fear God, by their fruits and marks which they themselves
do manifest. And do not they manifest themselves to be the briars and the
thorns where the Grapes and Figs grows not? And do the Teachers of the world
manifest themselves to be the ravening Wolves, which have gotten the Sheeps
clothing, and by their means many of Christ's sheep are cast into prisons, and
there almost murdered, and they have made many of the Magistrates without the
fear of God, to be their Executioners, to cast the Lambs of Christ into prison,
but such as fear God, see their folly, and the Errors of the wicked Teachers
are too many to mention.

Again, such Priests as preached for hire, and Prophets that divined for money,
and Heads that judged for rewards, these built up Zion with blood, and
Jerusalem with iniquity, therefore shall Zion for your sakes be laid wast, and
plowed as a field, and Jerusalem shall become as heaps, and the Mountain of the
house shall be as the forest: and all consider that be in the Light, if this
Nation be not brought to the same pass by these builders which are now cried
against with the Light that Micah was in; Mich. 3.9, 10 11.
but them which be in the error hold up them which be in the Error, but them
which be in the Light cannot hold up them which be in the error, neither ever
could in all ages, but the Light did them judge and condemn, in which Light the
Saints have their Unity, both with the Son and the Father: and this was given
forth that all may take warning in their life time what they hold up.

The wicked plotteth against the just, and gnasheth upon him with his teeth,
the Lord shall laugh at him, Psalm. 37.12.12.14.
for he sees that his day is coming. The wicked have drawn out the Sword, and
have bent their bow to cast down the poor and needy, and to slay such as be of
upright conversation.

THE END.

