Love and a Bottle. A COMEDY, As it is Acted at the THEATER ROYAL in Drury Lane
BY His MAJESTY's Servants.

Vade sed incultus, qualem decet exulis esse. Ovid. Trist. El. 1. Written by
Mr. George Farquhar.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Standfast, next door to the Three-Tun Tavern, near
Temple Bar; and Francis Coggen, in the Inner-Temple-lane. 1699.

There is lately published, the Adventures of Covent Garden, in imitation of
Scarrons City Romance: Printed for Richard Standfast. 1699.

To the Right Honorable, PEREGRINE, Lord Marquess of Carmarthen, etc.
My Lord,

BEing equally a stranger to your Lordship, and the whole Nobility of this
Kingdom, something of a natural impulse and aspiring motion in my inclinations,
has prompted me, tho I hazard a presumption, to declare my Respect. And be the
Success how it will, I am vain of nothing in this piece, but the choice of my
Patron; I shall be so far thought a judicious Author, whose principal business
is to design his Works an offering to the greatest Honor and Merit.

I cannot here, my Lord, stand accused of any sort of Adulation, but to my
self, because Compliments due to Merit return upon the giver, and the only
flattery is to my self, whilst I attempt your Lordships praise. I dare make no
essay on your Lordships youthful Bravery and Courage, because such is always
guarded with Modesty, but shall venture to present you some lines on this
Subject, which the world will undoubtedly apply to your Lordship.

Courage, the highest gift, that scorns to bend
To mean devices for a sordid end.
Courage -- an independent spark from Heaven's bright Throne,
By which the Soul stands raised, triumphant, high, alone.
Great in it self, not praises of the crowd,
Above all vice, it stoops not to be proud.
Courage, the mighty attribute of powers above,
By which those great in War, are great in Love.
The spring of all brave Acts is seated here,
As falsehoods draw their sordid birth from fear.
The best and noblest part of mankind pay homage to Royalty, what veneration
then is due to those Virtues and Endowments which even engaged the respect of
Royalty it self, in the person of one of the greatest Emperors in the World,
who chose your Lordship not only as a Companion, but a Conductor.

He wanted the Fire of such a Britton to animate his cold Russians, and would
therefore choose you his Leader in War, as in Travel: he knew the Fury of the
Turk could be only stopped by an English Nobleman, as the Power of France was by
an English King. A sense of this greatness which might deter others, animates
me to Address your Lordship; resolved that my first Muse should take an high
and daring flight, I aspired to your Lordships Protection for this trifle,
which I must own my self now proud of, affording me this opportunity of Humbly
declaring my self,

My Lord,

Your Lordships most devoted Servant,

G. Farquhar.

PROLOGUE:
By J. H. spoken by Mr. Powell, a Servant attending with a Bottle of Wine.
AS stubborn Atheists, who disdained to pray,
Repent, tho late, upon their dying day,
So in their pangs, most Author's racked with fears,
Implore your mercy in our suppliant prayers.
But our new Author has no Cause maintained,
Let him not lose what he has never gained.
Love and a Bottle are his peaceful arms?
Ladies, and Gallants, have not these some Charms.
For Love, all mankind to the Fair must sue,
And Sirs, the Bottle, he presents to you.
Health to the Play, (drinks.) even let it fairly pass,
Sure none sit here that will refuse their glass.
Othere's a damning Soldier -- let me think --
He looks as he were sworn -- to What! -- to drink. (drinks.
Come on then; foot to foot be boldly set,
And our young Author's new Commission wet.
He and his Bottle here attend their doom,
From you the Poets Hellicon must come;
If he has any foes, to make amends,
He gives his service (drinks) sure you now are friends.
No Critic here will he provoke to fight,
The day be theirs, he only begs his Night;
Pray pledge him now, secured from all abuse,
Then name the health you love, let none refuse,
But each man's Mistress be the Poet's Muse.
EPILOGUE:
Written and Spoke by Jo. Haynes in Mourning.
I Come not here, our Poets Fate to see,
He and his Play may both be damned for me.
No; Royal Theater, I come to Mourn for thee.
And must these Structures then untimely fall
Whilst the other House stands and gets the Devil and all?
Must still kind Fortune through all Weathers steer 'em?
And Beauties bloom their spite of Edax, Rerum.
Vivitur Ingenio, that damned Motto there [Looking up at it.
Seduced me first to be a Wicked Player.
Hard Times indeed, Oh Tempora! Oh Mores!
I knew that Stage must down where not one whore is.
But can you have the hearts though? -- (pray now speak)
After all our Services to let us break,
You cannot do it unless the Devil's in ye,
What Arts, what Merit have not we used to win ye?
First to divert ye with some new French strowlers;
We brought ye Bona Sere's, Barba Colar's. [Mocking the late singers.
When their Male Throats no longer drew your Money.
We got ye an Eunuch's Pipe, Seignior Rampony.
That Beardless Songster we could never make much on;
The Females found a damned Blot in his Scutcheon.
An Italian now we have got of mighty Fame,
Don Segismondo Fideli. -- There Is Musick-in-his Name,
His voice is like the Music of the Spheres
It should be Heavenly for the Price it bears. [20 l. a time.
He Is a handsome fellow too, look brisks and trim.
If he don't take ye, Then the Devil take him.
Besides least our white faces always may not delight ye;
We Have Picked up Gypsies now to please or fright ye.
Lastly to make our House more Courtlier shine;
As Travel does the Men of Mode refine,
So our Stage Hero's did their Tour design.
To mend their Manners and course English Feeding,
They went to Ireland to improve their Breeding:
Yet for all this, we still are at a loss,
Oh Collier! Collier! Thou'st frighted away Miss C -- s
She to return our Foreigner's Complizance
At Cupid's call, has made a Trip to France.
Love's Fire Arm's here are since not worth a sous.
We Have lost the only Touchhole of our House.
Losing that Jewel gave us a Fatal blow:
Well, if thin Audience must Jo. Haynes undo,
Well, if it is decreed, Nor can thy Fate, O Stage
Resist the Vows of this obdurate Age,
I Will then grow wiser, leave off Playing the Fool,
And Hire this Playhouse for a Boarding-School.
Do You think the Maids will not be in a sweet Condition
When they are Under Jo. Haynes's Grave Tuition
They Will have no occasion then I Am sure to Play
They Will have such Comings in another way.
Drammatis Personae.
Roebuck. An Irish Gentleman, of a wild roving temper; newly come to London.
Mr. Williams. Lovewell. His Friend sober and modest, in Love with Lucinda. Mr.
Mills. Mockmode. A young Squire, come newly from the University, and setting up
for a Beau, Mr. Bullock. Lyrick. A Poet. Mr. Johnson. Phamphlet. A Bookseller.
Mr Haynes. Rigadoon. A Dancing Master. Mr Haynes. Nimblewrist. A
Fencing-Master. Mr. Ashton. Club. Servant to Mockmode. Mr. Pinkethman. Brush.
Servant to Lovewell. Mr. Fairbank.
WOMEN.
Lucinda. A Lady of considerable Fortune. Mrs. Rogers. Leanthe Sister to
Lovewell, in love with Roebuck, and disguised as Lucinda's Page. Mrs. Maria
Alison. Trudge Whore to Roebuck. Mrs. Mills. Bullfinch. Landlady to Mockmode.
Lyrick, and Trudge. Mrs. Powell. Pindress. Attendant and Confident to Lucinda.
Mrs. Moor.
Bailiffs, Beggar, Porter, Masks, and Attendants.

SCENE LONDON.

Love and a Bottle.
ACT I. SCENE Lincolns-Inn-Fields.
Enter Roebuck in Riding habit Solus, repeating the following Line.
THUS far our Arms have with Success been Crowned. -- Heroically spoken, faith,
of a fellow that has not one farthing in his Pocket. If I have one Penny to buy
a Halter withal in my present necessity, may I be hanged; tho I Am reduced to a
fair way of obtaining one methodically very soon, if Robbery or Theft will
purchase the Gallows. But hold -- Cannot I rob honorably, by turning Soldier?

Enter a Cripple begging.
Crip. One farthing to the poor old Soldier, for the Lord's sake.


Roeb. Ha! -- a glimpse of Damnation just as a Man is entering into sin, is no
great policy of the Devil. -- But how long did you bear Arms, friend;


Crip. Five years, an't please you Sir.


Roeb. And how long has that honorable Crutch born you?


Crip. Fifteen, Sir.


Roeb. Very pretty! Five year a Soldier, and Fifteen a Beggar! -- This is Hell
right! an age of Damnation for a momentary offense. Thy condition fellow, is
preferable to mine; the merciful Bullet, more kind than thy ungrateful Country,
has given thee a Debenter in thy broken Leg, from which thou can draw a more
plentiful maintenance than I from all my Limbs in perfection. Prithee friend,
why would thou beg of me? Do think I Am rich?


Crip. No, Sir, and therefore I believe you charitable. Your warm fellows are
so far above the sense of our Misery, that they cannot pity us; and I have
always found it, by sad experience, as needless to beg of a rich Man as a
Clergyman. Our greatest Benefactors, the brave Officers are all disbanded, and
must now turn Beggars like my self; and so, Times are very hard, Sir.


Roeb. What, are the Soldiers more charitable than the Clergy.


Crip. Ay, Sir, A Captain will say Dam'me, and give me Sixpence; and a Parson
shall whine out God bless me, and give me not a farthing: Now I think the
Officers Blessing much the best.


Roeb. Are the Beau's never compassionate?


Crip. The great full Wigs they wear, stop their Ears so close, that they cannot
hear us; and if they should, they never have any farthings about'em.


Roeb. Then I am a Beau, friend; therefore pray leave me. Begging from a
generous Soul that has not to bestow, is more tormenting than Robbery to a
Miser in his abundance. Prithee friend, be thou charitable for once; I beg only
the favor which rich friends bestow, a little Advice. I am as poor as thou
art, and am designing to turn Soldier.


Crip. No, no, Sir. See what an honorable Post I am forced to stand to, My
Rags are scarecrows sufficient to frighten any one from the Field; rather turn
bird of prey at home.

[Shewing his Crutch.
Roeb. Grammercy, old Devil. I find Hell has its Pimps of the poorer sort, as
well as of the wealthy. I fancy, friend, thou have got a Cloven-foot instead of
a broken Leg. It Is a hard Case, that a Man must never expect to go nearer
Heaven than some steps of a Ladder. But it is unavoidable: I have my wants to
lead, and the Devil to drive; and if I cannot meet my friend Lovewell, (which I
think impossible, being so great a stranger in Town) Fortune thou have done thy
worst; I proclaim open War against thee.

I Will stab thy next rich Darling that I see;
And killing him, be thus revenged on thee.
[Goes to the back part of the Stage, as into the Walks, making some turns
cross the Stage in disorder, while the next speak. Exit Beggar.
Enter Lucinda and Pindress.
Lucin. Oh these Summer mornings are so delicately fine, Pindress, it does me
good to be abroad.


Pin. Ay, Madam, these Summer mornings are as pleasant to young folks, as the
Winter nights to married people, or as your morning of Beauty to Mr. Lovewell.


Lucin. I Am violently afraid the Evening of my Beauty will fall to his share
very soon; for I Am inclinable to marry him. I shall soon lie under an Eclipse,
Pindress.


Pin. Then it must be full Moon with your Ladyship. But why would you choose to
marry in Summer, Madam?


Luo. I know no cause, but that people are aptest to run mad in hot weather,
unless you take a Woman's reason.


Pin. What Is that, Madam?


Luc. Why, I am weary of lying alone.


Pin. Oh dear Madam! lying alone is very dangerous; it is apt to breed strange
Dreams.


Luc. I had the oddest Dream last night of my Courtier that is to be, 'Squire
Mockmode. He appeared crowded about with a Dancing Master, Pushing-Master,
Musick-Master, and all the throng of Beaumakers; and methought he mimick'd
Foppery so awkwardly, that his imitation was downright burlesquing it. I burst
out a laughing so heartily, that I wakened my self.


Pin. But Dreams go by contraries, Madam. Have not you seen him yet.


Luc. No; but my Unkles Letter gives account that he is newly come to Town from
the University, where his Education could reach no farther than to guzzle fat
Ale, smoke Tobaco, and chop Logic. -- Faugh -- it makes me Sick.


Pin. But he is very rich, Madam; his Concerns join to yours in the Country.


Luc. Ay, but his Concerns shall never join to mine in the City: For since I
have the disposal of my own Fortune, Lovewell's the Man for my Money.


Pin. Ay, and for my Money; for I Have have had above twenty Pieces from him
since his Courtship began. He Is the prettiest sober Gentleman; I have so strong
an opinion of his modesty, that I Am afraid, Madam, your first Child will be a
Fool.


Luc. Oh God forbid! I hope a Lawyer understands business better than to beget
any thing non compos. -- The Walks fill a pace; the Enemy approaches, we must
set out our false Colors.

[put on their Masks.
Pin. We Masks are the purest Privateers! Madam, how would you like to Cruise
about a little?


Luc. Well enough, had we no Enemies but our Fops and Cits: But I dread these
blustering Men of War, the Officers, who after a Broadside of Dam'me's and
Sinkme's, are for boarding all Masks they meet, as lawful Prize.


Pin. In truth Madam, and the most of 'em are lawful Prize, for they generally
have French Ware under Hatches.


Luc. Oh hidious! OF my Conscience Girl thou'at quite spoild, An Actres upon
the Stage would blush at such expressions.


Pin. Ay Madam, and your Ladyship would seem to blush in the Box, when the
redness of your face proceeded from nothing but the constraint of holding your
Laughter. Did you chide me for not putting a stronger Lace in your Stays, when
you had broke one as strong as a Hempen Cord, with containing a violent Tihee
at a smutty Jest in the last Play.


Luc. Go, go, you are a naughty Girl; thy impertinent Chat has diverted us from
our business. I Am afraid Lovewell has missed us for want of the Sign: -- But
whom have we here? an odd figure! some Gentleman in disguise, I believe.


Pin. Had he a finer Suit on, I should believe him in disguise; for I fancy his
friends have only known him by that this Twelvemonth.


Luc. His Mien and Air show him a Gentleman, and his Clothes demonstrate him a
Wit. He may afford us some sport. I have a Female inclination to talk to him.


Pin. Hold, Madam, he looks as like one of those dangerous Men of War you just
now mentioned as can be; you had best send out your Pinnace before to discover
the Enemy.


Luc. No, I Will hale him my self.

[Moves toward him. What, Sir, dreaming?

[Slaps him of the Sholder with her Fan.
Roeb. Yes, Madam.

[Sultenly
Luc. Of what?


Roeb. Of the Devil, and now my Dream's out.


Luc. What! do you Dream standing?


Roeb. Yes faith, Lady, very often when my sleep's haunted by such pretty
Goblins as you. You are a sort of Dream I would fain be reading: I Am a very
good interpreter Indeed, Madam.


Luc. Are you then one of the Wise Men of the East?


Roeb. No, Madam; but one of the Fools of the West.


Luc. Pray what do you mean by that?


Roeb. An Irishman, Madam, at your Service.


Luc. Oh horrible! an Irishman! a mere Wolf-Dog, I protest.


Roeb. Ben't surpised Child; the Wolf-Dog is as well natured an Annimal as any
of your Country Bull-Dogs, and a much more fawning Creature, let me tell ye.

[Lays hold on her
Luc. Pray good Caesar, keep off your Paws; no scarping acquaintance, for
Heaven's sake. Tell us some news of your Country; I have heard the strangest
Stories, -- that the people wear Horns and Hoofs.


Roeb. Yes, faith, a great many wear Horns: but we had that among other
laudable fashions, from London. I think it came over with your mode of wearing
high Topknots; for ever since, the Men and Wives bear their heads exalted
alike. They were both fashions that took wonderfully.


Luc. Then you have Ladies among you?


Roeb. Yes, yes, we have Ladies, and Whores; Colleges, and Playhouses;
Churches, and Taverns; fine Houses, and Bawdy-houses; in short, every thing
that you can boast of, but Fops, Poets, Toads and Adders.,


Luc. But have you no Beau's at all?


Roeb. Yes, they come over, like the Woodcoks, once a year.


Luc. And have your Ladies no Springes to catch 'em in?


Roeb. No, Madam; our own Country affords us much better Wild-fowl. But they
are generally stripped of their feathers by the PIayhouse and Taverns; in both
which they pretend to be Critics; and our ignorant Nation imagines a full Wig
as infallible a token of a Wit as the Laurel.


Luc. Oh Lard! and here it is the certain sign of a Blockhead. But why no Poets
in Ireland, Sir!


Roeb. Faith, Madam, I know not, unless St. Patrick sent them a packing with
other venomous Creatures out of Ireland. Nothing that carries a Sting in its
Tongue can live there. But since I have described my Country, let me know a
little of England, by a sight of your Face.


Luc. Come you to particulars first. Pray, Sir, unmasque, by telling who you
are; and then I Will unmasque, and show who I am.


Roeb. You must dismiss your attendant then, Madam; for the distinguishing
particular of me is a Secret.


Pin. Sir, I can keep a Secret as well as my Mistress; and the greater the
secrets are, I love 'em the better.


Luc. Cannot they be whispered, Sir?


Roeb. Oh yes, Madam, I can give you a hint, by which you may understand 'em --

[Pretends to whisper, and kisses her.
Luc. Sir, you're Impudent --


Roeb. Nay, Madam, since you're so good at minding folks, have with you.

[Catches her fast, carrying her off.
Luc. Pin. Help! help! help!


Enter Lovewell.
Love. Villain, unhand the Lady, and defend thy self.

[Draws.
Roeb. What! Knight-Errants in this Country! Now has the Devil very opportunely
sent me a Throat to cut; Pray Heaven his Pockets be well lined. --

[Quits 'em, they go off. Have at thee -- St. George for England. --

[They fight, after some passes, Reob. starts back and pauses. My Friend
Lovewell?


Love. My dear Roebuck!

[Fling down their Swords and embrace. Shall I believe my eyes?


Roeb. You may believe your ears; It Is I be gad.


Love. Why thy being in London is such a mystery, that I must have the evidence
of more senses than one to confirm me of its truth. -- But pray unfold the
Riddle.


Roeb. Why Faith it is a Riddle. You wonder at it before the Explanation, then
wonder more at your self for not guessing it. -- What is the Universal cause of
the continued Evils of mankind?


Love. The Universal cause of our continued evil is the Devil sure.


Roeb. No, it is the Flesh, Ned. -- That very Woman that drove us all out of
Paradise, has sent me a packing out of Ireland.


Love. How so?


Roeb. Only tasting the forbidden Fruit: that was all.


Love. Is simple Fornication become so great a Crime there, as to be punishable
by no less than Banishment?


Roeb. I gad, mine was double Fornication, Ned -- The Jade was so pregnant to
bear Twins; the fruit grew in Clusters; and my unconscionable Father, because I
was a Rogue in Debauching her, would make me a fool by Wedding her: But I would
not marry a Whore, and he would not own a disobedient Son, and so --


Love. But was she a Gentlewoman?


Roeb. Pshaw! No, she had no Fortune. She wore indeed a Silk Manteau and
High-Head; but these are grown as little signs of Gentility now adays, as that
is of Chastity.


Love. But what necessity forced you to leave the Kingdom?


Roeb. I Will tell you. -- To shun the insulting Authority of an incensed Father,
the dull and often-repeated advice of impertinent Relations, the continual
clamours of a furious Woman, and the shrill bawling of an ill natured Bastard.
-- From all which, Good Lord deliver me.


Love. And so you left them to Grand Dada! -- Ha, ha, ha.


Roeb. Heaven was pleased to lessen my affliction, by taking away the she Brat;
but the the other is, I hope, well, because a brave Boy, whom I christened
Edward, after thee, Lovewell; I made bold to make my man stand for you, and
your Sister sent her Maid to give her name to my Daughter.


Love. Now you talk of my Sister, pray how does she?


Roeb. Dear Lovewell, a very Miracle of Beauty and Goodness. -- -- But I don't
like her.


Love. Why?


Roeb. She Is Virtuous; -- and I think Beauty and Virtue are as ill joined as
Lewdness and Ugliness.


Love. But I hope your Arguments could not make her a Proselyte to this
Profession.


Roeb. Faith I endeavored it; but that Plaguey Honor -- Damn it for a whim --
Were it as honorable for Women to be Whores, as men to be Whore-masters, we
should have Lewdness as great a Mark of Quality among the Ladies, as it is now
among the Lords.


Love. What! do you hold no innate Principle of Virtue in Women?


Roeb. I hold an innate principle of Love in them: Their Passions are as great
as ours, their Reason weaker. We admire them and consequently they must us. And
I tell thee once more, That had Women no safe guard but your innate Principle
of Virtue, honest George Roebuck would have lain with your Sister, Ned, and
should enjoy a Countess before night.


Lov. But methinks, George, 'twas not fair to tempt my Sister.


Roeb. Methinks 'twas not fair of thy Sister, Ned, to tempt me. As she was thy
Sister, I had no design upon her: but as she is a pretty Woman, I could scarcely
forbear her, were she my own.


Love. But, upon serious reflection, Could not you have lived better at home,
by turning thy Whore into a Wife, than hear by turning other Men's Wives into
Whores? There are Merchants Ladies in London, and you must trade with them, for
ought I see.


Roeb. Ay, but is the Trade open? Is the Manufacture encouraged, old Boy?


Lov. Oh, wonderfully! -- a great many poor people live by it. Tho the Husbands
are for engrossing the Trade, the Wives are altogether for encouraging
Interlopers. But I hope you have brought some small Stock to set up with.


Roeb. The greatness of my wants, which would force me to discover 'em, makes
me blush to own 'em. [Aside.] Why faith, Ned, I had a great Journey from
Ireland hither, and would burden my self with no more than just necessary
Charges.


Lov. Oh, then you have brought Bills?


Roeb. No, faith. Exchange of Money from Dublin hither is so unreasonable high,
that --


Lov. What?


Roeb. That -- Zoons I have not one farthing. -- Now you understand me?


Lov. No faith, I never understand one that comes in forma pauperis; I have not
studied the Law so long for nothing. -- But what prospect can you propose of a
supply?


Roeb. I Will tell you. When you appeared, I was just thanking my Stars for
sending me a Throat to eut, and consequently a Purse: But my knowledge of you
prevented me of that way, and therefore I think you're obliged in return to
assist me by some better means. You were once an honest Fellow; but so long
study in the Inns may alter a Man strangely, as you say.


Lov. No, dear Roebuck, I Am still a friend to thy Virtues, and esteem thy
Follies as Foils only to set them off. I did but rally you; and to convince
you, here are some Pieces, share of what I have about me; Take them as earnest
of my farther supply, you know my Estate sufficient to maintain us both, if you
will either restrain your Extravagancies, or I retrench my Necessaries.


Roeb. Thy profession of kindness is so great, that I could almost suspect it
of design. -- But come, Friend, I am heartily tired with the fatigue of my
Journey, besides a violent Fit of Sickness, which detained me a Month at
Coventry, to the exhausting my Health and Money. Let me only recruit by a
relish of the Town in Love and a Bottle, and then --

As they are going off, Roebuck starts back surpised. Oh Heavens! and Earth!


Lov. What Is the matter, Man?


Roeb. Why! Death and the Devil; or, what is worse, a Woman and a Child. -- --
Oons! don't you see Mrs. Trudge with my Bastard in her Arms crossing the field
toward us? -- Oh the indefatigable Whore to sollow me all the way to London!


Lov. Mrs. Trudge! my old acquaintance!


Roeb. Ay, ay, the very same; your old acquaintance; and for ought I know, you
might have clubb'd about getting the Brats.


Love. It Is but reasonable then I should pay share at the Reckoning. I Will help
to provide for her; in the mean time, you had best retire. -- Brush, conduct
this Gentlemen to my Lodgings, and run from thence to Widow Bullfinch's, and
provide a Lodging with her for a Friend of mine. -- Fly, and come back
presently. -- [ Ex. Roeb. and Brush. -- So; my Friend comes to Town like the
Great Turk to the Field, attended by his Concubines and Children; and I Am
afraid these are but parts of his Retinue. -- But hold -- I shall not be able to
sustain the shock of this Woman's Fury. I Will withdraw till she has discharged
her first Volley, then surprise her.

Eter Trudge, with a Child crying. Hush, hush, hush. -- And indeed it was a
young Traveller. -- And what would it say? It says that Daddy is a false Man, a
cruel Man, and an ungrateful Man. -- In troth so he is, my dear Child. -- What
shall I do with it, poor Creature? -- Hush, hush, hush. -- Was ever poor Woman
in such a lamentable condition? immediately after the pains of one Travel to
undergo the fatigues of another? -- But I Am sure he can never do well; for tho
l cannot find him, my curses, and the misery of this Babe, will certainly reach
him.


Love. Methinks I should know that voice. --

[moving forward. What! Mrs. Trudge! and in London! whose brave Boy have thou
got there?


Trud. Oh Lord! Mr. Lovewell! I Am very glad to see you, -- and yet am ashamed
to see you. But indeed he promised to marry me, [Crying.] and you know, Mr.
Lovewell, that he is such a handsome Man, and has so many ways of insinuating,
that the frailty of Woman's Nature could not resist him.


Love. What Is all this? -- A handsome Man? Ways of insinuating? Frailty of
Nature? -- I don't understand these ambiguous terms.


Trud. Ah, Mr. Lovewell! I Am sure you have seen Mr. Roebuck, and I Am sure
'twou'd be the first thing he would tell you. I refer it to you, Mr. Lovewell,
if he is not an ungrateful man, to deal so barbarously with any Woman that had
used him so civily. I was kiuder to him than I would have been to my own born
Brother.


Lov. Oh then I find kissing goes by favor, Mrs. Trudge.


Trud. Faith you're all alike, you men are alike. -- Poor Child! he is as like
his own Dadda, as if he were spit out of his mouth. See, Mr. Lovewell, if he
has not Mr. Roebuck's Nose to a hair; and you know he has a very good Nose; and
the little Pigsnye has Mamma's Mouth. Oh the little Lips:! -- and it is the best
natured little dear -- -- [Smuggles and kisses it.] And would it ask its
Godfather Blessing? -- Indeed, Mr. Lovewell, I believe the Child knows you.


Love. Ha, ha, ha! Well, I will give it my Blessing.

[Gives it Gold. (As he gives her the Gold, enter Lucinda and Pindress, who
seeing them stand, abscond. Come, Madam, I Will first settle you in a Lodging and
then find the false Man, as you call him. --

(Exit Love.
Lucinda and Pindress come forward.
Luc. The false man is found already. -- Was there ever such a lucky discovery?
-- My care for his preservation brought me back, and now behold how my kindness
is returned! -- Their Fighting was a downright trick to frighten me from the
place, thereby to afford him opportunity of entertaining his Whore and Brat.


Pin. Your conjecture, Madam, bears a color; for looking back, I could
perceive 'em talking very familiarly; so that they could not be strangers as
their pretended ^uarrel would intimate.


Luc. It Is all true as he is false. -- What! slighted! despised! my honorable
Love truck'd for a Whore! Oh Villain! Epitome of thy Sex! -- But I Will be
revenged. I Will marry the first man that asks me the Question; nay, though he be
a disbanded Soldier, or a poor Poet, or a senseless Fop; Nay though Impotent I Will
Marry him.


Pin. Oh Madam! that s to be revenged on your self.


Luc. I care not, Fool! I deserve punishment for my Credulity, as much as he
for his Falsehood And you deserve it too, Minx; your persuasions drew me to this
Assignation: I never loved the false man.


Pin. That Is false, I Am sure.

Aside.
Luc. But you thought to get another piece of Gold. We shall have him giving
you Money on the same score he was so liberal to his Whore just now.

Walks about in Passion.
Enter Lovewell.
Love. So much for Friendship -- now for my Love. -- I have not transgressed much.
-- Oh, there she is. -- Oh my Angel!

runs to her.
Luc. Oh thou Devil! --

[Starts back.
Lov. Not unless you damn me, Madam.


Luc. You're damned already; you're a Man.

Exit pushing Pindress.
Lov. You're a Woman, I Will be sworn. -- Hey day! what giddy Female Planet rules
now! By the Lord, these Women are like their Maidenheads, no sooner found than
lost. -- Here, Brush, run after Pindress, and know the occasion of this. --

[Brush runs.] -- Stay, come back -- Zoons, I Am a fool.


Brush. That Is the first wise word you have spoke these two months.


Love. Trouble me with your untimely Jests, Sirrah, and I Will. -- --


Brush. Your Pardon, Sir; I Am in downright earnest. -- It Is less Slavery to be
Apprentice to a famous Clap-Surgeon, than to a Lover. He falls out with me,
because he cannot fall in with his Mistress. I can bear it no longer.


Love. Sarrah, what are you mumbling?


Brush. A short Prayer before I depart, Sir. -- -- I have been these three
years your Servant, but now, Sir, I Am your humble Servant.

Bows as going.
Love. Hold, you shall not leave me.


Brush. Sir, you cannot be my Master.


Love. Why so?


Brush. Because you're not your own Master; yet one would think you might, for
you have lost your Mistress. Oons, Sir, let her go, and a fair riddance. Who
throws away a Tester and a Mistress, loses sixpence. That little Pimping Cupid
is a blind Gunner. Had he shot as many Darts as I have carried Billets deux, he
would have laid her kicking with her heels up e're now. In short, Sir, my
Patience is worn to the stumps with attending; my Shoes and Stockings are upon
their last Legs with trudging between you. I have sweat out all my moisture of
my hand with palming your clammy Letters upon her. I have --


Love. Hold, Sir, your trouble is now at an end, for I design to marry her.


Brush. And have you courted her these three years for nothing but a Wife?


Love. Do you think, Raskal, I would have taken so much pains to make her a
Miss?


Brush. No, Sir; the tenth part on it would have done. -- But if you are resolved
to marry, God b'w'ye.


Love. What Is the matter now, Sirrah!


Brush. Why, the matter will be, that I must then Pimp for her. -- -- Hark ye,
Sir, what have you been doing all this while, but teaching her the way to
Cuckold ye? -- -- Take care, Sir; look before you leap. You have a ticklish
point to manage. -- Can you tell, Sir, what is her quarrel to you now?


Lov. I cannot imagine. I don't remember that ever I offended her.


Brush. That Is it Sir. She resolves to put your easiness to the Test now, that
she may with more security rely upon t^ hereafter. -- Always suspect those
Women of Designs that are for searching into the humors of their Courtiers;
for they certainly intend to try them when they are married.


Lov. How came thou such an Engineer in Love?


Brush. I have sprung some Mines in my time, Sir; and since I have trug'd, so
long about your amorous Messages, I have more Intrigue in the sole of my feet,
than some Blockheades in their whole Body.


Lov. Sirrah, have you ever discovered any behavior in this Lady, to occasion
this suspicious discourse?


Brush. Sir, has this Lady ever discovered any behavior of yours to occasion
this suspicious quarrel? I believe the Lady has as much of the innate Principle
of Virtue (as the Gentleman said) as any Woman: But that Baggage her Attendant
is about ravishing her Ladies Page every hour. It Is an old saying, Like Master,
like Man; why not as well, like Mistress, like Maid?


Lov. Since thou art for trying humors, have with you Madam Lucinda. Besides,
so fair an opportu^ity offers, that Fate seemed to design it. -- Have you left
the Gentleman at my Lodgings?


Brush. Yes, Sir, and sent a Porter to his Inn to bring his things thither.


Lov. That Is right -- Love like other Diseases, must sometimes have a desperate
Cure. The Shool of Venus imposes the strist Diseipline; And awful Cupid is a
chastning God; He whips severely.


Brush. No, not if we kiss the Rod.

Exeunt.
The End of the First ACT.
ACT II. SCENE Lovewell's Lodgings.
Enter Lovewell, Roebuck dressed, and Brush.
Lov. OF my Conscience the fawning Creature loves you.


Roeb. Ay, the constant effects of debauching a Woman are, that she infallibly
loves the Man for doing the business, and he certainly hates her. -- But what
Company is she like to have at this same Widows, Brush?


Brush. Oh the best of Company, Sir; a Poet lives there, Sir.


Roeb. They Are the worst Company, for they are ill natured.


Brush. Ay, Sir, but it does no body any harm; for these fellows that get Bread
by their Wits, are always forced to eat their words. They must be good natured,
'spight of their Teeth, Sir. It Is said he pays his Lodging by cracking some
smutty Jests with his Landlady overnight; for she is very well pleased with his
natural parts.

[While Roeb. and Brush talk, Lovewell seems to project something by himself.
Roeb. What other Lodgers are there?


Brush. One newly entr'd, a young Squire, just come from the University.


Roeb. A. mere Perigatetick I warrant him. -- A very pretty Family. A Heathen
Philosopher, an English Poet, and an Irish Whore. Had the Landlady but a
Highland Piper to join with 'em, she might set up for a Collection of Monsters.
-- Any body within.

[Slaps Lovewell on the Sholder.
Lov. Yes, you are, my Friend. All my thoughts were employed about you. In
short, I have one request to make, That you would renounce your loose wild
Courses, and lead a sober life, as I do.


Roeb. That I will, if you will grant me a Boon.


Lov. You shall have it, be it what it will.


Roeb. That you would relinquish your precise sober behavior, and live like a
Gentleman as I do.


Lov. That I cannot grant.


Roeb. Then we are off; Tho should your Women prove no better than your Wine, my
Debaucheries will fall of themselyss, for want of Temptation.


Lov. Our Women are worse than our Wine; our Claret has but little of the
French in it, but our Wenches have the Devil and all: They are both adulterated,
To prevent the inconveniences of which, I ll provide you an honorable
Mistress.


Roeb. An honorable Mistress! what is that?


Roeb. A virtuous Lady, whom you must Love and Court; the surest method of
reclaiming you. -- As thus. -- Those superfluous Pieces you throw away in Wine
may be laid out. --


Roeb. To the Poor?


Lov. No, no. In Sweet Powder, Cravats, Garters, Snuff-boxes, Ribbons,
Coach-hire, and Chair-hire. Those idle hours which you mispend with lewd
sophisticated Wenches, must be dedicated --


Roeb. To the Church?


Lov. No, To the innocent and charming Conversation of your virtuous Mistress;
by which means, the two most exorbitant Debaucheries, Drinking and Whoring will
be retrenched.


Roeb. A very fine Retrenchment truly? I must first despise the honest jolly
Conversation at the Tavern, for the foppish, affected, dull, insipid
Entertainment at the Chocolate-house; must quit my freedom with ingenious
Company, to harness my self to Foppery among the fluttering Crowd of Cupid's
Livery-boys. -- The second Article is, That I must resign the Company of lewd
Women for that of my Innocent Mistress; That is, I must change my easy natural
sin of Wenching, to that constrained Debauchery of Lying and Swearing. -- The
many Lies and Oaths that I made to thy Sister, will go nearer to damn me, than
if I had enjoyed her a hundred times over.


Lov. Oh Roebuck! your Reason will maintain the contrary, when you're in Love.


Roeb. That is, when I have lost my Reason, Come, come; a Wench a Wench! a
soft, white, easy, consenting Creature! -- Prithee Ned leave Musteness, and
show me the Varities of the Town.


Lov. A Wench is the least Variety -- Look out -- See what a numerous Train
trip along the street there --

[pointing outward,
Roeb. Oh Venus! all these fine stately Creatures!

Fair you well, Ned. --

[Runs out; Lovew. catches him, and pusts him back. Prithee let me go: It Is a
deed of Charity; I Am quite starved. I Will just take a snap, and be with you in
the twinkling. -- As you're my friend.-I must go.


Lov. Then we must break for altogether? --

[Quits him.] -- He that will leave his friend for a Whore, I reckon a Commoner
in Friendship as in Love.


Roeb. If you saw how ill that serious face becomes a Fellow of your years, you
would never wear it again. Youth is taking in any Masqurade but Gravity.


Lov. Tho Lewdness suits much worse with your Circumstances, Sir.


Roeb. Ay these Circumstances. Damn these Circumstances. -- There he has
Hamstring'd me. This Poverty! how it makes a Man sneak! -- Well prithee let us
know this Devilish Virtuous Lady. By the Circumstances of my Body I shall soon
be off or on with her.


Lov. Know then, for thy utter Condemnation, that she is a Lady of Eighteen,
Beatiful, Witty, and nicely Virtuous.


Roeb. A Lady of Eighteen! Good. -- Beautiful! Better. -- Witty! -- Best of all
-- -- Now with these three Qualifications, if she be nicely Virtuous, then I Will
henceforth adore every thing that wears a Petycoat. -- Witty and Virtuous! ha,
ha, ha. Why, it is as inconsistant in Ladies as Gentlemen; And were I to debauch
one for a Wager, her Wit should be my Bawd. -- Come, come; the forbidden Fruit
was plucked from the Tree of Knowledge, Boy.


Lov. Right. -- But there was a cunninger Devil than you, to tempt. -- I Will
assure you George, your Rhetoric would fail you here; she would worst you at
your own Weapons.


Roeb. Ay, or any Man in England, if she be Eighteen as you say:


Lov. Have a care, friend, this Satyr will get you torn in pieces by the
Females; you will fall into Orpheus's fate.


Roeb. Orpheus was a blockhead, and deserved his fate.


Lov. Why?


Roeb. Because he went to Hell for a Wife.


Lov. This happens right. -- Aside. -- But you shall go to Heaven for a
Mistress, you shall Court this Divine Creature. -- I don't desire you to fall
in Love with her; I don't intend you should marry her nither: but you must be
convinced of the Chastity of the Sex; Tho, if you should conquer her, the
Spoil, you Rogue, will be glorious, and infinitely worth the pains in attaining.


Roeb. Ay, but Ned, my Circumstances, my Circumstances. --


Lov. Come, you shall not want Money.


Roeb. Then I dare attempt it. Money is the Sinews of Love, as of War. Gad
friend, thou't the bravest Pimp I ever heard of. -- Well, give me directions to
sail by, the name of my Port, laden my Pockets, and then for the Cape of Good
Hope.


Lov. You need no directions as to the manner of Courtship.


Roeb. No; I have seen some few Principles, on which my Courtship's founded,
which seldom fail. To let a Lady rely upon my modesty, but to depend my self
altogether upon my Impudence; To use a Mistress like a Deity in public, but
like a Woman in private: To be as cautious then of asking an Impertinent
question, as afterward of telling a story; remembering, that the Tongue is the
only Member that can hurt a Ladies Honor, tho touched in the tender'st part.


Lov. Oh, but to a Friend, George; you will tell a Friend your success?


Roeb. No, not to her very self; it must be as private as Devotion. -- No
blabbing, unless a squalawling Brat peeps out to tell Tales. -- But where lies
my Course?


Lov. Brush shall show you the house; the Ladies name is Lucinda; her Father
and Mother dead; she is Heiress to Twelve hundred a year: But above all, observe
this: She has a Page which you must get on your side; It Is a very pretty Boy; I
presented him to the Lady about a fortnight ago; he is your Countryman too; he
brought me a Letter from my Sister, which I have about me. -- Here you may read
it.


Roeb. Ay, it is her hand; I know it well; and I almost bush to see it.

Aside. [Reads] Dear Brother,
A Lady of my acquaintance lately dying, begged me, as her last request, to
provide for this Boy, who was her Page. I hope I have obeyed my Friend's last
Command, and obliged a Brother, by sending him to you. Pray dispose of him as
much as you can for his advantage. All friends are will, and I am

Your affectionate Sister, Leanthe.




While he reads, Lovewell talks to Brush, and gives him some directions
seemingly. All friends are well? Is that all? not a word of poor Roebuck. -- I
wonder she mentioned nothing of my misfortunes to her Brother. But she has
forgot me already. True Woman still. -- Well, I may excuse her, for I Am making
all the haste I can to forget her.


Lov. Be sure you have an eye upon him, and come to me presently at Widow
Bulfinch's -- (To Brush.) -- Well, George, you will not communicate your success?

Aside.
Roeb. You may guess what you please. -- I Am as merry after a Mistress as after
a Bottle. -- All Air; brimfull of Joy, like a Bumper of Claret, smiling and
sparkling.


Lov. Then you will certainly run over.


Roeb. No, no; nor shall I drink to any body. --

Exeunt severally. SCENE changes to a Dining Room in Widow Bulfinches house, A
Flutea, Musick-book on the Table; a Case of Toys hanging up. -- Enter Rigadoon
the Dancing Master, leading in Mockmode by both hands, as teaching him the
Minuet; he sings, and Mockmode dances awkwardly; Club follows.
Rig. Tal -- dal -- deral -- One -- Two. -- Tal -- dal -- deral -- Coupe -- --
Tal -- dal -- deral -- Very well -- Tal -- dal -- deral -- Wrong. -- Tal -- dal
-- deral Toes out -- Tal -- dal -- deral -- Observe Time: -- Very well indeed,
Sir; you shall dance as well as any Man in England: you have an excellent
disposition in your Limbs, Sir: -- Observe me, Sir.

Here the Master dances a new Minuet; and at every Cut Club makes an awkward
imitation, by leaping up. And so forth, Sir.


Mock. I Am afraid we shall disturb my Landlady.


Rig. Landlady! you must have a care of that; she will never pardon you. --
Landlady! -- Every Woman, from a Countess to a Kitchen-Wench, is Madam; and
every Man, from a Lord to a Lacquey, Sir.


Mock. Must I then lose my Title of 'Squire, 'Siquire Mockmode?


Rig. By all means, Sir; 'Squire and Fool are the same thing here.


Mock. That Is very Comical, faith! -- But is there an Act of Parliament for
that, Mr. Rigadoon? -- Well, since I cannot be a 'Squire, I Will do as well: I
have a great Estate, and want only to be a great Beau, to qualify me either
for a Knight or a Lord. By the Universe, I have a great mind to bind my self
'Prentice to a Beau. -- Could I but dance well, push well, play upon the Flute,
and swear the most modish Oaths, I would set up for Quality with e're a young
Nobleman of 'em all. -- Pray what are the most fashionable Oaths in Town?
Zoons, I take it, is a very becoming one.


Rig. Zoons is only used by the disbanded Officers and Bullies: but Zauns is
the Beaux pronuncation.


Mock. Zauns --


Club. Zauns --


Rig. Yes, Sir, we swear as we Dance; smooth, and with a Cadence. -- Zauns! --
It Is harmonious, and pleases the Ladies, because it is soft. -- Zauns, Madam. --
is the only Compliment our great Beaux pass on a Lady.


Mock. But suppose a Lady speaks to me? what must I say?


Rig. Nothing, Sir. -- you must take Snush, Grin, and make her an humble Cringe
-- Thus:

[He bows Foppishly, and takes Snush; Mockmode imitates him awkwardly; and
taking Snush, sneezes.
Rig. O Lard, Sir, you must never sneeze; it is as unbecoming after Orangere, as
Grace after Meat.


Mock. I thought People took it to clear the Brain.


Rig. The Beaux have no Brains at all, Sir; their Skull is a perfect Snush-box;
and I heard a Physician swear, who opened one of 'em, that the three divisions
of his head were filled with Orangere, Bourgamot, and Plain-Spanish.


Mock. Zauns I must sneeze -- [Sneezes] -- Bless me.


Rig. Of fie, Mr. Mockmode! what a rustical expression that is. -- Bless me! --
you should upon all such occasions cry, Them me. You would be as nauseous to the
Ladies, as one of the old Patriarks, if you used that obsolete expression.


Club. I find that going to the Devil is very modish in this Town -- Pray,
Master, Dancing Master, what Religion may these Beaux be of?


Rig. A sort of Indians in their Religion, They worship the first thing they
see in the Morning.


Mock. What Is that Sir?


Rig. Their own shadows in the Glass; and some of 'em such hellish Faces, that
may frighten 'em into Devotion.


Mock. Then they are Indians right, for they worship the Devil.


Rig. Then you shall be as great a Beau as any of 'em. But you must be sure to
mind your Dancing.


Mock. Is not Music very convenient too? -- I can play the Bells, and Maiden
Fair already. Alamire, Bifabemi, Cesolfa, Delasol, Ela, Effaut, Gesolreut. I
have 'em all by heart already. But I have been plaguily puzzled about the
Etymology of these Notes; and certainly a Man cannot arrive at any perfection,
unless he understands the derivation of the Terms.


Rig. O Lard, Sir! That Is easy. Effaut and Gesolreut were two famous German
Musicians, and the rest were Italians.


Mock. But why are they only Seven?


Rig. From a prodigious great Bass-Vial with seven Strings, that played a Jig
called the Music of the Spheres: The seven Planets were nothing but
Fiddle-strings.


Mock. Then your Stars have made you a Dancing Master?


Rig. O Lard, Sir! Pythagoras was a Dancing Master; he shows the Creation to be
a Country-Dance, where after some antic Changes, all the parts fell into their
places, and there they stand ready, till the next squeak of a Philosopher's
Fiddle sets 'em a Dancing again.


Club. Sir, here comes the pushing Master.


Rig. Then I Will be gone. But you must have a care of Pushing, 'twill spoil the
niceness of your steps. Learn a flourish or two; and that is all a Beau can have
occasion for.


Enter Nimblewrist.
Mock. Oh, Mr. Nimblewrist, I crave you ten thousand pardons, by the Universe.


Nimb. That was a home thrust. Good Sir. I hope ya're for a breathing this
Morning. [Takes down a Foyl.] -- I Will assure you, Mr. Mockmode, you will make
an excellent Swords Man; y're as well shaped for Fencing as any Man in Europe.
The Duke of Burgundy is just of your Make; he pushes the finest of any Man in
France. -- Sa, sa -- like Lightning.


Mock. I Am much in Love with Fencing: But I think Back-Sword is the best play.


Nimb. Oh Lard Sir! -- Have you ever been in France, Sir?


Mock. No, Sir; but I understand the Geography of it. -- France is bounded on
the North with the Rhine.


Nimb. No, Sir, a Frenchman is bounded on the North with Quart, on the South
with Tierce, and so forth. It Is a Noble Art, Sir; and every one that wears a.
Sword is obliged by his Tenure to learn. The Rules of Honor are engraved on
my-Hilt, and my Blade must maintain 'em: My Sword's my Herald, and the bloody
Hand my Coat of Arms.


Mock. And how long have you professed this Noble Art, Sir?


Nimb. Truly, Sir, I served an Apprenticeship to this Trade, Sir.


Mock. What are ye a Corporation then?


Nimb. Yes, Sir; the Surgeons have taken us into their's, because we make so
much work for 'em. -- But, as I was telling you, Sir, I professed this Science
till the Wars broke out: But then, when every body got Commissions, I put in
for one, served the Campaigns in Flanders; and when the Peace broke out, was
disbanded; so among a great many other poor Rogues, am forced to betake to my
old Trade. Now the public Quarrel's ended, I live by private Ones. I live
still by dying, as the song goes, Sir. While we have English Courages,
French-Honour, and Spanish Blades among us, I shall live, Sir.


Mock. Surely your sword and skill did the King great service a broad.


Nimb. Yes, Sir, I killed above fifteen of our own Officers by Private Duels in
the Camp, Sir; killed 'em fairly; killed 'em thus, Sir. -- Sa, sa, sa, sa.
Parry, parry, parry, --

[He pushes Mockmode on the ribs; he strikes Nimblewrist over the head, and
breaks the Foil.
Club. What Is the name of that Thrust, pray, Sir?


Nimb. Oh Lard, Sir, he did not touch me; not in the least, Sir. The Foyl was
cracked, a palpable crack.

[Blood runs down his Face.
Club. A very palpable crack truly. Your Skull is only cracked, palpably
cracked, that is all.


Mock. Well, Sir, if you please to teach me my Honors -- My Dancing Master has
forbid me any more, lest I should discompose my steps.


Nim. Your Dancing Master is a Blockhead, Sir.


Enter Rigadoon.
Rig. I forgot my Gloves, and so --


Mock. Oh Sir, he calls you Blockhead, by the Universe.


Rig. Zauns, Sir --

[Foppishly.
Nimb. Zoons, Sir.

[Bluffishly.
Rig. I have more Wit in the sole of my foot then you have in your whole body.


Nim. Ay, Sir, you Caperers daunce-all your Brains into your heels, which makes
you carry such empty Noddles. Your Rational's reversed, carrying your
understandings in your Legs. Your Wit is the perfect Antipodes to other Men's.


Rig. And what are you good Monsieur, sa, sa? Stand upon your Guard Mr
Mockmode, he is the greatest falsify in his Art; he will fill your head so full of
French Principles of Honor, that you will not have one of Honesty left. His
Breast Plate there he calls the But of Honor, at which all the Fools in the
Kingdom shoot, and not one can hit the Mark.


Nimb. You talk of Robin Hood, who never shot in his Bow, Sir. -- You Dancers
are the Battledoors of the Nation, that toss the light Foppish Shuttlecocks to
and again, to get your selves in heat. -- Have a care, Mr. Mockmode, this Fellow
will make a mere Grasshopper of you. -- Sir, you're the grand Pimp to Foppery
and Lewdness; and the Devil and a Dancing Master, Dance a Corante over the
whole Kingdom.


Rig. A Pimp, Sir! what then, Sir? I engage Couples into the Bed of Love, but
you match 'em in the Bed of Honor. We only juggle People out of their
Chastity, but you cheat 'em out of their Lives. We shall have you, Mr.
Mockmode, grinning in the Bed of Honor, as if you. laughed at the Fool who
must be hanged for you. -- Which is best, Mr. Nimblewrist, an easy Minuet, or
a Tyhurn Jig?


Nimb. Don't provoke my sword, Sir, least that Art you so revile should revenge
it self; for every one of you that live by Dancing should die by Pushing, Sir.


Rig. And every Man that lives by Pushing, should die Dancing, I take it.


Nimb. Zoons, Sir! what do you mean?


Rig. Nothing, Sir; -- Tal -- dal -- deral. --

Daunces. This takes the Ladies, Mr. Mockmode; this runs away with all the
great Fortunes in Town. Though you be a Fool, a Fop, a Coward, Dance well, and
you Captivate the Ladies. The moving a man's Limbs pliantly, does the business.
If you want a Fortune, come to me -- Tal -- dal -- deral --

Daunces.
Nimb. No, no, to me, Sir. -- -- sa, sa, -- does your business soonest with a
Woman. A clean and manly extension of all your parts -- -- Ha -- Carrying a
true point, is the matter. -- Sa, sa, sa, sa. -- Defend your self.

Pushes at Rigadoon, who Dances, and Sings, retiring off the Stage.
Enter Bullfinch.
Bull. Oh goodness! what a Room's here! Could not these fellows wipe their feet
before they came up. And here is such a tripping and such a stamping, that they
have broke down all the Cieling. You Dancing and Fencing-Masters have been the
downful of many Houses. Get out of my Doors; my house was never in such a
pickle. -- You Country Gentlemen, newly come to London, like your own Spaniels
out of a Pond, must be shaking the Water off, and bespatter every body about
you. --

[ Mockmode having taken snush, offering to sneeze, sneezes in her face.
Mock. Zauns, Madam -- sneezes. -- Bless me! -- Them me, I mean.


Bull. He Is tainted. These cursed Flies have blown upon him already.


Mock. Sa, sa -- Defend Flankonade, Madam.


Bull. Ah, Mr. Mockmode, my Pushing and Dancing days are done, But I had a Son,
Mr. Mockmode, that would match you -- Ah my poor Robin! -- he died of an
Apoplexy; he was as pretty a young man as ever stepped in a Black-Leather Shoe:
he was as like you, Mr. Mockmode; as one Egg is like another; he died like an
Angel -- But I am sure he might have recovered but for the Physicians -- oh
these Doctor's! these Doctors!


Mock. Bless the Doctors, I say; for I believe they killed my honest old Father.


Bull. Ay, that is true. If my Robin had left me an Estate, I should have said
so too. --

Cries.
Mock. Zauns, Madam, you must not be melancholy, Madam.


Bull. Well, Sir, I hope you will give us the Beverage of your fine Clothes. I Will
assure you, Sir, they fit you very well, and I like your fancy mightily.


Mock. Ay, ay, Madam. But what is most modish for Beverage? for I suppose the
fashion of that alters always with the Clothes.


Bull. The Tailors are the best Judges of that -- But Champaigne, I suppose.


Mock. Is Champaigne a Tailor? Now methinks that were a fitter name for a
Wig-maker. -- I think they call my Wig a Campaigne.


Bull. You're clear out, Sir, clear out. Champaigne is a fine Liquor, which all
you great Beaux drink to make 'em witty.


Mock. Witty! Oh by the Universe I must be witty. I Will drink nothing else; I
never was witty in all my life. I love Jokes dearly. -- Here, Club, bring us a
Bottle of what do you call it? the witty Liquor.

(Exit Club.
Bull. But I thought all you that were bred at the University should be Wits
naturally.


Mock. The quite contrary, Madam, there is no such thing there. We dare not have
Wit there, for fear of being counted Rakes. Your solid Philosophy is all read
there, which is clear another thing. But now I will be a Wit by the Universe. I
must get acquainted with the great Poets. Landlady, you must introduce me.


Bull. Oh dear me, Sir! would you ruin me? I introduce you! no Widow dare be
seen with a Poet, for fear she should be thought to keep him.


Mock. Keep him! what is that? They keep nothing but Sheep in the Country; I
hope they don't fleece the Wits.


Bull. Alas, Sir, they have no Fleeces; there is a great cry, but little Wool.
However, if you would be acquainted with the Poets, I can prevail with a
Gentleman of my acquaintance to introduce you; It Is one Lovewell, a fine
Gentleman, that comes here sometimes.


Mock. Lovewell! By the Universe my Rival; I heard of him in the Country. This
puts me in mind of my Mistress. -- Zauns I Am certainly become a Beau already;
for I was so in love with my self, I quite forgot her. -- I have a Note in my
Pocketbook to find her out by. --

[Pulls out a large Pocketbook, turning over the leaves, reads to himself.
Sixpence for Washing. -- Two pence to the Maid. -- Sixpence for Snush -- One
Shilling for Buttered Ale-By the Universe I have lost the Directions. -- Hark
ye, Madam; Does this same Lovewell come often here, say you?


Bull. Yes, Sir, very often. -- There Is a Lady of his acquaintance, a Lodger in
the house just now.


Mock. A Lady of his acquaintance a Lodger in the house just now? of his
acquaintance, do you say?


Bull. Yes, and a pretty Lady too.


Mock. And he comes often here, you say? By the Universe! should I happen to
lodge in the same house with my Mistress? I gad it must be the same. Can you
tell the Woman's Name? -- Stay -- Is her Name Lucinda?


Bull. Perhaps it may, Sir; but I believe she is a Widow, for she has a young
Son, and I Am sure it is legitimately begotten, for it is the bravest Child you
shall see in a Summers-day; It Is not like one of our puling Brats of the Town
here, born with the Diseases of half a dozen Fathers about it.


Mock. By the Universe I don't remember whether my Mistress is Maid or Widow:
But a Widow, so much the Better; for all your London widows are devilish rich
they say. She came in a Coach, did she not, Madam?


Bull. Yes, Sir, yes.


Mock. Then it is infalliblly she. -- Does she not always go out in her Coach?


Bull. She has not stirred abroad since she came, Sir.


Mock. Oh, I was told she was very reserved, tho it is very much of a Widow. I
have often heard my Mother say, that sitting at home and silence were very
becoming in a Maid; and she has often chid my Sister Dorothy for gadding out to
the Meadows, and tumbling among the Cocks with the Haymakers. I gad I Am the
most lucky Son of a Whore; I was wrapped in the Tail of my Mothers Smock,
Landlady.


Enter Servant.
Bull. Oh but this Lady, Sir. --


Ser. Madam here is a Gentleman below wants to speak with you instantly


Bull. With me, Child? Sir, I Will wait on you in a minut.

Exit with Servant.
Enter Club with Wine and Glasses.
Mock. Is that the Witty Liquor? Come, fill the Glasses. Now that I have found
my Mistress, I must next find my Wits.


Club. So you had need, Master; for those that find a Mistress, are generally
out of their Wits. --

Gives him a Glass.
Mock. Come, fill for your self.

They jingle and drink. But where is the Wit now Club? have you found it?


Club. I gad Master I think it is a very good Jest.


Mock. What?


Club. What! why, Drinking. You Will find, Master, that this same Gentleman in
the Straw Doublet, this same Will in the Wisp, is a Wit at the bottom. -- Fills.
-- Here, here, Master; how it puns and quibbles in the Glass!


Mock. By the Universe now I have it; The Wit lies in the Jingling: All Wit
consists most in Jingling. Hear how the Glasses rhyme to one another.


Club. What, Master, are these Wits so apt to clash?

[Jingle the Glasses Break 'em.
Mock. Oh by the Universe, by the Universe this is Wit.

My Landlady is in the right. -- I have often heard their was Wit in breaking
Glasses. It would be a very good Joke to break the Flask now?


Club. I find then that this same Wit is very britle Ware. -- But I think, Sir,
'twere no Joke to spill the Wine.


Mock. Why there is the Jest, Sirrah; all Wit consists in losing; there was
never any thing got by it. I fancy this same wine is all sold at Will's
Coffee-house. Do you know the way thither Sirrah? I long to see Mr. Comic and
Mr. Tagrhine, with the rest of 'em. I wonder how they look! Certainly these
Poets must have something extraordinary in their faces. Of all the Rarities of
the Town, I long to see nothing more than the Poets and Bedlam. -- Come in,
Club; I must go practice my Honors. -- Tal -- dal -- deral. --

[Exit dancing, and Club to peing
Enter Lovewel and Bullfinch.
Bull. Oh Mr. Lovewell! you come just in the nick; I was ready to spoil all, by
telling him that she was a Stranger, and just now come.


Lov. Well, dear Madam, be cautious for the future; it is the most fortunate
chance that ever befell me. 'Twere convenient we had the other lodgers of our
side.


Bull. There Is no body but Mr. Lyrick; and you had as safely tell a secret over
a Groaning Cheese, as to him.


Lov. How so?


Bull. Why you must know that he has been Lying-in these four months of a Play;
and he has got all the Muses about him; a parcel of the most tattling Gossips.


Lov. Come, come; no more words; but to our business. I will certainly reward
you. But have you any good hopes of its succeeding?


Bull. Very well of the 'Squire's side. But I Am afraid your Widow will never
play her part, she is so awkward, and so sullen.


Lov. Go you and instruct her, while I manage Affairs abroad.


Bull. She Is always raving of one Roebuck. Prithee who is this same Roebuck? --
Ah, Mr. Lovewell, I Am afraid this Widow of yours is something else at the
bottom; I Am afraid there has been a Dog in the Well.

[Exit.
Enter Brush.
Lov. So, Sirrah! where have you left the Gentleman?


Brush. In a friend's house, Sir.


Lov. What friend?


Brush. Why, a Tavern.


Lov. What took him there?


Brush. A Coach, Sir.


Lov. How do you mean?


Brush. A Coach and Six, Sir, no less, I Will assure you, Sir.


Lov. A Coach and Six!


Brush. Yes, Sir, six Whores and a Carted Bawd. He picked 'em all up in the
street, and is gone with this splendid Retinue into the Sun by Covent Garden. I
asked him what he meant? he told me, That he only wanted to Whet, when the very
sight of 'em turned my Stomach.


Lov. The fellow will have his swing, tho he hang for it. However, run to him,
and bid him take the name of Mockmode; call himself Mockmode upon all
occasions; and tell him that he shall find me here about Four in the afternoon,
-- Ask no questions, but fly. -- So. -- His usurping that name gives him a
Title to Court Lucinda, by which I shall discover her Inclinations to Exit
Brush this Mockmode, whose coming to Town has certainly occasioned her quarrel
with me; while I set the Hound himself upon a wrong scent, and ten to one
provide for Mistristess Trudge by the bargain. It Is said, one cannot be a Friend
and a Lover.

But opposite to that, this Plot shall prove;
I Will serve my Friend by what assists my Love.
Exit.
The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
SCENE, Lucinda's House.
Enter Leanthe Sola, dressed like a Page.
MEthinks this Livery suits ill my Birth: but slave to Love, I must not
disobey; his service is the hardest Vassalage, forcing the Powers Divine to lay
their Godships down, to be more Gods, more happy here below. -- Thus I, poor
Wanderer, have left my Country, disguised my self so much, I hardly know
whether this Habit or my Love be blindest; to follow one, perhaps, that loves
me not, tho every breath of his soft words was Passion, and every accent Love.
Oh Roebuck!

Weeps.
Enter Roebuck.
Roeb. This is the Page, Love's Link-boy, that must light me the way. -- How
now, pretty Boy? has your Lady beaten you? ha? -- This Lady must be a Venus,
for she has got a Cupid in her Family. It Is a wondrous pretty Boy, -- Leanthe
starts, and stares at him.) but a very Comical Boy. -- What the Devil does he
stare at?


Lean. Oh Heaven's! is the Object real, or are my eyes false? Is that Roebuck,
or am I Leantbe? I am afraid he is not the same; and too sure I Am not my self.
--

Weeps.
Roeb. What offense could such pretty Innocence commit, to deserve a punishment
to make you cry?


Lean. Oh Sir! a wondrous offense.


Roeb. What was it, my Child?


Lean. I pricked my Finger with a Pin, till I made it bleed.


Roeb. Such little Boys as you, should have a care of sharp things.


Lean. Indeed, Sir, we ought; for it pricked me so deep that the sore went to
my very heart.


Roeb. Poor Boy! -- here is a plaster for your sore Finger --

[Gives him Gold.
Lean. Sir, you had best keep it for a sore Finger.

[returns it.
Roeb. OF my Conscience the Boy's witty, but not very wise in returning Gold.
-- Come, come, you shall take it.

[Forces it upon him, and kisses him.
Lean. That Is the fitter cure for my sore Finger. -- -- The same dear Lips
still. Oh that the Tongue within them were as true!

aside.
Roeb. By Heavens this Boy has the softest pair of Lips I ever tasted. I never
found before that Ladys kissed their Pages; but now if this Rogue were not too
young, I should suspect he were beforehand with me. I gad, I must kiss him
again. -- Come, you shall take the Money.

Kisses.
Lean. Oh how he bribes me into Bribery; -- But what must I do whit this Money,
Sir?


Roeb. You must get a little mistress, and treat her with it.


Lean. Sir, I have one Mistress already; and they say no man can serve two
Masters, much less two Mistresses. How many Mistresses have you, pray?


Roeb. Umh! -- I gad the Boy has posed me. -- How many, Child? -- Why, let me
see. -- There was Mrs. Mary, Mrs. Margaret, Mrs. Lucy, Mrs. Susan, Mrs. Judy,
and so forth; to the number of five and twenty, or thereabouts.


Lean. Oh ye Powers! and did you love 'em all?


Roeb. Yes, desperately. -- I would have drank and fought for any one of 'em. I
have sworn and ly'd to every one of 'em, and have lain with 'em all That Is for
your Encouragement, Boy. Learn betimes, Youth; young Plants should be watered.
Your Smock face was made for a Chamber Utensil.


Lean. And did not one escape ye?


Roeb. Yes, one did, -- the Devil take her.


Lean. What, don't you love her then?


Roeb. No, faith; but I bear her an amorous grudge still; something between
Love and spite. -- I could kill her with kindness.


Lean. I don't believe it, Sir; you could not be so hard-hearted sure: Her
honorable Passion, I think, should please you best.


Roeb. O Child! Boys of your age are continually reading Romances, filling your
Heads with that old bombast of Love and Honor: But when you come to my years,
you will understand better things.


Lean. And must I be a false treacherous Villain, when I come to your years,
Sir? Is Falsehood and Perjury essential to the perfect state of manhood?


Roeb. Pshaw, Children and old men always talk thus foolishly. -- you
understand nothing, Boy.


Lean. Yes, Sir, I have been in Love and much more than you, I perceive.


Roeb. It appears then, that there is no service in the World so educating to a
Boy, as a Ladies. -- By Jove, this Spark may be older than I imagine. Hark ye,
Sir; do you never pull of your Ladies Shoes and Stockins? Do you never reach
her the -- Pincushion? Do you never sit on her bedside, and sing to her? ha!
-- Come, tell me, that is my good Boy. --

Makes much of him.
Lean. Yes, I do sing her asleep sometimes.


Roeb. But do you never waken her again?


Lean. No, but I constantly wake my self; my rest's always disturbed by Visions
of the Devil.


Roeb. Who would imagine now that this young shaver could dream of a Woman so
soon? -- But what Songs does your Lady delight in most?


Lean. Passionate ones, Sir; I Will sing you one of 'em, if you will stay.


Roeb. With all my heart, my little Cherubim. The Rogue is fond of showing his
parts. -- Come, begin.

A SONG:
Set by Mr. Richardson.
How blessed are Lovers in diguise!
Like Gods, they see,
As I do thee,
Unseen by human Eyes.
Exposed to view.
I Am hid from you;
I Am altered, yet the same:
The dark conceals me,
Love reveals me;
Love, which lights me by its Flame.
2.
Were you not false, you me would know;
For though your Eyes
Could not devise,
Your heart had told you so.
Your heart would beat
With eager heat,
And me by Sympathy would find:
True Love might see
One changed like me,
False Love is only blind.

Roeb. Oh my little Angel in voice and shape --

Kisses her. I could wish my self a Female for thy sake.


Lean. You're much better as you are for my sake. --

Aside.
Roeb. Or if thou were a Woman, I would --


Lean. What would you? Marry me? would you marry me?


Roeb. Marry you, Child? No, no; I love you too well for that,. you should not
have my hand, but all my Body at once. -- But to our business. Is your Lady at
home.


Lean. My Lady! What business have you with my Lady, pray Sir?


Roeb. Don't ask Questions. You know Mr. Lovewell?


Lean. Yes, very well. He Is my great Friend, and one I would serve above all
the World -- but his Sister.


Roeb. His Sister! -- Ha! that gives me a twinge for my Sin. -- Pray, Mr. Page,
was Leanthe well when you left her?


Lean. No, Sir; but wondrous melancholy, by the departure of a dear Friend of
hers to another World.


Roeb. Oh that was the person mentioned in her Letter, whose departure
occasioned your departure for England.


Lean. That was the occasion of my coming, too sure, Sir. -- Oh, 'twas a dear
Friend to me! the loss makes me weep.


Roeb. Poor tenderhearted Creature! -- But I still find there was not a word
of me. -- Pray, good Boy, let your Mistress know here is one to wait: on her.


Lean. Your business is from Mr. Lovewell, I suppose, Sir?


Roeb. Yes, yes.


Lean. Then I Will go.

Exit.
Roeb. I Have thrown my cast, and am fairly in for it. But an't I an impudent Dog?
Had I as much Gold in my Breeches, as Brass in my Face, I durst attempt a whole
Nunnery. This Lady is a reputed Virtue, of Good Fortune and Quality; I am a
Rakehelly Rascal not worth a Groat; and without any further Ceremony, am going
to Debauch her. -- But hold. -- She does not know that I Am this Rakehelly
Rascal, and I know that she is a Woman, one of eighteen too; Beautiful, Witty.
-- OF my Conscience upon second thoughts, I am not so very Impudent neither. --
Now as to my management, I Will first try the whining Addresses, and see if
she will bleed in the soft Vein.


Enter Lucinda.
Luc. Have you any business with me, Sir?


Roeb. Thus looked the forbidden Fruit, luscious and tempting. It Is ripe, and
will soon fall, if one will shake the Tree.

Aside.
Luc. Have you any business with me, Sir? --

Comes nearer.
Roeb. Yes, Madam, the business of mankind; To adore you. -- My Love, like my
Blood, circulates through my Veins, and at every pulse of my heart animates me
with a fresh Passion. -- Wonder not, Madam, at the power of your Eyes, whose
painted Darts have struck on a young and tender heart which they easily
pierced, and which unacustom'd to such wounds finds the smart more painful.

Lean. peeps Oh Traitor! Just such words he spoke to me.


Luc. Hey day. I was never so attacked in all my Life. In love with me, Sir!
Did you ever see me before?


Roeb. Never, by Jove. --

Aside. -- Oh, ten thousand times, Madam. Your lovely Idea is always in my
view, either asleep or awake, eating or drinking, walking, sitting or standing;
alone, or in Company, my fancy wholly feeds upon your dear Image, and every
thought is you. -- Now have I told about fifteen lies in a Breath.

Aside.
Luc. I suppose, Sir, you are some conceited young Scribler, who has got the
benefits of a first Play in your Pocket, and are now going a Fortune hunting.


Roeb. But why a Scribler, Madam? Are my Clothes so course, as if they were
spun by those lazy Spinsters the Muses? Does the parting of my Fore-top show so
thin, as if it resembled the two withered tops of Parnassus? Do you see any
thing peculiarly Whimsical or ill-natured in my Face? Is my Countenance
strained, as if my head were distorted by a Stranguary of Thought? Is there any
thing proudly, slovenly, or affectedly careless in my Dress? Do my hands look
like Paper moths? I think, Madam, I have nothing Poetical about me.


Luc. Yes, Sir, you have Wit enough to talk like a Fool; and are Fool enough to
talk like a Wit.


Roeb. You called me Peot, Madam, and I know no better way of Revenge, than to
convince you that I am one by my Impudence. --

Offers to kiss her hand.
Luc. Then make me a Copy of Verses upon that, Sir.

[Hits him on the ear, and Exit. Leanthe Entering. How do you like the Subject,
Sir?


Roeb. It Is a very copious one.

Spitting. -- It has made my Joll rhyme in my Head. This it is to be thought a
Poet; every Minx must be casting his Profession in his Teeth. -- What: Gone;


Lean. Ay, she knows that making Verses requires Solitude and Retirement.


Roeb. She certainly was afraid I intended to beg leave to dedicate something.
-- If ever I make Love like a Poetical fool again, may I never receive any
favor but a Subject for a Copy of Verses.


Re-enter Lucinda.
Luc. I will not dismiss him thus; for fear he Lampoon me. -- Well, Sir, have you
done them?


Roeb. Yes, Madam, will you please to read.

Catches her and kisses her three or four times.
Lean. Oh Heaven I can never bear it.

I must devise some means to part 'em.

Exit.
Luc. Sir, your Verses are too rough and constrained. However, because I gave
the occasion, I Will pardons what is past.


Roeb. By the Lord she was angry only because I did not make the first offer to
her Lips.

Aside -- Then, Madam, the Peace is concluded?


Luc. Yes, and therefore both parties should draw out of the Field.

Going.
Roeb. Not 'till we make Reprizals; I make Peace with Sword in hand, Madam, and
till you return my heart, which you have taken, or your own in exchange, I will
not put up. And so, Madam, I proclaim open War again. --

Catches her
Enter Leanthe.
Lean. Oh, Madam! yonder is poor little Crab, your Lap-Dog, has got his head
between two of the Window-bals, and is like to be strangled.

The Dog howls behind the Scenes.
Luc. Oh Lard, my poor Crabby! I must run to the rescue of my poor Dog; I Will
wait on you instantly. -- Come, come, Page. -- Poor Grabby! --

Exit with Leanthe.
Roeb. Oh the Devil chock Crabby! -- Well, I find there is much more Rhetoric
in the Lips than in the Tongue. -- -- Had Buss been the first word of my
Courtship, I might have gained the Outworks by this. Impudence in Love, is like
Courage in War; tho Both blind Chances, because Women and Fortune rule them.


Re-enter Leanthe.
Lean. Sir, my Lady begs your pardon; there is something extraordinary happened,
which prevents her waiting on you, as she promised.


Roeb. What has Monsieur Crabby rubbed some of the hairs off his Neck? Has he
disordered his pretty ears? she will not come again then?


Lean. No, Sir; you must excuse her.


Roeb. Then I Will go be Drunk. -- Harkye, Sirrah; I have half a dozen delicious
Creatures waiting for me at the Sun; you shall along with, me and have your
Chocie. I Will enter you into the School of Venus Child. It Is time you had lost
your Maidenhead, you're too old for Play-things.


Lean. Oh Heavens! I had rather he should stay then go there.

Aside But why will you keep such Company, Sir?


Roeb. Nay, if y're for Advice, farewell: Men of ripe understanding should
always despise What Babes only practice, and Dotards advise.

Exit singing.
Lean. Wild as Winds, and unconfined as Air. -- Yet I may reclaim him. His
follies are weakly founded, upon the Principles of Honor, where the very
Foundation helps to undermine the Structure. How charming would Virtue look in
him, whose behavior can add a Grace to the unseemliness of Vice!


Enter Lucinda.
Luc. What is the Gentleman gone?


Lean. Yes, Madam. He was instantly taken ill with a violent pain in his
Stomach, and was forced to hurry away in a Chair to his Lodging.


Luc. Oh poor Gentleman! He Is one of those conceited fools that think no Female
can resist their Temptations. Blockheads, that imagine all Wit to consist in
blaspheming Heaven and Women. -- I Will feed his Vanity, but starve his Love.

And may all Coxcombs meet no better Hate,
Who doubt our Sex Virtue, or dare prompt our hate.
Exit.
SCENE Lyrick's Chamber in Widow Bullfinch 's house; Papers scattered about the
Table, himself sitting writing in a Nightgown and Cap.
Lyr. Two as good Lines as ever were written. --

Rising. I gad I shall maull these topping fellows. -- Says Mr. Lee,

Let there be not one Glimps, one Starry spark,
But God's meet Gods, and justle in the Dark.
Says little Lyrick,
Let all the Lights be burnt out to a Snuff,
And Gods meet Gods, and play at Blind-man's buff.
Very well!
Let Gods meet Gods, and so -- fall out and cuff.
That Is much mended. They Are as noble Lines as ever were penn'p. Oh, here comes
my damned Muse; I Am always in the Humor of writing Elegy after a little of her
Inspiration.


Enter Bullfinch.
Bull. Mr. Lyrick, what do you mean by all this? Here you have lodged two years
in my house, promised me Eighteen-pence a week for your Lodging, and I have
never received eighteen farthings, not the value of that, Mr Lyrick Snapes with
her fingers you always put me off with telling me of your Play, your Play. --
Sir, you shall play no more with me, I Am in earnest.


Lyr. This living on Love is the dearest Lodging -- a Man's eternally dunn'd,
tho perhaps he have less of one ready Coin than the other. -- There Is more
trouble in a Play than you imagine, Madam.


Bull. There Is more trouble with a Lodger than you think, Mr. Lyrick.


Lyr. First there is the decorum of Time.


Bull. Which you never observe, for you keep the worst hours of any Lodger in
Town.


Lyr. Then there is the exactness of Characters. --


Bull. And you have the most scandalous one I ever heard.


Lyr. Then there is laying the Drama. --


Bull. Then you foul my Napkins and Towels. (...)


Lyr. Then there are preparations of Incidents, working the Passions, Beauty of
Expression, Closeness of Plot, Justness of Place, Turn of Language, Opening the
Catastrophe. --


Bull. Then you wear out my Sheets, burn my Fire and Candle, dirty my House,
eat my Meat, destroy my Drink, wear out my Furniture -- I have lent you Money
out of my Pocket.


Lyr. Was ever poor Rogue so ridden? If ever the Muses had a Horse, I am he. --
Faith Madam, poor Pegasus is Jaded.


Bull. Come, come, Sir, he shall not slip his Neck out of the Collar for all that.
Money I will have, and Money I must have; let your Play and you both be damned.


Lyr. Well, Madam, my Bookseller is to bring me some twenty Guinea's for a few
Sheets of mine presently, which I hope will free me from your Sheets.


Bull. My Sheets, Mr. Lyrick! Pray what do you mean? I Will assure you, Sir, my
Sheets are finer than any of your Muses spinning. -- Marry come up.


Lyr. Faith you have spun me so fine, that you have almost cracked my Thread of
Life, as may appear by my Spindle-shanks.


Bull. Why sure -- Where was your Thalia, and your Melpomene, when the Tailor
would have stripped you of your Silk Wastcoat, and have clapped you on a
Stone-doublet? Would all your Golden Verse have paid the Sergeants Fees?


Lyr. Truly, you freed me from Gaol, to confine me in a Dugeon; you did not
ransom me, but bought me as a slave; So, Madam, I Will purchase my freedom as
soon as possible. Flesh and Blood cannot bear it.


Bull. Take your course, Sir. -- There were a couple of Gentlemen just now to
enquire for you; and if they come again, they shall not be put off with the old
story of your being abroad, I Will promise you that, Sir,

Exit.
Lyr. Zoons! if this Bookseller does not bring me Money --

Enter Pamphlet. Oh, Mr. Pamphlet, your Servant. Have you perused my Poems?


Pam. Yes, Sir, and there are some things very well, extraordinary well, Mr.
Lyrick: but I don't think'em for my purpose. -- Poetry's a mere Drug, Sir.


Lyr. Is that because I take Physic when I write? Damn this costive fellow,
now he does not apprehend the Joke.


Pam. No, Sir; but your name does not recommend'em. One must write himself into
a Consumption before he gain Reputation.


Lyr. That Is the way to lie abed when his Name's up. Now I lie abed before I
can gain Reputation.


Pam. Why so ad^r?


Lyr. Because I have scarcely any Clothes to put on. -- If ever man did Penance
in a White Sheet --


Pam. You stand only sometimes in a White Sheet for your offenses with your
Landlady. Faith, I have often wondered how your Muse could take such flights,
yoked to such a Cartload as she is.


Lyr. Oh, they are like the Irish Horses, they draw best by the Tail -- Have
you ever seen any of my Burlesque, Mr. Pamphlet? I have a Project of turning
three or four of our most topping fellows into Doggrel. As for Example; --

Reads. Conquest with Laurels has our Arms adorned,
And Rome in tears of Blood our anger mourned.
Now, Butchers with Rosemary have our Beef adorned.
Which has in Gravy Tears our Hunger mourned.
How do you like it, Mr. Pamphlet, ha? -- Well --
Like Gods, we passed the rugged Alpine Hills;
Melted our way, and drove our hissing Wheels;
Through cloudy Deluges, Eternal Rills.
Now observe, Mr. Pamphlet; pray observe.
Like Razors keen, our Knives cut passage clean
Through Rills of Fat, and Deluges of Lean.

Pam. Very well, upon my Soul.


Lyr. Hurled dreadful Fire and Vinegar infused.


Pam. Ay, Sir, Vinegar! how patly that comes in for the Beef, Mr. Lyrick! It Is
all wondrous fine indeed.


Lyr. This is the most ingenious fellow of his Trade that I have seen; he
understands a good thing. -- Aside. -- But as to our business. -- What are you
willing to give for these Poems? Prithee say something. There are about three
thousand lines. -- Here, take'em for a couple of Guinea's.


Pam. No, Sir, Paper is so excessive dear that I dare not venture upon'em.


Lyr. Well, because you're a Friend, I Will bestow'em upon you. -- Here, take'em
all. -- There Is the hopes of a Dedication still.

Aside.
Pam. I give you a thousand thanks, Sir; but I dare not venture the hazard;
they will never quit cost indeed, Sir.


Lyr. This fellow is one of the greatest Blockheads that ever was Member of a
Corporation. -- How shall I be revenged?


Enter Boy.
Boy. Sir, there are two Men below desire to have the Honor of kissing your
hand.


Lyr. They must be Knaves or Fools, By their fulsome Complement. Hark ye --
Whispers the Boy. -- Bid'em walk up.


Pam. Since you have got Company, Sir, I Will take my leave.


Lyr. No, no, Mr. Pamphlet, by no means! we must drink before we part. Boy, a
Pint of Sack and a Toast. These are two Gentlemen out of the Country, who will
be for all the new things lately published; they will be good Customers. -- Come,
sit down. -- You have not seen my Play yet? -- Here, take the Pen, and if you
see any thing amiss, correct it; I Will go bring'em up. -- -- Stay, lend me your
Hat and Wig, or I shall take cold going down Stairs.

[He takes Pamphlet's Hat and Wig, and puts his Cap on Pamphlet's Head.
Pam. (Solas) This is a right Poetical Cap; it is Bays the outside, and the
Lining Fustian. -- [Reading.] -- This is all stuff, worse than his Poems.


Enter two Bailiffs behind him, and clap him on the shoulder.
1 Bail. Sir, you're the King's Prisoner.


Pam. That Is a good Fancy enough, Mr. Lyrick. But pray don't interrupt me, I Am
in the best Scene. -- I gad the Drama is very well laid.


2 Bail. Come, Sir.


Pam. Well, well, Sir, I Will pledge ye. Prithee now good Mr. Lyrick do'nt
disturb me. --

And furious Lightnings brandished in her Eyes.
That Is true Spirit of Poetry.


1 Bail. Zoons, Sir, do you banter us?

[Takes him under each arm, and hauls him up.
Pam. Gentlemen -- I beg you pardon. How do you like the City Gentlemen? If you
have any occasion for Books to carry into the Country, I can furnish you as
well as any man about Paul's. Where Is Mr. Lyrick.


1 Bail. These Wits are damnable Cunning. I always have double Fees for
Arresting one of you Wits. All your Evasions will not do; we understand trap, Sir;
you must not think to catch old Birds with Chaff, Sir.


Pam. Zoons, Gentlemen, I Am not the Person; I Am a Freeman of the City; I have
good Effects, Gentlemen, good Effects. Do You think to make a Fool of me I Am a
Bookseller, no Poet.


2 Bail. Ay, Sir, we know what you are by your Fools Cap there.


1 Bail. Yes, one of you Wits would have passed upon us for a Corncutter
yesterday; and was so like one, we had almost believed him.

[Hauls him.
Pam. Why Gentlemen, Gentlemen, Officers, have a little Patience, and Mr.
Lyrick will come up Stairs.


1 Bail. No, no; Mr. Lyrick shall go down Stairs. He would have us wait till
some Friends come into rescue him. Ah these Wits are Devilish Cunning. --

Exit hauling Pamphlet.
Enter Lyrick, Mockmode, and Club; Lyrick dressed.
Lyr. Ha, ha, ha. Very Poetical Faith; a good Plot for a Play, Mr. Mockmode; a
Bookseller bound in Calves-Leather. -- Ha, ha, ha. -- How they walked along
like the three Volumes of the English Rogue squeezed together on a shelf.


Mock. What was it, what was it, Mr. Lyrick?


Lyr. Why, I am a States man, Sir. -- I cannot but laugh, to think how they will
sponge the sheet before the Errata be blotted out; and then how he will hamper
the Dogs for false Imprisonment.


Mock. But pray what was the matter, Mr. Lyrick!


Lyr. Nothing, Sir, but a Shurking Bookseller that owed me about Forty Guinea's
for a few lines. He would have put me off, so I sent for a couple of Bull-Dogs,
and Arrested him.


Mock. Oh Lord, Mr. Lyrick, Honesty's quite out of doors; it is a rare thing to
find a man that is a true Friend, a true Friend is a rare thing indeed! -- Mr.
Lyrick, will you be my Friend? I only want that Accomplishment. I have got a
Mistress, a Dancing and Fencing-Master; and now I want only a Friend, to be a
fine Gentleman.


Lyr. Have you never had a Friend, Sir?


Mock. Yes, a very honest fellow; our Friendship commenced in the
College-Cellar, and we loved one another like two Brothers, till we unluckily
fell out afterward at a Game at Tables.


Lyr. I find then that neither of ye lost by the fet.

Aside. But my short acquaintance cannot recommend me to such a Trust.


Mock. Pshaw! Acquaintance? -- You must be a man of Honor, as you're a Poet,
Sir.


Lyr. But what use would you make of a Friend, Sir?


Mock. Only to tell my Secreets too, and be my Second. -- Now, Sir, a Wit must
be best to keep a Secret, because what you say to one's prejudice will be
thought malice. Then you must have a Devilish deal of Courage by your Heroic
Writing. --

But know, that I alone am King of Me.

Heavens! sure the Author of that Line must be a plaguey stout fellow; it makes
me Valiant as Hector when I read it.


Lyr. Sir, we stick to what we write as little as Divines to what they preach.
-- Besides, Sir, there are other qualifications requisite in a Friend, he must
lend you Money. Now, Sir, I cannot be that Friend, for I want forty Guinea's.


Mock. Sir, I can lend you fifty upon good security. -- 'Twas the last word my
Father spoke on his Deathbed, that I should never lend Money without security.


Lyr. Fie, Sir! Security from a Friend, and a Man of Honor by his Profession
too!


Mock. By the Universe, that is true, you are my Friend. Then I Will tell you a
Secret --

They whisper.
Club. Now will this plaguey Wit turn my Nose out of Joint -- I was my Master's
Friend before, though I never found the knack of borowing Money; though I have
received some marks of his Friendship, some sound drubs about the Head and
Shoulders, or so. I have been bound for him too, in the Stocks, for his
breaking Windows very often.


Lyr. Mr. Mockmode, you may be imposed upon. I would see this Lady you court. I
know Mr. Lovewell has a Mistress named Lucinda; but that she lodges in this
house, I much doubt.


Mock. Imposed upon. That Is very Comical. -- Ha, ha, ha! you shall see, Sir;
come. -- Pray Sir, you're my Friend.


Lyr. Nay, pray; Indeed, Sir, I beg your

[They Complement for the door.] Pardon; you're a 'Squire, Sir.


Mock. Zauns, Sir, you lie, I Am not a Fool; I Will take an affront from no man.
-- Draw, Sir.

Draws.
Club. Draw, Sir. -- I gad I Will put his Nose out of joint now.


Lyr. Unequal numbers, Gentlemen.


Club. I Am only my Master's Friend, his Second, or so, Sir.


Lyr. What Is the matter, noble Squire?


Mock. You lie again, Sir. Zauns, draw. --

strikes him with his sword.
Lyr. Ha! -- a blow! -- Essex, a blow -- yet I will be calm.


Club. Zoons, draw, Sir.

[Strikes him.
Lyr. Oh patience Heaven! -- Thou art my Friend still.


Mock. You lie, Sir.


Lyr. Then thou art a Traitor, Tyant, Monster.


Mock. Zauns, Sir, you're a Son of a Whore, and a Rascal.


Club. A Scribler.


Lyr. Ah, ah, -- That stings home. -- Scribler!


Mock. Ay, Scribler, Ballad-maker.


Lyr. Nay then -- I and the Gods will fight it with ye all.

Draws. Enter Roebuck drunk, and singing. France never will comply
Till her Claret run dry;
Then let us pull away, to defeat her:
He hinders the Peace,
Who refuses this Glass,
And deserves to be hanged for a Traitor.
Now, my Mirmydons fall on; I have taken off the odds.
Dub a dub, dub a dub, to the Battle.
Sings. Zoons Gentlemen, why don't ye fight? -- Blood fight. Oblige me so far
to fight a little; I long to see a little sport.


Lyr. Sir, I scorn to show sport to any man.

puts up.
Mock. And so do I, by the Universe.


Club. And I, by the Universe:


Lyr. I shall take another time.

Exit.
Roeb. Here Rascal, take your Chopping-knife, -- gives Club his Sword. and
bring me a Joint of that Coward's flesh for your Masters Supper. -- Fly, Dog.
--

Takes him by the Nose.
Club. Auh! -- This fellow's likeliest to put my Nose out of joint.


Roeb. Now, Sir, tell me, how you durst be a Coward?


Mock. Coward, Sir? I Am a Man of a great Estate, Sir; I have five thousand
Acres of as good fighting ground as any in England, good Terrafirma, Sir,
Coward, Sir! Have a care what you say, Sir. -- My Father was a Parliament Man,
Sir, and I was bred at the College, Sir.


Roeb. Oh then I know your Genealogy; your Father was a Senior-Fellow, and your
Mother was an Air-pump. You were suckl'd by Platonic Idea's, and you have some
of your Mothers Milk in your Nose yet.


Mock. Form the Proposition by Mode and Figure, Sir.


Roeb. I told you so. -- Blow your Nose Child, and have a care of dirting your
Philosophical slabbering-bib.


Mock. What do you mean, Sir?


Roeb. Your starched Band, set by Mode and Figure, Sir.


Mock. Band Sir? -- This fellow's blind, Drunk. I wear a Cravat, Sir?


Roeb. Then set a good face upon the matter. Throw off Childishness and Folly
with your hanging-sleeves. Now you have left the University, learn, learn.


Mock. This fellow's an Atheist, by the Universe; I Will take notice of him, and
inform against him for being Drunk. -- Pray, Sir, what is your Name?


Roeb. My name? by the Lord I have forgot. -- Stay, I shall think on it by and
by.


Mock. Zauns, forget your own Name! your memory must be very short, Sir.


Roeb, Ay, so it seems, for I was but, Christened this morning, and I have
forgot it already.


Mock. Was your Worship then Turk or Jew before? -- I knew he was some damned
bloody Dog. --

Aside.
Roeb. Sir, I have been Turk, or Jew rather, since; for I have got a plaguey
heathenish Name. -- Pox on it. -- Oh! now I have it. -- Mo -- Mock -- mo --
Mockmode.


Mock. Mockmode! Mockmode, Sir, Pray how do you spell it?


Roeb, Go you to your A, B, C. you came last from the University.


Mock. Sir, I Am called Mockmode. -- What Family are you of, Sir?


Roeb. What Family are you of, Sir?


Mock. Of Mockmode-Hall in Shropshire.


Roeb. Then I Am of the same, I believe. -- I fancy, Sir, that you and I are
near Relations.


Mock. Relations. Sir! There are but two Families; my Fathers, who is now dead,
and his Brothers, Colonel Peaceable Mockmode.


Roeb. Ay, ay, the very same Colonel Peaceable. -- -- Is not he Colonel of
Militia?


Mock. Yes, Sir.


Roeb. And was not he High Sheriff of the County last year?


Mock. The very same, Sir.


Roeb. The very same; I Am of that Family. -- And your Father died about -- let
me see --


Mock. About half a year ago.


Roeb. Exactly. By the same token you got drunk at a Hunting-match that very
day seven-night he was buried.


Mock. This fellow's a Witch. -- But it looks very strange that you should be
Christened this morning. I Am sure your Godfathers had a plaguey deal to answer
for.


Roeb. Oh, Sir, I Am of age to answer for my self.


Mock. One would not think so, y're so forgetful. It Is two and twenty years
since I was Christened, and I can remember my name still.


Roeb. Come, we'll take a Glass of Wine, and that will clear our understanding.
We'll remember our friends.


Mock. You must excuse me, Sir. -- This is some Sharper.

Aside.
Roeb. Nay, prithee Cousin, good Cousin Mockmode, one Glass. I know you are an
honest fellow. We must remember our Relations in the Country indeed, Sir.


Mock. Oh, Sir, you're so short of memory, you can never call 'em to mind. You
have forgot your self, Sir. Mockmode is a Heathenish Name, Sir, and all that,
Sir. And so I beg your pardon, Sir. --

Exit
Roeb. Now were I Lawyer enough, by that little enquiry into that fellow's
Concerns, I could bring in a false Deed to cheat him of his Estate.

Enter Brush. Where the Devil is thy Master? You said I should find him here.


Brush. It Is impossible for you, or me, or any body, to find him.


Roeb. Why?


Brush. Because he has lost himself. The Devil has made a Juglers Ball of him I
believe. He Is here now; then Presto, pass in an instant. He has got some damned
business to day in hand.


Roeb. Ay, so it seems. -- I must be Squire Mockmode, and court an honorable
Mistress in the Devils name! Well, let my sober thinking Friend plot on, and
lay Traps to catch Futurity; I Am for holding fast the present. -- I have got
about twenty Guinea's in my Pocket; and whilst they last, the Devil take George
if he thinks of Futurity. I Will go hand in hand with Fortune.

She is an honest, giddy, reeling Punk;
My Head, her Wheel, turn round, and so we both are drunk.
Exit reeling.
The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE Lucinda's House.
Enter Leanthe, and Pindress following with Paper of Sweetmeats in her hand.
Pind. HEre, here,-Page; your Lady has sent you some Sweetmeats; but indeed
you shall not have 'em till you hire me.


Lean. She sent sower Sauce, when she made you the Bearer.

Aside.
Pind. Prithee now what makes you constantly so melancholy? Come you must be
merry, and shall be merry, I Will get you some Play-things.


Lean. I believe you want Play-things more than I. -- But I would be private
Pindress.


Pindress. Well, my Child, I Will be private with you; Boys and Girls should
still be private together; and we may be as retired as we please; for my
Mistress is reading in her Closet, and all the Servants are below. -- But what
Concerns have you? I Am sure such a little Boy can have no great business in
private.


Lean. I will try thee for once

Aside -- Yes, Mrs. Pindress, I have great inclination. --


Pin. To what? To do what, Sir? -- Don't name it: -- It Is all in vain. -- you
shall not do it, you need not ask it.


Lean. Only to kiss you. --

Kisses her.
Pen. Oh fie, Sir! Indeed I Will none of your kisses. Take it back again

Kisses him. Is it not the taste of the Sweetmeats very pretty about my Lips?


Lean. Oh hang your liquorish Chaps; you would fain be licking your Lips, I find
that.


Pin. Indeed, Mr. Page, I will not pay you the Kisses you won from me last night
at Cross-purposes; -- and you shall not think to keep my Pawn neither. -- Pray
give me my Hungary-bottle. -- As I hope to be saved I will have my
Hungary-bottle --

Rummaging him. -- I Am stronger than you. -- I Will carry you in, and throw you
upon the bed, and take it from you. --

Takes him up in her Arms,
Lean. Help! help! I shall be ravished! Help! help!


Enter Lucinda.
Luc. What Is the matter? -- Oh bless me!


Pin. Oh dear Madam, this unlucky Boy had almost spoiled me. Did not your
Ladyship hear me cry I should be ravished? I was so weak, I could not resist
the little strong Rogue; he whipped me up in his arms, like a Baby, and had not
your Ladyship come in --


Luc. What, Sirrah, would you debauch my Maid? you little Cock-Sparrow, must
you be Billing too? I have a great mind to make her whip you Sirrah.


Pind. Oh dear, Madam, let me do it. I Will take him into the Room and I will so
chastise him. --


Luc. But do you think you will be able, Pindress? I Will send one of the Men to
help you.


Pind. No, no, Madam; I could manage him with one hand. -- See here, Madam.

Takes him in her arms, and is running away.
Luc. Hold, hold. -- Is this you that the little strong Rogue had almost
Ravished? He snatched you up in his arms like a Baby. -- Ah Pindress, Pindress!
I see you are very weak indeed. -- Are not you ashamed, Girl, to debauch my
little Boy?


Pin. Your Ladyship gave me orders to make him merry, and divert his
melancholy, and I know no better way than to teize him a little. I Am afraid the
Boy is troubled with the Rickets, and a little shaking, Madam, would do him
some good.


Lean. I Am tired with impertinence, and have other business to mind.

Aside Exit.
Pin. I hope your Ladyship entertains no ill opinion of my Virtue.


Luc. Truly I don't know what to think on it: but I Have so good an opionion of
your sense, as to believe you would not play the fool with a Child.


Pind. W'ere all subject to playing the fool, if you continue your Resolution
in marrying of the first man that asks you the Question.


Luc. No, my mind's changed; I Will never marry any Man.


Pind. I dare swear that resolution breaks sooner, than the former. Aside. Ah
Madam, Madam! if you never believe Man again, you must never be Women again;
for though we are as cunning as Serpents, we are naturally as flexible too. Speak
ingeniously, Madam; If Mr. Lovewell should with an amorous whine and suppliant
cringe tell you a formal story, contrary to what we suspect, would you not
believe him?


Luc. What, believe his vain assertations, before the demonstration of my
senses? No, no; my Love's not so blind. Did I not see his Miss and his Child?
did I not behold him giving her Money? did I not hear him declare he would
settle her in a Lodging?


Pind. But, Madam, upon serious reflection, where is the great harm in all this?
Most Ladies would be over joy'd at such a discovery of their Lovers ability.
The Child seemed a lusty chopping Boy; and let me tell you, Madam, it must be a
lusty chopping Boy that got it.


Luc. Urge no farther in his defense; he is a Villain, and of all Villains that
I hate most, an hypocritical one. The Ladies give him the Epithet of modest,
and the Gentlemen that of sober Lovewell. Now methinks such a piece of
Debauchery sits so awkwardly on a person of his Character, that it adds an
unseemliness to the natural vileness of the Vice; and he that dares be a
Hypocrite in Religion, will certainly be one in Love. -- Stay, is not that he?

Pointing outward.
Pind. Yes, Madam; I believe he is going to the Park.


Luc. Call a couple of Chairs quickly; we'll thither Masqu'd. This day's
adventures argue some intended Plot upon me, which I may countermine by only
setting a Face upon the matter.

Puts her Masque on. For as Hypocrisy in men can move,
Here Is the best Hypocrite in Female Love.
On even scores designing Heaven took care;
Since Men false Hearts, that we false Faces wear.
Exit.
SCENE the Park.
Enter Lovewell and Lyrick meeting; Lyrick reading.
I Will rack thy Reputation, blast thy Fame,
And in strong grinding Satyr Gibbet up thy Name.
Lov. What, in a Rapture, Mr. Lyrick?


Lyr. A little Poetical fury, that is all. -- I Will 'Squire him; I Will draw his
Character for the Buffoon of a Farce; he shall be as famous in Ballad as Robin
Hood, or Little John; my Muses shall haunt him like Demons; they shall make him
more ridiculous than Don Quixote.


Lov. Because he encountered your Windmill-Pate. -- -- Ha, ha, ha. -- Come,
come, Mr. Lyrick, you must be pacified.


Lyr. Pacified, Sir! Zoons, Sir, he is a Fool, has not a grain of sense. Were he
an ingenious Fellow, or a Man of Parts, I could bear a kicking from him: But an
abuse from a Blockhead! I can never suffer it.

Pert Blockhead, who has purchased by the School
Just sense enough to make a noted Fool.
That stings, Mr. Lovewell.

Lov. Pray, Sir, let me see it.


Lyr. This is imperfect, Sir: But if you please to give your Judgment of this
Piece. -- [Gives him a Paper. It Is a Piece of Burlesque on some of our late
Writings.


Lov. Ay, you Poets mount first on the Shoulders of your Predecessors, to see
farther in making Discoveries; and having once got the upper-hand, you spurn
them under-foot. I think you should bear a Veneration to their very Ashes.


Lyr. Ay, if most of their Writings had been burnt. I declare, Mr. Lovewell,
their Fame has only made them the more remarkably faulty: Their great Beauties
only illustrate their greating Errors.


Lov. Well, you saw the new Tragedy last night; how did it please ye?


Lyr. Very well; it made me laugh heartily.


Lov. What, laugh at a Tragedy!


Lyr. I laugh to see the Ladies cry. To see so many weep at the Death of the
fabulous Hero, who would but laugh if the Poet that made 'em were hanged? On my
Conscience, these Tragedies make the Ladies vent all their Love and Honor at
their Eyes, when the same white Hankerchief that blows their Noses, must be a
Winding Sheet to the deceased Hero.


Lov. Then there is something in the Handkerchief to embalm him, Mr. Lyrick, Ha,
ha, ha. -- But what relish have you of Comedy?


Lyr. No satisfactory one -- My curiosity is fore-stall'd by a foreknowledge
of what shall happen. For as the Hero in Tragedy is either a whining cringing
Fool that is always a stabbing himself, or a ranting hectoring Bully that is for
killing everybody else: so the Hero in Comedy is always the Poet's Character.


Lov. What Is that?


Lyr. A Compound' of practical Rake, and speculative Gentleman, who always
bears of the great Fortune in the Play, and Shams the Beau and 'Squire with a
Whore or Chambermaid; and as the Catastrophe of all Tragedies is Death, so the
end of Comedies is Marriage.


Lov. And some think that the most Tragical conclusion of the two.


Lyr. And therefore my eyes are diverted by a better Comedy in the Audience
than that upon the Stage. -- I have often wondered why Men should be found of
seeing Fools ill represented, when at the same time and place they may behold
the mighty Originals acting their Parts to the Life in the Boxes. --


Lov. Oh be favorable to the Ladies, Mr. Lyrick, it is your Interest. Beauty is
the Deity of Poetry; and if you rebel, you will certainly run the Fate of your
first Parent, the Devil.


Luc. You're out, Sir. Beauty is a merciful Deity, and allows us sometimes to
be a little Atheistical; and it is so indulgent to Wit, that it is pleased with
it, though in the worst habit, that of Satyr. Besides, there can appear no
greater Argument of our Esteem, than Raillery, because it is still founded upon
Jealousy; occasioned by their preferring senseless Fops and Wealthy Fools to
Men of Wit and Merit, the great Upholders of the Empire.


Lov. Now I think these Favorites of the Ladies are more Witty than you.


Lyr. How so, pray, Sir?


Lov. Because they play the Fool, conscious that it will please; and you're a
Wit, when sensible that Coxcombs only are encouraged. I wonder, Mr. Lyrick,
that a man of your sense should turn Poet; you will hardly ever find a Man that
is capable of the Employment will undertake it.


Lyr. The reason of that is, every one that knows not a tittle of the matter
pretends to be a judge of it. -- By the Lard, Mr. Lovewell, I put the Critics
next to Plague, Pestilence and Famine in my Litany. -- Had you seen 'em last
night in the Pit, with such demure supercilious Faces -- their contemplative
Wigs thrust judiciously backwards; their hands rubbing their Temples to chaff
ill nature; and with a hissing venomous Tongue pronouncing. Pish! Stuff!
Intolerable! Damn him! -- Lord have mercy upon us.


Lov. Ay, and you shall have others as foolish as they are ill-natured; fond of
being thought Wits, who shall laugh outragiously at every smutty Jest; cry,
Very well, by Gad; that is fine, by Heavens; and if a Dystich of Rhyme happens,
they clap so damnably loud, that they drown the Jest.


Lyr. That Is the Jest. The Wit lies in their hands; and if you would tell a
Poet his Fortune, you must gather it from the Palmistry of the Audience; for as
nothing's ill said, but what is ill taken; so nothing's well said, but what is
well taken. And betweeen you and I, Mr. Lovewell, Poetry without these laughing
Fools, were a Bell without a Clapper; an empty sounding business, good for
nothing; and all we Professors might go hang our selves in the Bell-ropes.


Lov. Ha, ha, ha. -- But I thought Poetry was instructive.


Lyr. Oh Gad forgive me, that is true; To Ladies it is morally beneficial; For
you must know they are too nice to read Sermons; such Instructions are too
gross for their refined apprehensions: but any Precepts that may be instilled
by easy Numbers, such as of Rochester, and others, make great Converts. Then
they hate to hear a fellow in Church preach methodical Nonsense, with a
Firstly, Secondly, and Thirdly: but they take up with some of our modern Plays
in their Closet, where the Morallity must be Devilish Instructive. -- But I
must be gone; here comes the 'Squire. What in the name of wonder has he got
with him?


Lov. That which shall afford you a more plentiful Revenge than your Lampoon,
if you join with me in the Plot. To the better effecting of which, you must be
seemingly reconciled to him. --

Let Us step aside, and observe 'em while I give you a hint of the matter.

[Exeunt between the Scenes, and seem to confer and hearken.
Enter Mockmode, leading Trudge dressed like a Widow.
Mock. This is very fine Weather, blessed Weather indeed, Madam; 'twill do
abundance of good to the Grass and Corn.


Trud. Ay, Sir, the Days are grown a great length; and I think the Weather much
better here than in Ireland.


Mock. Why, Madam, were you ever there?


Trud, Oh no, not I indeed, Sir; but I have heard my first Husband (Rest his
Soul) say so; he was an Irish Gentlemen.


Mock. I find, Madam, you have loved your first Husband mightily, for you
affect his tone in discourse. -- Pray, Madam, what did that Mourning cost a
Yard?


Trud. Oh Lard, what shall I say now? it is none of mine.

Aside. It cost, Sir; let me see -- it cost about -- but it was my Steward
bought it for me, I never buy such small things.


Mock. By the Universe she must be plaguey Rich; I will be brisk.

Aside. Pray, Madam -- I -- I pray Madam, will you give us a Song?


Trud. A Song! Indeed then I had a good voice before, Mr. Roebuck spoiled it.


Mock. Mr. Roebuck? was that your first Husband's Name, Madam?

[Lov. behind.] She Will spoil all.


Trud. No, Sir; Roebuck was a Doctor, that let me blood under the Tongue for
the Quinsey, and made me hoarse ever since.


Mock: By the Universe she is a Widow, and I will be a little brisk. Madam, will
you grant me a small favor, and I will bend upon my knees to receive it. --

Kneels.
Trud. What is it, pray?


Mock. Only to take off your Garter.

Lovewell Enters. Zoons, her thick Leg will discover all. -- By your leave,
Sir, have you any pretensions to this Lady?

[Pushes Mockmode down.
Mock. I don't know whether this be an affront or not. -- Aside.) --
Pretensions, Sir? I have so great a Veneration for the Lady, that I honor any
man that has pretensions to her. -- Them me, Sir, may I crave the honor of your
Acquaintance?


Lov. No, Sir.


Mock. No, Sir! I gad that must be Wit, for it cannot be good Manners. -- Sir, I
respect all men of sense, and would therefore beg to know your Name.


Lov. No matter, Sir; I know your Name's Mockmode.


Mock. By the Universe, that is very Comical! that a fellow should pretend to
tell me my own Name! -- Another Question, if you please, Sir.


Lov. What is it, Sir?


Mock. Pray Sir, what is my Christened Name?


Lov. Sir, you don't know.


Mock. Zauns, Sir, would you persuade me out of my Christened Name? I Will lay
you a Guinea that I do know, by the Universe. --

Pulls a handful of Money out. Here Is Silver, Sir, here is Silver, Sir; I can
command as much Money as another, Sir; I am at Age, Sir, and I will not be
bantered. Sir.


Lov. Sir, you must know, that I baptize you Rival; for your Love to this Lady,
is the only sign of Christianity you can boast of. -- And now Sir, my name's
Lovewell.


Mock. Then I say, Sir, that your Love to that Lady is the only sign of a Turk
you can brag of. -- I wish Club were come.

Aside.
Lov. Sir, I shall certainly Circumcise you, if you make any farther
pretensions to Madam Lucinda here.


Mock. Circumcise me! Circumcise a Puddings end, Sir. -- Zauns, Sir, I Will be
judged by the Lady who merits Circumcission most, you or I, Sir. These
London-Blades are all stark mad; --

Lucinda enters, and observes Love. courting Trudge in dum signs. I met one
about two hours ago, that had forgot his Name, and this fellow would persuade
me now that I had forgot mine. Mr. Lyrick is the only man that speaks plain to
me. I must be Friends with him, because I find I may have occasion for such a
Friend; I Will find him out strait.

Exit.
Lov. Madam, will you walk. --

[Exit with Trudge.
Lucinda and Pindress come forward.
Luc. Now my doubts are removed.


Pin. Mine are-more puzzling. There must be something in this, more than we
imagine. You had best talk to him.


Luc. Yes, if my Tongne bore Poison in it, and that I could spit Death in his
face.


Pin. If he is lost, your hard usage this morning has occasioned it.


Luc. I Am glad on it; I Have gained by the loss, I despise him more now than e're
I loved him. That Passion which can stoop so low as that Blowze, is an Object
too mean for any thing but my scorn to level at.


Pin. This were a critical minute for your new Lover the 'Squire I fancy; Mr.
Lovewell's disgrace would bring him into favor prefently.


Lov. It certainly shall, if he be not as great a Fool as t'other's false.


Pin. You may be mistaken in your opinion of him, as much as you have been in
Mr. Lovewell.


Luc. No, Pindress, I shall find what I read in the last Miscellanies very true.

But two distinctions their whole Sex does part;
All Fools by Nature, or all Rogues by Art.
SCENE continues.


Enter several Masks crossing the Stage, and Roebuck following:
Roeb. 'Sdeath! what a Coney-burrough's here! The Trade goes swimingly on. This
is the great Empory of Lewdness, as the Change is of Knavery. -- The Merchants
cheat the World there, and their Wives gull them here. -- I begin to think
Whoring Scandalous, it is grown so Mechanical. -- My modesty will do me no good,
I fear. -- -- Madam, are you a Whore?


1 Mas. Yes, Sir.

[Catches a Masque.
Roeb. Short and pity. -- If ever Woman spoke truth, I believe thou have.

[Second Masque pulls him by the Elbow. Have you any business with me, Madam?


2 Mas. Pray, Sir be civil; you're mistaken, Sir. -- I have had an Eye upon
this fellow all this afternoon. Aside. you're mistaken, Sir.


Roeb. Very likely, Madam; for I imagined you modest.


2 Mas. So I am, for I Am married.


Roeb. And married to your forrow, I warrant you!


2 Mas. Yes, upon my Honor, Sir.


Roeb. I knew it. I have met above a dozen this Evening, all married to their
Sorrow. -- Then I suppose you're a Citizen's Wife; and by the broadness of your
bottom, I should geuss you sat very much behind a Counter.


2 Mas. My Husband's no Mercer, he is a Judge.


Roeb. Zoons! A Judge! I shall be arraigned at the Bar for keeping on my Hat so
long. -- It Is very hard, Madam, he should not do you Justice: Has not he an
Estate in Tail, Madam?


2 Mas. I seldom examine his Papers; They are a parcel of old dry shrvel'd
Parchments; and this Court-hand is so devilish crabbed, I cannot endure it.


Roeb. Umph! -- Then I suppose, Madam, you want a young Lawyer to put your Case
to. But faith, Madam, I Am a Judge too.


2 Mas. Oh Heavens forbid! such a young Man?


Roeb. That Is, I Will do nothing without a Bribe. -- Pray, Madam, how does that
Watch strike?


2 Mas. It never strikes, it only points to the business, as you must do,
without telling Tales. Dare you meet me two hours hence?


Roeb. Ay, Madam, but I shall never hit the time exactly without a Watch.


2 Mas. Well, take it. -- At Ten exactly, at the Fountain in the Middle Temple.
Cook upon Littleton be the word.

Exit.
Roeb. So -- If the Law be all such Volumes as thou, Mercy on the poor
Students. From Cook upon Littleton in Sheets deliver me.


Enter Lovewell.
Lov. What! engaged Mirmydon! I find you will never quit the Battle till you have
cracked a Pike in the Service.


Roeb. Oh dear friend! you are critically come to my Relief; for faith I Am
almost tired.


Lov. What a miserable Creature is a Whore! whom every Fool dares pretend to
love, and every Wise Man hates.


Roeb. What, morallizing again! Oh I Will tell thee News, Man; I Am entered in the
Inns, by the Lard.


Lov. Pshaw!


Roeb. Nay, if you will not believe me, see my Note of admission.

[shews the Watch.
Lov. A Gold Watch, boy?


Roeb. Ay, a Gold Watch, boy,


Lov. Whence had you money to buy it?


Roeb. I took it upon tick, and I design to pay honestly.


Lov. I don't like this running of the Score. -- But what News from Lucinda,
boy? Is she kind? ha?


Enter a Masque crossing the Stage.
Roeb. Ha! there is a stately Cruiser; I must give her one chase. -- I Will tell
you when I return.

Exit running.
Lov. I find he has been at a loss there, which occasions his eagerness for the
Game here. I begin to repent me of my suspicion; I believe her Virtue so sacred
that it is a piece of Atheism to distrust its Existence. But jealousy in Love,
like the Devil in Religion, is still raising doubts which without a firm Faith
in what we adore, will certainly damn us.


Enter a Porter.
Por. Is your name Mr. Roebuck, Sir?


Lov. What would you have with Mr. Roebuck, Sir?


Por. I have a small Note for him, Sir.


Lov. Let me see it.


Por. Ay, Sir, if your name be Mr. Roebuck, Sir.


Lov. My Name is Roebuck, Blockhead.


Por. God bless you, master.

[Gives him a Letter, and Exit.
Lov. This is some tawdry Billet, with a scrawling Adieu at the end on it. These
strolling Jades know a young wholesome fellow newly come to Town, as well as a
Parsons Wife does a fat Goose. It Is certainly some secret, and therefore shall
be known.

Opens the Letter. SIR, Tuesday three a Clock.
MY behavior toward you this morning was somewhat strange; but I shall tell
you the cause of it, if you meet me at Ten this night in our Garden; the
Backdoor shall be open.

Yours Lucinda.




Oh Heavens! certainly it cannot be! L, U, C, I, N, D, A; that spells Woman.
'Twas never written so plain before. Roebuck, you are as true an Oracle, as
she is a false one. Oh thou damned Sybil! I have courted thee these three years,
and could never obtain above a Kiss of the hand, and this fellow in an hour or
two has obtained the back door open. Mr. Roebuck, since I have discovered some
of your Secrets, I Will make bold to open some more of 'em. -- But how shall I
shake him off? -- Oh, I have it; I Will seek him instantly.

Exit.
Enter Roebuck meeting the Porter.
Roeb. Here, you Sir, have you a Note for one Roebuck?


Por. I had, Sir; but I gave it to him just now.


Roeb. You lie, Sirrah, I am the Man.


Por. I an't positive I gave it to the right person; but I Am very sure I did;
for he answered the Description the Page gave to a T, Sir.


Roeb. 'Twas well I met that Page, Dog, or now should I cut thy Throat, Rascal.


Por. Bless your Worship, Noble Sir.

Exit.
Roeb. At Ten, in the Garden! the backdoor open! -- Oh the delicious place and
hour! soft panting breasts! trembling Joints! melting Sighs! and eager
Embraces! -- Oh Ecstasy! -- But how to shake off Lovewell? -- This is his
nicely Virtuous! Ha, ha, ha. -- This is his innate Principle of Virtue? Ha, ha,
ha.


Enter Lovewell.
Lov. How now why so merry?


Roeb. Merry! why, 'twou'd make a Dog split, Man; Ha, ha, ha. -- The Watch Sir,
the Watch; Ha, ha, ha.


Lov. What of the Watch? you laugh by the hour; you will be run down by and by
sure.


Roeb. Ay, but I shall be wound up again. This Watch I had for a Fee, Lawyer:
-- Should I ever be tried before this Judge, how I should laugh, to see how
gravely his Goose-Caps sits upon a pair of Horns. Ha, ha, ha.


Lov. You Are Horn-mad. Prithee leave impertinence. I received a Note just now.


Roeb. A Note! 'Sdeath, what Note! what do you mean? who brought it?


Lov. A Gentleman; it is a Challenge.


Roeb. Oh, thanks to the Stars; I Am glad on it.

Aside.
Lov. And you may be signally serviceable to me in this affair. I can give you
no greater testimony of my Affection, than by making so free with you.


Roeb. What needs all this formality? I Will be thy second, without all this
impertinence.


Lov. There Is more than that, Friend. In the first place, I don't understand a
Sword; and again, I Am to be called to the Bar this Term, and such a business
might prejudice me extteamly. So, Sir, you must meet and fight for me.


Roeb. Faith, Lovewell, I shall not stick to cut a Throat for my Friend at any
time, so I may do it fairly, or so. -- The hour and place?


Lov. This very Evening, in Moorfields.


Roeb. Umph! How will you employ your self the while?


Lov. I Will follow you at a distance, lest you have any foul play.


Roeb. Which if you do. No, faith Ned, since I Am to answer an appointment for
you, you must make good an assignation for me. I Am to meet one of your Ladies
at the Fountain in the Temple to night. You may be called to the Bar there, if
you will. This Watch will tell you the hour, and shall be your Passport. Let
me have yours. --

[Changes Watches:
Lov. Oh, was that the Jest? Ha, ha, ha. -- Well, I will answer an Assignation
for you sure enough. Ha, ha, ha. -- How read ly does the Fool run to have his
Throat cut?

Aside.
Roeb. How eagerly now does my moral Friend run to the Devil, having hopes of
Profit in the Wind! I have shabb'd him off purely. -- But prithee, Ned, where
had you this fine Jewel?

Viewing one tied to the Watch.
Lov. Pshaw! a Trifle, a Trifle; from a Mistress. -- Take care on it though. But
hark ye, Goerge; don't push too home; have a care of whipping through the Guts.


Roeb. Gad I Am afraid one or both of us may fall. But do you hear, Ned, remember
you sent me on this Errant, and are therefore answerable for all mifchief; if I
do whip my Adversary through the Lungs, or so remember your set me upon it.


Lov. Well, honest George, you will not believe how much you oblige me in this
Courtesy.


Roeb. You know always I oblige my self by serving my Friend. -- I never
thought this Spark was a Coward before.

Aside.
Lov. I never imagined this Fellow was so easy before. -- Aside. Well, good
success to us both; and when we meet, we'll relate all Transactions that pass.


Roeb. That you're a Fool.


Lov. That you're an Ass.

[Exeunt severally, lauhging.
Re-Enter Lovewell crossing the Stage hastily, Mockmode and Lyrick following
him.
Lyr. Mr. Lovewell, a word w'ye.


Lov. Let it be short, pray Sir, for my business is urgent, and it is almost
dark.


Lyr. I Am reconciled to the Squire, and want only the Presentment of a Copy of
Verses, to ingratiate my self wholly thoroughly. Let me have that piece I lent
just now.


Lov. Ay, ay, with all my heart: -- Here, -- Farewell.

[Pulls the Poem hastily, and justles out a Letter with it, which Mockmod takes
up,
Lyr. Now, Sir, here is a Poem, (which according to the way of us Poets) I say
was written at fifteen; but between you and I it was made at five and twenty.


Mock. Five and twenty! -- When is a Poet at Age, pray Sir?


Lyr. At the third night of his first Play; for he is never a Man till then.


Mock. But when at years of discretion?


Lyr. When they leave Writing, and that is seldom or never.


Mock. But who are your Guardians?


Lyr. The Critics, who with their good will, would never let us come to Age.
But what have you got there?


Mock. By the Universe, I don't know; it is a Woman's hand; some Billet-deux, I
suppose; it justl'd out of Lovewell's Pocket. We'll to the next Light, and read
it.

Exeunt:
SCENE a dark Arbor in Lucinda's Garden
Enter Roebuck Solus.
Roeb. Oh how I reverence a back-dore half open, half shut! It Is the narrow
Gate to the Lovers Paradise; Cupid stood Centry at the entrance; Love was the
Word, and he let me pass -- Now is my friend pleading for Life; he has a
puzzling Case to manage Ten to one he is Nonsuted; I have gulled him fairly.


Enter Lovewell.
Lov. I Have got in, thanks to my Stars, or ^ather the Clouds, whose influence is
my best Friend at present. Now is Rocbuck gazing, or rather groping about for a
Fellow with a long sword; and I know his fighting humor will be as mad to be
balked by an Enemy, as by a Mistress.


Roeb. Hark, hark! I hear a Voice; it must be she. -- Lucinda!


Lov. True to the touch, I find. Is it you, my Dear


Roeb. Yes, my Dear.


Lov. Let me embrace thee, my heart.


Roeb. Come to my Arms. --

[Run into each others Arms. Finding the mistake, start back.
Lov. 'Slife! a Man!


Roeb. 'Sdeath! a Devil! -- And were thou a Legion, here is a Wand should
conjure thee down --

Draws.
Lov. We should find whose Charms is strongest.

Draws. [They push by one another; Roebuck passes out at the opposite door: and
as Lovewell is passing out on the other side of the Stage.
Enter Leanthe.
Lean. Mr. Roebuck? Sir? Mr. Roebuck?

[With a Nightgown over his Clothes.
Lov. That Is a Woman's Voice, I Will swear. -- Madam? --


Lean. Sir.


Lov. Come, my dear Lucinda; I Have staid a little too long; but making an
Apology now were only lengthening the offense. Let Us into the Arbor, and make
up for the moments misspent.


Lean. Hold, Sir. Do you love this Lucinda you're so fond of hauiing into the
Arbor?


Lov. Yes, by all that is powerful.


Lean. False, false Roebuck! -- Aside. -- I am lost.


Lov. Madam, do you love this Roebuck, that you opened the Garden door to so
late?


Lean. I Am afraid I do too well.


Lov. And did you never own an affection to another?


Lean. No, witness all those Powers you just now mentioned.


Lov. Revenge your selves, ye Heavens. Behold in me your Accuser and your
Judge. Behold Lovewell, injured Lovewell. -- This darkness, which opportunely
hides your blushes, makes your shame more Monstrous.


Lean. Ha! Lovewell! I Am vexed it is he, but glad to be mistaken. -- Now Female
Policy assist me.


Lov. Yes, Madam, your silence prolaims you Guilty -- Farewell Woman.


Lean. Ha, ha, ha.


Lov. What am I made your scorn?


Lean. Ha, ha, ha. -- This happens better than I expected. -- Ha, ha, ha. --
Mr. Lovewell!


Lov. No Counter-plotting, Madam, the Mine Is sprung already and all your deceit
discovered.


Lean. Indeed you're a fine fellow at discovering deceits, I must confess, that
could not find whether I was a Man or a Woman all this time.


Lov. What, the Page!


Lean. No Counter-plotting, good Sir, the Mine Is sprung already. -- Ah, Sir, I
fancy Mr. Roebuck is better at discovering a Man from a Woman in the dark, than
you.


Lov. This discovery is the greatest Riddle! -- Prithee, Child, what makes thee
disguised? But above all, what meant that Letter to Roebuck?


Lean. Then I find you intercepted it. -- Why, Sir, my Lady had a mind to put a
trick upon the impudent Fellow, made him an Assignation, and sent me in her
stead, to banter him, But when I tell her how you fell into the snare, and how
jealous you were. -- Ha, ha, ha.


Lov. Oh my little dear Rogue! was that the matter? -- [Hugs her.] Of My
Conscience you are so soft, I believe thou art a Woman still. -- But who was
that Man I encountted just now?


Lean. A Man! 'Twas certainly Roebuck. -- Aside. Some of the Footmen, I
suppose. -- Come, Sir, I must Conduct you out immediately, lest some more of
'em-meet you. [Conducts him to the door, and returns.

He certainly was here, and I have missed him.
Fortune delights with Innocence to play,
And Love's to hoodwink those already blind.
Wary deceit can many by-ways tread,
To shun the blocks in Virtues open Road,
Whilst heedless Innocence still falls on Ruin
Yet, whilst by Love inspired, I will pursue;
What Men by Courage, we by Love can do.
Not even his falsehood shall my Claim remove;
From mutual Fires none can true passion prove;
For like to like, is Gratitude, not Love.

The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV.
SCENE, An Antichamber in Lucinda's house; The Flat Scene half open, discovers
a Bedchamber; Lucinda in her Nightgown, and reading by a Table.
Enter Roebuck groping his way.
R^^b. ON what new happly Climate am I thrown?

This house is Loves Labyrinth; I have stumbled into it by chance. -- Ha! an
Illusion! Let me look again. -- Eyes, if you play me false, (Looking about)
I Will pluck ye out. -- It Is she; it is Lucinda! alone, undressed, in a
Bedchamber, between Eleven and Twelve a Clock. -- A blessed opportunity! --
Now if her innate Principle of Virtue defend her, then is my innate Principle
of Manhood not worth Twopence. -- Hold, she comes forward. -- [ Lucinda
approaches, reading.


Luc. Unjust Prerogative of faithless Man,
Abusing Power which partial Heaven has granted!
In former Ages, Love and Honor stood
As Props and Beauties to the Female Cause;
But now lie prostitute to scorn and sport.
Man, made our Monarch, is a Tyrant grown,
And Womankind must bear a second Fall.

Roeb. Aside. Ay, and a third too, or I Am mistaken. -- I must divert this
plaguey Romantic humor.


Luc. While Virtue guided Peace, and Honor War,
Their Fruits and Spoils were offerings made to Love.

Roeb. And it is so still; for (Raising his Voice.)
Beau with earliest Cherries Miss does grace,
And Soldier offers spoils of Flanders Lace.

Luc. Ha! -- Protect me Heavens! what art thou?


Roeb. A Man, Madam.


Luc. What accursed Spirit has driven you hitherto?


Roeb. The Spirit of Flesh and Blood, Madam.


Luc. Sir, what Encouragement have you ever received to prompt you to this
Impudence?


Roeb. Umph! I must not own the reception of a Note from her. Aside. Faith,
Madam, I know not whether to attribute it to Chance, Fortune; my good Stars, my
Fate, or my Destiny: But here I am, Madam, and here I will be.

[Taking her by the hand.
Luc. Pulling her hand away. If a Gentleman, my Commands may cause you
withdraw; If a Russian, my Footmen shall dispose of you.


Roeb. Madam, I Am a Gentleman; I know how to oblige a Lady, and how to save her
Reputation. My Love and Honor go linked together; they are my Principles: and
if you will be my Second, we'll engage immediately.


Luc. Stand off, Sir; the name of Love and Honor are burlesqu'd by thy
Professing 'em. Thy Love is Impudence, and thy Honor a Cheat. Thy Mien and
Habit show thee a Gentleman? but thy behavior is Brutal. Thou art a Centaur;
only one part Man, and the other Beast.


Roeb. Philosophy in Peticoats! No wonder Women wear the Breeches; aside. and,
Madam, you are a Demi-Goddess; only one part Woman, the other Angel; and thus
divided, claim my Love and Adoration.


Luc. Honorable Love is the Parent of mankind; but thine is the Corruptor and
Debaser of it. The Passion of you Libertines is like your Drunkeness; heat of
Lust, as the other is of Wine, and off with the next Sleep.


Roeb. No, Madam; an Hair of the same -- is my Receipt -- Come, come, Madam,
all things are laid to rest that will disturb our Pleasure, whole Nature
favors us; the kind indulgent Stars that directed me hither, wink at what we
are about. 'Twere Jilting of Fortune to be now idle, and she, like a true
Woman, once balked, never affords a second opportunity. -- I Will put out the
Candle, the Torch of Love shall light us to Bed.


Luc. To Bed, Sir! Thou have Impudence enough to draw thy Rationality in
Question. Whence proceeds it? From a vain thought of thy own Graces, or an
opinion of my Virtue? -- If from the latter, know that I am a Woman, whose
modesty dare not doubt my Virtue; yet have so much Pride to support it, that
the dying Groans of thy whole Sex at my feet should not extort an immodest
thought from me.


Roeb. Your thoughts may be as modest as you please, Madam. -- You shall be as
Virtuous to morrow morning as e're a Nun in Europe, the opinion of the World
shall proclaim you such, and that is the surest Charter the most rigid Virtue in
England is held by. The Night has no Eyes no to see, nor have I a Tongue to
tell: One kiss shall seal up my Lips for ever.


Luc. That uncharitable Censure of Women, argues the meaness of thy
Convertation.


Roeb. Her superior Virtue awes me into coldness. 'Slife! it cannot be Twelve
sure. -- -- Night's a Liar.

Draws out his Watch.
Luc. Sir, if you will not be gone, I must fetch those shall Conduct you hence.
--! my Eyes are dazzled sure, [Passing by him toward the door, she perceives
the Jewel tied to the Watch. Pray, Sir let me see that Jewel.


Roeb. By Heavens she has a mind to it! -- Oh, it is at your service with all my
Soul.


Luc. Wrong not my Virtue by so poor a thought. -- But answer directly, as you
are a Gentleman, to what I now shall ask: whence had you that Jewel?


Roeb. I exchanged Watches with a Gentleman, and had this Jewel into the
bargain. He valued it not, 'twas a Trifle from a Mistress.


Luc. A Trifle said he? -- Oh Indignation! slighted thus! -- I Will put a Jewel
out of his power, that he would pawn his Soul to retrieve. -- If you be a
Gentleman, Sir, whom Gratitude can work up to Love, or a Virtuous Wife reclaim,
I Will make you a large return for that Trifle.


Roeb. Hey-day! a Wife said she!


Luc. What Is your Name, Sir? and of what Country?


Roeb. My Name's Roebuck, Madam.


Luc. Roebuck.


Roeb. 'Sdeath! I forgot my Instructions. -- Mockmode, Madam. -- Roebuck
Mockmode, my Name, and Surname.


Luc. Mockmode my 'Squire! it cannot be! But if it should, I Have made the better
Exchange. -- Of what Family are you, Sir?


Roeb. Of Mockmode-Hall i^ Shropshire, Madam. My Father's lately dead; I came
lately from the University; I have fifteen hundred Acers of as good fighting
Ground as any in England. -- 'Twas lucky I met that Blockhead to day.

Aside.
Luc. The very same. -- And had you any directions to couat a Lady in London.


Roeb. Umph! -- How should I have found the way hither else, Madam. What the
Devil will this come to?

Aside.
Luc. My Fool that I dreamt of, I find a pretty Gentleman. -- Dreams go by
contraries. -- Well, Sir, I am the Lady; and if your Designs are Honorable,
I Am yours, take a turn in the Garden, till I send for my Chaplain, you must
take me immediately, for if I cool, I Am lost for ever.


Roeb. I think I am become a very sober Shropshire Gentleman in good earnest; I
don't start at the name of a Parson. -- Oh Fortune! Fortune! what art thou
doing? If thou and my Friend will throw me into the arms of a fine Lady, and
great Fortune, how the Devil can I help it! Oh but, Zoons, there is Marriage!
Ay, but there is Money. -- Oh but there are Children; sqawling Children. Ay but
then there are Rickets and Smallpox, which perhaps may carry them all away. --
Oh but there is Horns! Horns! Ay, but then I shall go to Heaven, for it is but
reasonable, since all Marriages are made in Heaven, that all Cuckolds should go
thither. -- But then there is Leanthe! That sticks. I love her, witness, Heaven,
I love her to that degree. -- Pshaw, I shall whine presently. I love her as
well as any Woman; and what can she expect more? I cannot drag a Lover's Chain a
hundred Miles by Land and a hundred Leagues by Water. -- Fortune has decreed it
otherwise. -- So lead on, blind Guide, I follow thee; and when the blind lead
the blind, no wonder they both fall into -- Matrimony.

Going out, meets Leanthe. Oh my dear auspicious little Mercury! let me kiss
thee. -- Go tell thy Charming Mistress I obey her Commands.

Exit.
Enter Leanthe.
Lean. Her Commands! Oh Heavens! I must follow him.

going.
Luc. Page, Page.


Lean. Oh my cursed Fortune! balked again! -- Madam.


Luc. Call my Chaplain; I Am to be married presently.


Lean. Married so suddenly! To whom, pray Madam?


Luc. To the Gentleman you met going hence just now.


Lean. Oh Heavens! your Ladyship is not in earnest, Madam?


Luc. What, is Matrimony to be made a Jest of? don't be impertinent, Boy; call
him instantly.


Lean. What shall I do? -- Oh, Madam, suspend it till the morning, for Heaven's
sake. Mr. Lovewell is in the House; I met him not half an hour ago; and he will
certain^^ kill the Gentleman, and perhaps harm your Ladyship.


Luc: Lovewell in my house! How came he hither?


Lean. I know not, Madam, I saw him and talked to him; he had his Sword drawn,
and he threatened every body. Pray delay it to night, Madam.


Luc. No, I Am resolved; and I Will prevent his discovering us; I Will put on a suit
of your Clothes, and order Pindress to carry her Night Gown to the Gentleman in
the Garden, and bid him meet me in the lower Arbor, in the West Corner, and
send the Chaplain thither instantly.

Exit.
Lean. Hold, Fortune, hold; thou have entirely won;
For I am lost. Thus long I have been racked
On thy tormenting Wheel, and now my Heart Strings break.
Discovering who I am, exposes me to shame.
Then what on Earth can help me?

Enter Pindress.
Pind. Oh Lord, Page, what is the matter? Here Is old doings, or rather new
doings. Prithee let you and I throw in our Twopence a piece into this
Marriage-Lottery.


Lean. You Will draw nothing but Blanks, I Will assure you, from me. -- But stay,
let me consider of the business.


Pin. No consideration; the business must be done hand over head.


Lean. Well, I have one Card to play still; and with you, Pindress.

Takes her hand.
Pin. You expect though that I should turn up Trumps?


Lean. No, not if I shuffle right.

Aside. -- Well, Pindross, it is a Match. Be gone to the lower Arbor at the West
Corner of the Garden, and I Will come to thee immediately with the Chaplain. You
must not whisper, for we must pass upon the Chaplain for my Lady and the
Gentleman. -- Haste.


Pin. Shall Not I put on my New Gown first?


Lean. No, no; you shall have a Green Gown for your Wedding in the Arbor.


Pin. A Green Gown? -- Well, all Flesh is Grass.


Lean. Make haste, my sponse, fly.


Pin. And will you come? will you be sure to come? -- O my litlte Green
Gooseberry, my Teeth waters at ye. --

Exit.
Lean. Now Chance. -- No, you are blind.

Then Love, be thou my Guide, and set me right;
Though blind, like Chance, you have best Eyes by Night.
Exit.
SCENE Bullfinches's House.
Enter Lovewell, Brush, and Servant.
Lov. Mr. Lyrick abroad, say thou? and Mockmode with him?


Serve. All abroad, my Mistress and all.


Lov. I don't understand this. -- Brush, run to Lucinda's Lodgings, and observe
what is a doing there: I spied some hasty Lights glancing through the Rooms; I Will
follow you presently.

(Exit Brush. -- Cannot you inform me which way they went:


Serve. Perhaps Mr. Mockmodes's man can inform ye.


Lov. Pray call him.


Serve. Mr. Club, Mr, Club.


Lov. What is the follow deaf?


Serve. No, Sir; but he is asleep, and in bed. -- Mr. Club, Mr. Club.


Club. Augh --

yawning I Am asleep, I Am asleep; don't wake me. -- Augh.


Serve. Here Is a Getleman wants ye.


Enter Club, with his Coat unbutten'd, his Garter's unti'd, scratching and
yawning, as newly weakened from Bed.
Club. Pox of your London-breeding; what makes you waken a Man out of his sleep
that way.


Lov. Where Is your Master, pray Sir?


Club. Augh. -- It Is a sad thing to be broken of ones rest this way.


Lov. Can you inform me where your Master's gone?


Club. My Master? -- Augh --

stretching and yawning.
Lov. Yes, Sir, your Master,


Club. My Master? -- Augh -- What a Clock is it, Sir? I believe it is past
Midnight, for I have gotten my first sleep -- Augh. --


Lov. You Are asleep still, Blockhead. Answer me, or -- where is your Master?


Club. Augh -- I had the pleasantest Dream when you called me -- Augh -- I
thought my Master's great black Stone-horse, had broke loose among the Mares --
Augh -- and so, Sir, you called me -- Augh -- and so I wakened.


Love. Sirrah, strikes him -- Now your dream's out, I hope.


Club. Zauns, Sir! what do you mean, Sir? My Master's as good a Man as you, Sir;
Them me, Sir?


Lov. Tell me presently, where your Master is, Sirrah, or I Will dust the secret
out of your Jacket.


Club. Oh, Sir, your Name's Lovewell, Sir!


Love. What then, Sir?


Club. Why then my Master is -- where you are not, Sir. -- My Master's in a
fine Ladies Arms, and you are -- liere, I take it.

Shrugging.
Lov. Has he got a Whore a Bed with him?


Club. He may be Father to the Son of a Whore by this time, if your Mistress
Lucindae be one, Mr. Lyrick did his business, and my Master will do her
business I warrant him, if of the right Shropshire breed which I Am sure he is,
for my Mother nursed him on my Milk.


Lov. Two Calves suckl'd on the same Cow -- Ha, ha, ha. Gramercy Poet, has he
brought the Play to a Catastrophe so soon? A rare Executioner, to clap him in
the Female Pillory already! Ha, ha, ha.


Club. Ay, Sir; and a Pillory that you would give your Ears for, I warrant you
think my Master's over head and ears in the Irish Quagmire you would have
drowned him in. But, Sir, we have found the bottom on it.


Lov. He may pass over the Quagmire, Sirrah, for there were Stepping stones
laid in his way.


Club. He has got over dry-shod, I Will assure you. -- Pray, Sir, did not you
receive a Note from Lucinda, the true Lucinda, to meet her at Ten in her Garden
to Night. -- Why don't you laugh now? Ha, ha, ha.


Lov. 'Sdeath, Rascal, What Intelligence could you have of that?


Club. Hold, Sir, I have more Intelligence. You threw Mr. Lyrick his Poem in a
hurrey in the Park, and justled that sweet Letter out of your Pocket, Sir. This
Letter fell into my Master's hands, Sir, and discovered your Sham, Sir, your
Trick, Sir. Now Sir, I think you're as deep in the Mud as he is in the Mire.


Lov. Cursed misfortune! -- And where are they gone, Sir? Quickly, the Truth,
the whole Truth, Dog, or I Will spit you like a Sparrow.


Club. I design to tell you, Sir. Mr. Lyrick, Sir, being my Master's intimate
Friend, or so, upon a Bribe of a hundred Pounds, or so, has sided with him,
taken him to Lucinda's Garden in your stead, and there is a Parson, and all, and
so forth. -- Now, Sir, I hope the Poet has brought the Play to a very good Cata
-- Cata -- what do you call him, Sir?


Lov. 'Twas he I incounter'd in the Garden. -- 'Sdeath! Tricked by the Poet!
I Will cut off one of his Limbs, I Will make a Synelepha of him; I Will --


Club. He, he, he! -- Two Calves sucked on the same Cow! -- He, he! --


Lov. Nay then I begin with you.

Drubs him.
Club. Zauns! Murder! Them me! Zauns! Murder! Zauns!

[Runs off, and Lovewell after him.
SCENE changes to the Antichamber in Lucinda 's house; a Hat, and Sword on the
Table. Enter Brush.
Brush. I have been peeping and crouching about like a Cat a Mousing. Ha! I
smell a Rat -- A Sword and Hat! -- There are certainly a pair of Breeches
appertaining to these, and may be lap'd up in my Ladies Lavender, who knows! --

listens.
Enter Lovewell in a hurry.
Lov. What, Sir? What are you doing? I Am ruined tricked. --


Brush. I believe so too, Sir. -- See here. --

)Shows the Hat and Sword.
Lov. By all my hopes, Roebuck's Hat and Sword. This is mischief upon mischief.
Run you to the Garden, Sirrah; and if you find any body, secure 'em; I Will
search the House. -- I Am ruined! -- Fly. -- Roebuck? -- what hoa? -- Roebuck?
-- hoa?


Enter Roebuck unbutton'd; runs to Lovewell, and embraces him.
Roeb. Dear, dear Lovewell, wish me Joy, wish me Joy, my Friend.


Lov. Of what, Sir?


Roeb. Of the dearest, tenderst, whitest, softest Bride, that ever blessed Man's
Arms. I Am all Air, all a Cupid, all Wings, and must fly again to her embraces.
Detain me not, my Friend.


Lov. Hold, Sir, I hope you mock me; though that it self's unkind.


Roeb. Mock you! -- By Heavens no; she is more than sense can bear, or Tongue
express. -- Oh Lucinda! should Heaven --


Lov. Hold, Sir; no more.


Roeb. I Am on the Rack of Pleasure, and must confess all.
When her soft, melting white, and yielding Waste,
Within my pressing Arms was folded fast,
Our lips were melted down by heat of Love,
And lay incorporate in liquid kisses,
Whilst in soft broken, sighs, we caught each other's Souls.

Lov. Come, come, Roebuck, no more of this Extravagance. -- By Heaven I swear
you shall not marry her.


Roeb. By Heaven I swear so too, for I Am married already.


Lov. Then you are a Villain.


Roeb. A Villain, Man! -- Pshaw! that is Nonsense. A poor fellow can no sooner
get married, than you imagine he may be called a Villain presently. -- You may
call me a Fool, a Blockhead, or an Ass, by the Authority of Custom: But why a
Villain, for God's sake?


Lov. Did not you engage to meet and fight a Gentleman for me in Moorfields?


Roeb. Did not you promise to engage a Lady for me at the Fountain, Sir?


Lov. This Lucinda is my Mistress, Sir.


Roeb. This Lucinda, Sir; is my Wife.


Lov. Then this decides the matter. -- Draw.

Throws Roebuck, his Sword, and draws his own.
Roeb. Prithee be quiet, Man, I Have other business to mind on my Wedding-night.
I must in to my Bride.

Going.
Lov. Hold, Sir; move a step, and by Heavens I Will stab thee.


Roeb. Put up, put up; Pshaw, I an't prepared to dye; I an't, Devil take me.


Lov. Do you dally with me, Sir?


Roeb. Why you will not be so unconseionable as to kill a Man so suddenly; I have not
made my Will yet. Perhaps I may leave you a Legacy.


Lov. Pardon me Heaven's, if pressed by stinging taunts, my Passion urge my Arm
to act what is foul,

Offees to push at him.
Roeb. Hold.

Taking up his Sword. It Is safest making Peace, they say, with Sword in hand.
-- Pll tell thee what, Nod; I would not lose this Nights Pleasure for the
honor of fighting and vanquishing the Seven Champions of Christendom. Permit
me then but this Night to return to the Arms of my dear Bride, and faith and
troth I Will take a fair Thrust with you to morrow morning.


Lov. What, beg a poor Reprieve for Life! -- Then you are a Coward.


Roeb. You imagined the contrary, when you employed me to fight for ye in
Moorfields.


Lov. Will nothing move thy Gall? -- You Are ^ase ungrateful.


Roeb. Ungrateful! I love thee, Ned; by Heavens, my Friend, I love thee.
therefore name not that word again, for such a repetition would over-pay all
thy favors.


Lov. A cheap, a very cheap way of making acknowledgment, and therefore thou
have caught, which makes thee more ungrateful


Roeb. My Friendship even yet does balance Passion; but throw in the least
grain more of an affront, and by Heaven you turn the Scale.


Lov. (Pausing.) No, I Have thought better; my Reason clears: She is not worth my
Sword; a Bully only should draw in her defense, for she is false, a Prostitute.

Puts up his Sword.
Roeb. A Prostitute! By Heaven thou lie.

Draws. -- Thou have blasphemed. Her Virtue answers the uncorrupted state of
Woman, so much above Immodesty, that it mocks Temptation. She has convinced me
of the bright Honor of her Sex, and I stand Champion now for the fair Female
Cause.


Lov. Then I have lost what naught on Earth can pay. Curse on all doubts, all
Jealousies, that destroy our present happiness, by mistrusting the future. Thus
mis-believers making their Heaven uncertain, find a certain Hell. -- And is she
Virtuous? -- sound the bold charge aloud, which does proclaim me Guilty.


Roeb. By Heavens as Virtuous as thy Sister.


Lov. My Sister; -- Ha! -- I fear, Sir, your Marriage with Lucinda has wronged
my Sister; for her you courted, and I heard she loved you.


Roeb. I courted her, it is true, and loved her also; nay, my Love to her,
rivall'd my Friendship toward; and had my Fate allowed me time for thought,
her dear remembrance might have stopped the Marriage. But since it is past, I must
own to you, to her, and all the World, that I cast off all former Passion, and
shall henceforth confine my Love to the dear Circle of her Charming Arms from
which I just now parted.


Enter Leanthe in Woman's loose Apparel.
Lean. I take you at your word. These are the Arms that held you.


Roeb. Oh Gods and Happiness! Leanthe!


Lov. My Sister! Heavens! it cannot be.


Roeb. By Heavens it can, it shall, it must be so -- For none on Earth could
give such Joys but she -- Who would have thought my Joys could bear increase?
Lovewell, my Friend! this is thy Sister! it is Leanthe! my Mistress, my Bride,
my Wife.


Lean. I am your Sister, Sir, as such I beg you to pardon the effects of
violent passion, which has driven me into some imprudent Actions; But none such
as may blot the honor of my Virtue, or Family. To hold you no longer in
suspense, 'twas I brought the Letter from Leanthe; 'twas I managed the Intrigue
with Lucinda; I sent the Note to Mr. Roebuck this afternoon; and I --


Reob. That was the Bride of happy me.


Lov. Thou art my Sister, and my Guardian-Angel; for thou have blessed thy
self, and blessed thy Brother. Lucinda still is safe, and may be mine.


Roeb. May! -- She shall be thine, my Friend.


Lov. Where is Lucinda?


Enter Mockmode.
Mock. Not far off; though far enough from you, by the Universe.


Lean. You must give me leave not to believe you, Sir.


Mock. Oh Madam, I crave you ten thousand pardons by the Universe, Madam. --
Zauns, Madam, Them me, Madam.

Offers to salute her awkwardly.
Lov. By your leave, Sir --

Thrusts him back,
Roeb: Ah, Cousin Mockmode! -- How do all our Friends in Shropshire? --


Mock. Now, Gentlemen, I thank you all for your Trick, your Sham. You imagine I
have got your Whore, Cousin, your Crack'. But Gentlemen, by the assistance of a
Poet, your Sheely is Metamorphos'd into the real Lucinda; which your Eyes shall
testify. Bring in the Jury there. -- Guilty or not Guilty?


Enter Lyrick and Trudge.
Trud. Oh my dear Reobuck! And Faith is it you, dear Joy? and where have you
been these seven long years?

Trudge seeing Lovewell, throws off her Masque, flies to him, takes him a bout
the Neck and kisses him.
Mock. Zauns! --


Roeb. Hold off, stale Iniquity. -- Madam, you will pardon this? -- (To Leanthe.


Trud. Indeed I will not live with that stranger. You promised to marry me, so you
did. -- Ah Sir, Neddy's a brave Boy, God bless him; he is a whole arm full; Lord
knows I had a heavy load of him.


Lov. Guilty, or Not Guilty, Mr. Mockmode?


Mock. It Is past that; I am condemned, I Am hanged in the Marriage Noose -- Hark
ye, Madam, was this the Doctor that let you blood under the Tongue for the
Quinsey.


Trud. Yes, that it was, Sir.


Mock. Then he may do so again; for the Devil take me if ever I breath a Vein
for ye: -- Mr. Lyrick, is this your Poetical Friendship?


Lyr. I had only a mind to convince you of your 'Squireship.


Lov. Now, Sister; my fears are over. -- But where is Lucinda? how is she
disposed of?


Lean. The fear she lay under of being discovered by you, gave me an
opportunity of imposing Pindress upon her instead of this Gentleman, whom she
expected to wear one of Pindress's Night-Gowns as a Disuise. To make the Cheat
more current, she disguised her self in my Clothes, which has made her pass on
her Maid for me; and I by that opportunity putting on a Suit of hers, past upon
this Gentleman for Lucinda, my next business is to find her out, and beg her
pardon, endeavor her reconcilement to you, which the discovery of the mistakes
between both will easily effect.

Exit.
Roeb. Well, Sir, (To Lyrick.) how was Plot your carried on?


Lyr. Why this 'Squire (will you give me leave to call you so now?) this
'Squire had a mind to personate Lovewell, to catch Lucinda -- So I made Trudge
to personate Lucinda, and snap him in this very Garden. -- Now Sir, you will give
me leave to write your Epithalamiu^?


Mock. My Epithalamiu^ I my Epitaph, Screech Owl, for I Am Buried alive. But I
hope you will return my hundred pound I gave you for marrying me.


Lyr. No, But for Five hundred more I Will unmarry you. These are hard times, and
men of industry must make Money.


Mock. Here Is the Money, by the Universe, Sir, a Bill of Five hundred pound
Sterling upon Mr. Ditto the Mercer in Cheapside. Bring me a Reprieve, and it is
yours.


Lyr. Lay it in that Gentleman's hands.

Gives Roeb. the Bill. The Executioner, shall cut the Rope.

Goes to the door, and brings in Bullfinch dressed like a Parson. Here Is
Revelation for you! --

Pulls open the Gown.
Mock. Oh thou damned Whore of Babylon!


Lov. What, Pope Joan the second! were you the Priest?


Bull. Of the Poet's Ordination.


Lyr. Ay, ay, before the time of Christianity the Poets were Priests.


Mock. No wonder then that all the World were Heathens.


Lyr. How do you like the Plot? would it not do well for a Play? -- My Money,
Sir. -- (To Roebuck.


Lyr. No, Sir, it belongs to this Gentlewoman. -- (Gives it to Trudge. you have
divorced her, and must give her separate maintenance. -- There Is another turn
of Plot you were not aware of, Mr. Lyrick.


Enter Lucinda, Leanthe, and Pindress.
Luc. You have told me Wonders.


Lean. Here are these can testify the truth. This Gentleman is the real Mr.
Mockmode, and much such another person as your dream represented.


Roeb. I hope, Madam, you will pardon my dissembling, since only the hopes of so
great a purchase could cause it.


Luc. Let my wishing you much Joy and Happiness in your Bride testify my
reconciliation; And at the request of your Sister, Mr. Lovewell, I pardon your
past Jealousies. You threatened me, Mr. Lovewell, with an Irish, Entertainment
at my Wedding. I wish it present now, to assist at your Sisters Nuptials.


Lean. Army last going hence, I sent for 'em, and they are ready.


Lov. Call 'em in then.

An Irish Entertainment of three Men and three Women, dressed after the
Fingallion fashion.
Luc. I must reward your Sister, Mr. Lovewell, for the many Services done me as
my Page. I therefore settle my Fortune and my self on you, on this Condition,
That you make over your Estate in Ireland to your Sister, and that Gentleman.


Lov. It Is done; only with this Proviso, Brother, That you forsake your
Extravagancies.


^oeb. Brother, you know I always slighted Gold;

But most when offered as a sordid Bribe.
I scorn to be bribed even to Virtue;
But for bright Virtues sake, I here embrace it.
(Embracing Leanthe. I have espoused all Goodness with Leanthe,
And am divorced from all my former Follies.
Woman's our Fate. Wild and Unlawful Plames
Debauch us first, and softer Love reclaims.
Thus Paradise was lost by Woman's Fall;
But Virtuous Woman thus restores it all.
Exeunt omnes
FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENT.
The Innocent Mistress a Comedy, Written by Mrs. Mary Pix.

The Modern Conveyancer, or Conveyancing Improved, being a choice Collection of
Presidents on most Occasions drawn after the manner of Conveyancing now in use.
By the greatest hand of the present Age, of which some are still living.

Consisting of Settlement of Estates upon Marriages, Bargains and Sales,
Ecclesiastical Instruments, Mortgages, Leasses, etc. With an Introduction
concerning Conveyancing in general. The Second Edition with Additions. Both
Printed for Fran. Coggan in the Inner-Temple-Lane.


