THE Constant Couple; OR A Trip to the Jubilee.

A COMEDY Acted at the Theater Royal in Drury Lane, By His Majesty's Servants.

By Mr. GEORGE FARQVHAR,

Sive favore tuli, sive hanc ego carmine famam
Iure tibi grates, candide lector, ago.
Ovid. Trist. lib. 4. Eleg. 10. LONDON; Printed for Ralph Smith at the Bible
under the Piazza of the Royal Exchange, Cornhil; and Bennet Banbury at the Blue
Anchor in the New Exchange in the Strand. 1700.

To the Honorable Sir ROGER MOSTYN Baronet, Of Mostyn-Hall in Flintshire.
SIR,
IT IS no small Reflection on Pieces of this nature, that Panegyric is so much
improved, and that De^ication is grown more an Art than Poetry; that Authors,
to make their Patrons more than Men, make themselves less; and that Persons of
Honor are forced to decline patronizing Wit, because their Modesty cannot bear
the gross Strokes of Adulation.

But give me leave to say, Sir, that I am too young an Author to have learnt
the Art of Flattery; and, I hope, the same Modesty which recommended this Play
to the World, will also reconcile my Addresses to You, of whom I can say
nothing but what your Merits may warrant, and all that have the honor of your
Acquaintance will be proud to vindicate.

The greatest Panegyric upon you, Sir, is the unprejudiced and bare Truth of
Your Character, the Fire of Youth, with the Sedateness of a Senator, and the
Modern Gaity of a fine English Gentleman, with the noble Solidity of the
Ancient Britton.

This is the Character, Sir, which all men, but your self, are proud to publish
of You, and which more celebrated Pens than mine should transmit to Posterity.

The Play has had some noble Appearances to honor its Representation; and to
complete the Success, I have presumed to prefix so Noble a Name to usher it
into the World. A stately Frontispiece is the Beauty of a Building. But here I
must transverse Ovid: Materia superabit Opus.


I am, Honorable Sir, Your most Devoted, and Humble Servant, Geo. Farquhar.

PREFACE to the READER.
AN affected Modesty is very often the greatest Vanity, and Authors are
sometimes prouder of their Blushes than of the Pra^^^s that occasioned them. I
shall not therefore, like a foolish Vigin, fly to be pursued, and deny what I
chiefly wish for. I am very willing to acknowledge the Beauties of this Play,
especially those of the third Night, which not to be proud of, were the height
of Impudence: Who is ashamed to value himself upon such Favors, undervalues
those who conferred them.

As I freely submit to the Criticisms of the Judicious, so I cannot call this
an ill Play, since the Town has allowed it such Success. When they have
pardoned my faults, 'twere very ill manners to condemn their Indulgence. Some
may think (my Acquaintance in Town being too slender to make a Party for the
Play) that the Success must be derived from the pure Merits of the Cause. I am
of another opinion: I have not been long enough in Town to raise Enemies
against me; and the English are still kind to Strangers. I am below the Envy of
great Wits, and above the Malice of little ones. I have not displeased the
Ladies, nor offended the Clergy; both which are now pleased to say, that a
Comedy may be diverting without Smut and Profaneness.

Next to these Advantages, the Beauties of Action gave the greatest life to the
Play, of which the Town is so sensible, that all will join with me in
commendation of the Actors, and allow (without detracting from the merit of
others) that the Theater Royal affords an excellent and complete set of
Comedians. Mr. Wilks's performance has set him so far above competition in the
part of Wildair, that none can pretend to envy the Praise due to his Merit.
That he made the Part, will appear from hence, that whenever the Stage has the
misfortune to lose him, Sir Harry Wildair may go to the Iubilee.

A great many quarrel at the Trip to the Jubilee for a Misnommer: I must tell
them that perhaps there are greater Trips in the Play; and when I find that
more exact Plays have had better success. I Will talk with the Critics about
Decorums, etc. However, if I ever commit another fault of this nature, I Will
endeavor to make it more excusable.

PROLOGUE, by a Friend.
POETS will think nothing so checks their Fury,
As Wits, Cits, Beaux, and Women for their Jury.
Our Spark's half dead to think what Medly's come,
With blended Judgments to pronounce his Doom.
It Is all false Fear; for in a mingled Pit,
Why, what your grave Don thinks but dully writ,
His Neighbor in the great Wig may take for Wit.
Some Authors court the Few, the Wise, if any;
Our Youth's content, if he can reach the Many,
Who go with much like Ends to-Church, and Play,
Not to observe what Priests or Poets say,
No! no! your Thoughts, like theirs, lie quite another way.
The Ladies safe may smile: for here is no Slander,
No Smut, no lewd-tongu'd Beau, no double Entendre.
It Is true he has a Spark just come from France,
But then so far from Beau -- why he talks Sense!
Like Coin o^t carried out, but -- seldom brought from thence.
There Is yet a Gang to whom our Spark submits,
Your Elbow-shaking Fool, that lives by's Wits,
That Is only witty tho, just as he lives by fits.
Who Lion-like through Bailiffs scours away,
Hunts in the Face a Dinner all the Day,
At Night with empty Bowels grumbles over the Play.
And now the modish Prentice he implores,
Who with his Master's Cash stolen out of Doors,
Imploys it on a Brace of -- Honorable Whores;
While their good bulky Mother pleased sits by,
Bawd Regent of the Bubble Gallery.
Next to our mounted Friends we humbly move,
Who all your Side-box Tricks are much above,
And never fail to pay us -- with your Love.
Ah Friends! Poor Dorse^ Garden-hou^e is gone,
Our merry Meetings there are all undone:
Quite lost to us, sure for some strange Misdeeds
That strong Dog Sampson's pulled it over our Heads,
Snaps Rope like Thread; but when his Fortune's told him,
He Will hear perhaps of Rope will one day hold him:
At least I hope that our good-natured Town
Will find a way to pull his Prizes down.
Well, that is all! Now Gentlemen for the Play,
On second Thoughts I Have but two words to say;
Such as it is for your Delight designed,
Hear it, read, try, judge, and speak as you find.
EPILOGUE,
spoken by Mr. Wilks.
NOW all depart, each his respective way,
To spend an Evening's Chatt upon the Play;
Some to Hippolito's, one homeward goes,
And one with loving she retires to the Rose.
The amorous Pair in all things frank and free,
Perhaps may save the Play, in number three.
The tearing Spark, if Phillis ought gai^says,
Breaks the Drawer's Head, kicks her, and murders Bays.
To Coffee some retreat to save their Pocket^,
Others more generous damn the Play at Lockets.
But there, I hope, the Author's Fears are vain.
Malice never spoke in generous Champain.
That Poet merits an ignoble Death,
Who fears to fall over a brave Monteth.
The Privilege of Wine we only ask,
You Will taste again, before you damn the Flask.
Our Author fears not you; but those he may
Who in cold Blood, murder a Man in Te^.
Those Men of Spleen, who fond the World should know it,
Sit down, and for their two pence damn a Poet.
Their Criticism's good, that we can say fort't,
They understand a Play -- too well to pay for it.
From Box to Stage, from Stage to Box they run,
First steal the Play, then damn it when they have done.
But now to know what Fate may us betide,
Among our Friends in Cornhil and Cheapside:
But those I think have but one Rule for Plays;
They Will say they are good, if so the World says.
If it should please them, and their Spouses know it,
They straight enquire what kind of Man's the Poet.
But from Side-box we dread a fearful Doom,
All the good-natured Beaux are gone to Rome.
The Ladies Censure I Would almos^ forgot,
Then for a Line or two to engage their Vote:
But that way's old, below our Author's Aim,
No less than his whole Play is Complement to them.
For their sakes then the Play cannot miss succeeding,
Tho Critics may want Wit, they have good Breeding.
They will not, I Am sure, forfeit the Ladies Graces,
By showing their ill nature to their Faces.
Our Business with good Manners may be done,
Flatter us here, and damn us when you're gone.
Dramatis Persona.
Sir Harry Wildair An airy Gentleman affecting humourous Gaity and Freedom in
his Behavior. Mr. Wilks. Standard A disbanded Colonel, brave and generous. Mr.
Powel. Vizard Outwardly pious, otherwise a great Debauchee, and villainous. Mr.
Mills. Smuggler An old Merchant. Mr. Johnson. Clincher A pert London Prentice
turned Beau, and affecting Travel. Mr. Pinkethman. Clincher jun. His Brother,
educated in the Country. Mr. Bullock. Dicky his Man Mr. Norris. Tom Errand, a
Porter Mr. Haines.

WOMEN.

Lurewell A Lady of a jilting Temper proceeding from a resentment of her Wrongs
from Men. Mrs. Verbruggen. Lady Darling An old Lady Mother to Angelica. Mrs.
Powel. Angelica A Woman of Honor. Mrs. Rogers. Parley Maid to Lurewell. Mrs
Moor.

Constable, Mob, Porter's Wife, Servants, etc.

SCENE, London.

THE Constant Couple.
ACT I.
SCENE, The Park.
Enter Vizard with a Letter, Servant following. Vizard. ANGELICA send it back
unopen'd! say you?


Servant. As you see, Sir.


Viz. The Pride of these virtuous Women is more insufferable, than the
immodesty of Prostitutes -- After all my Encouragement to slight me thus!


Serve. She said, Sir, that imagining your Morals sincere, she gave you access
to her Conversation; but that your late Behavior in her Company has convinced
her, that your Love and Religion are both Hypocrisy, and that she believes your
Letter like your self, fair on the outside, foul within; so sent it back
unopen'd.


Viz. May Obstinacy guard her Beauty till Wrinkles bury it, then may Desire
prevail to make her curse that untimely Pride her disappointed Age repents --
I Will be revenged the very first opportunity -- Saw you the old Lady Darling,
her Mother?


Serve. Yes, Sir, and she was pleased to say much in your Commendation.


Viz. That Is my Cue -- An Esteem grafted in old Age is hardly
Rooted out, Years stiffen their Opinions with their Bodies,
And old Zeal is only to be cozened by young Hypocrisy --
Run to the Lady Lurewells, and know of her Maid,
Whether her Ladyship will be at home this Evening,
Her Beauty is sufficient Cure for Angelica's Scorn. Exit Servant.

(Viz. pulls out a Book, reads, and walks about.) Enter Smuggler. Smug. Ay,
there is a Pattern for the young Men of the times, at his Meditation so early,
some Book of pious Ejaculations, I Am sure.


Viz. This Hobbs is an excellent Fellow! (aside) O Uncle Smuggler! to find you
in this end of the Town is a Miracle.


Smug. I have seen a Miracle this Morning indeed, Cousin Vizard.


Viz. What was it, pray Sir?


Smug. A Man at his Devotion so near the Court -- I Am very glad Boy, that you
keep your Sanctity untainted in this infectious place; the very Air of this
Park is heathenish, and every Man's Breath I meet scents of Atheism.


Viz. Surely Sir, some great Concern must bring you to this unsanctified end of
the Town.


Smug. A very unsanctify'd Concern, truly Cousin.


Viz. What is it?


Smug. A Lawsuit, Boy -- Shall I tell you? -- My Ship the Swan is newly
arrived from St. Sebastians, laden with Portugal Wines: Now the impudent Rogue
of a Tide-waiter has the face to affirm, it is French Wines in Spanish Casks,
and has indicted me upon the Statute -- O Conscience, Conscience! These Tide
waiters and Surveyors plague us more with their French Wines, than the War did
with French Privateers -- Ay, there is another Plague of the Nation --.

Enter Colonel Standard^ A red Coat and Feather.


Viz. Col. Standard, I Am your humble Servant.


Stand. May be not, Sir.


Viz. Why so?


Stand. Because -- I Am disbanded.


Viz. How? broke!


Stand. This very morning, in Hide Park, my brave Regiment, a thousand Men that
looked like Lions yesterday, were scattered, and looked as poor and simple as
the Herd of Deer that gazed beside 'em.


Smug. Tal, al, deral (singing) I Will have a Bonfire this night as high as the
Monument.


Stand. A Bonfire! thou dry, withered, ill nature; had not these brave Fellows
Swords defended you, your House had been a Bonfire e're this about your Ears --
Did not we venture our Lives, Sir?


Smug. And did not we pay you for your Lives, Sir? -- Venture your Lives! I Am
sure we ventured our Money, and that is Life and Soul to me -- Sir, we'll
maintain you no longer.


Stand. Then your Wives shall, old Action: There are five and thirty strapping
Officers gone this Morning to live upon free Quarter in the City.


Smug. O Lord! O Lord! I shall have a Son within these nine Months born with a
Leading staff in his hand -- Sir, you are --


Stand. What Sir?


Smug. Sir, I say that you are --


Stand. What Sir?


Smug. Disbanded Sir, that is all -- I see my Lawyer yonder. Exit.


Viz. Sir, I Am very sorry for your Misfortune.


Stand. Why so? I don't come to borrow Money of you; if you're my Friend, meet
me this Evening at the Rummer, I Will pay my Way, drink a Health to my King,
Prosperity to my Country; and away for Hungary to morrow Morning.


Viz. What! you will not leave us?


Stand. What! a Soldier stay here! to look like an old pair of Colors in
Westminster Hall, ragged and rusty! No, no -- I met yersterday a broken
Lieutenant, he was ashamed to own that he wanted a Dinner, but begged eighteen
pence of me to buy a new sheath for his Sword.


Viz. O, but you have good Friends, Colonel!


Stan. O very good Friends! my Father's a Lord, and my elder Brother a Beau.


Viz. But your Country may perhaps want your Sword again.


Stand. Nay for that matter, let but a single Drum beat up for Volunteers
between Ludgate and Charing Cross, and I shall undoubtedly hear it at the Walls
of Buda.


Viz. Come, come, Colonel, there are ways of making your Fortune at home --
Make your Addresses to the Fair, you're a Man of Honor and Courage.


Stand. Ay, my Courage is like to do me wondrous Service with the Fair: This
pretty cross Cut over my Eye will attract a Duchess -- I warrant 'twill be a
mighty Grace to my Ogling -- Had I used the Stratagem of a certain Brother
Colonel of mine, I might succeed.


Viz. What was it, pray?


Stand. Why to save his pretty face for the Women, he always turned his back
upon the Enemy -- He was a Man of Honor for the Ladies.


Viz. Come, come, the Loves of Mars and Venus will never fail, you must get a
Mistress.


Stand. Prithee, no more on it -- You have awakn'd a thought, from which and the
Kingdom I would have stolen away at once -- To be plain, I have a Mistress.


Viz. And She Is cruel?


Stand. No.


Viz. Her Parents prevent your Happiness.


Stand. Nor that.


Viz. Then she has no Fortune.


Stand. A large one, Beauty to tempt all Mankind, and Virtue to beat off their
Assaults. O Vizard! such a Creature! -- Hey Day! Who the Devil have we here?


Viz. The Joy of the Playhouse, and Life of the Park, ( Enter Sir Harry
Wildair, crosses the Stage singing, with Footmen after him.) Sir Harry Wildair
newly come from Paris.


Stand. Sir Harry Wildair! Did not he make a Campain in Flanders some three or
four years ago?


Viz. The same.


Stand. Why, he behaved himself very brav^ly.


Viz. Why not? Do think Bravery and Gaiety are inconsistent? He Is a
Gentleman of most happy Circumstances, born to a plentiful Estate, has had a
genteel and easy Education, free from the rigidness of Teachers, and Pedantry
of Schools. His florid Constitution being never ruffled by misfortune, nor
stinted in its Pleasures, has rendered him entertaining to others, and easy to
himself -- Turning all Passion into Gaiety of Humor, by which he chooses rather
to rejoice his Friends, than be hated by any; as you shall see.


Enter Wildair. Wild. Ha Vizard!


Viz. Sir Harry!


Wild. Who thought to find you out of the Rubric so long; I thought thy
Hypocrisy had been wedded to a Pulpit Cushion long ago -- Sir, if I mistake not
your Face, your Name is Standard.


Stand. Sir Harry, I Am your Humble Servant.


Wild. Come, Gentlemen, the News, the News o'th Town; For I Am just arrived.


Viz. Why, in the City end o'th Town we are playing the Knave to get Estates.


Stand. And in the Court end playing the Fool in spending 'em.


Wild. Just so in Paris; I Am glad we are grown so modish.


Viz. We are all so reformed, that Gallantry is taken for Vice.


Stand. And Hypocrisy for Religion.


Wild. Alamode de Paris. Again.


Viz. Not one Whore between Ludgate and Aldgate.


Stand. But ten times more Cuckolds than ever.


Viz. Nothing like an Oath in the City.


Stand. That Is a mistake; for my Major swore a hundred and fifty last night to
a Merchant's Wife in her Bedchamber.


Wild. P'shaw, this is trifling, tell me News, Gentlemen. What Lord has lately
broke his Fortune at the Groomporters? or his Heart at New Market, for the loss
of a Race? What Wise has been lately suing in Doctors-Commons for Alimony? or
what Daughter run away with her Fathers Valet? What Beau gave the noblest Ball
at the Bath, or had the finest Watch in the Ring? I want News, Gentlemen.


Stand. Faith, Sir, these are no News at all.


Viz. But pray, Sir Harry tell us some News of your Travels.


Wild. With all my heart -- You must know then, I went over to Amsterdam in a
Dutch Ship; I there had a Dutch Whore for five Stivers: I went from thence to
^anden, where I was heartily drub'd in the Battle with the but-end of a Swiss
Musket. I thence went to Paris, where I had half a dozen Intreagues, bought
half a dozen new Suits, fought a couple of Duels, and here I am again in statu
quo.


Viz. But we heard that you designed to make the Tour of Italy; what brought
you back so soon?


Wild. That which brought you into the World, and may perhaps carry you out of
it; a Woman.


Stand. What! Quit the Pleasures of Travel for a Woman! --


Wild. Ay, Colonel, for such a Woman! I had rather see her Ruell than the
Palace of Lewis le Grand: There Is more Glory in her Smile, than in the Iubilee
at Rome; and I would rather kiss her Hand than the Pope's Toe.


Viz. You, Colonel, have been very lavish in the Beauty and Virtue of your
Mistress; and Sir Harry here has been no less eloquent in the Praise of his Now
will I lay you both ten Guineas a piece, that neither of them is so pretty so
witty, or so virtuous as mine.


Stand. It Is done.


Wild. I Will double the Stakes -- But, Gentlemen, now I think on it, how shall we
be resolved? for I know not where my Mistress may be found; she left Paris
about a month before me, and I had an account --


Stand. How, Sir! left Paris about a month before you!


Wild. Yes, Sir, and I had an account that she lodged somewhere in St. James's.


Viz. How is that^ Sir? Somewhere in St. James's, say you?


Wild. Ay, but I know not where, and perhaps may not find her this fortnight.


Stand. Her Name, pray, Sir Harry.


Viz. Ay, ay, her Name^ perhaps we know her.


Wild. Her Name! Ay -- She has the softest, whitest Hand that ever was made of
Flesh and Blood, her Lips so balmy sweet.


Stand. But her Name, Sir.


Wild. Then her Neck and Breast; -- her Breast do so heave, so heave. Singing.


Viz. But her Name, Sir, her Quality?


Wild. Then her Shape, Colonel.


Stan. But her Name I want, Sir,


Wild. Then her Eyes, Vizard!


Stan. P'shaw, Sir Harry, her Name, or nothing.


Wild. Then if you must have it, she is called the Lady -- But then her Foot,
Gentlemen, she dances to a miracle. Vizard, you have certainly lost your Wager.


Viz. Why you have lost your Senses; we shall never discover the Picture unless
you subscribe the Name.


Wild. Then her Name is Lurewell.


Stand. God's Death, My Mistress. Aside.


Viz. My Mistress by Jupiter. Aside.


Wild. Do you know her, Gentlemen?


Stand. I have seen her, Sir.


Wild. Can tell where she lodges? Tell me, dear Colonel.


Stand. Your humble Servant, Sir. Exit Stand.


Wild. Nay, hold Colonel, I Will follow you, and will know. Runs out.


Viz. The Lady Lurewell his Mistress! He loves her. But she loves me -- but
he is a Baronet, and I plain Vizard; he has Coach and six, and I walk a foot; I
was bred in London, and he in Paris -- That very Circumstance has murdered me
-- Then some Stratagem must be laid to divert his Pretensions.


Re enter Wildair. Wild. Prithee, Dick, what makes the Colonel so out of humor?


Viz. Because he is out of Pay, I suppose.


Wild. S'life that is true, I was beginning to mistrust some Rivalship in the
Case.


Viz. And suppose there were, you know the Colonel can fight, Sir Harry.


Wild. Fight! Pshaw! but he cannot dance, ha! We contend for a Woman, Vizard!
S'life man, if Ladies were to be gained by Sword and Pistol only, what the
Devil should all the Beaux do?


Viz. I Will try him farther (Aside.) But would not you, Sir Harry, fight for
this Woman you so admire?


Wild. Fight! Let me consider. I love her, that is true -- but then I love
honest Sir Harry Wildair better. The Lady Lurewell is divinely charming --
right -- but then a Thrust in the Guts, or a Middlesex Jury, is as ugly as the
Devil.


Viz. Ay, Sir Harry, 'twere a dangerous Cast for a Beau Baronet to be t^ied by
a parcel of greasy, grumbling, bartering Boobies, who would hang you purely
because you're a Gentleman.


Wild. Ay, but on the other hand, I have Money enough to bribe the Rogues with: So
upon mature deliberation, I would fight for her -- but no more of her. Prithee,
Vizard, cannot you recommend a Friend to a pretty Mistress by the by, till I can
find my own? you have store I Am sure; you cunning poaching Dogs make surer game
than we that hunt open and fair. Prithee now, good Vizard.


Viz. Let me consider a little -- Now Love and Revenge inspire my Politics.
(Aside.) Pauses, whilst Sir Harry walks singing.


Wild. P'shaw! you are as long studying for a new Mistress, as a Drawer is
piercing a new Pipe.


Viz. I design a new Pipe for you and wholesome Wine, you will therefore bear a
little expectation.


Wild. Ha! say thou, dear Vizard.


Viz. A Girl of sixteen, Sir Harry.


Wild. Now sixteen thousand Blessings light on thee.


Viz. Pretty and Witty.


Wild. Ay, ay, but her Name, Vizard.


Viz. Her Name! yes -- she has the softest whitest Hand that ever was made of
Flesh and Blood, her Lips so balmy sweet.


Wild. Well, well, but where shall I find her, Man?


Viz. Find her -- but then her Foot, Sir Harry; she dances to a Miracle.


Wild. Prithee don't distract me.


Viz. Well then, you must know, that this Lady is the Curiosity and Ambition of
the Town; her Name's Angelica. She that passes for her Mother is a private
Bawd, and called the Lady Darling, she goes for a Baronets Lady (no
disparagement to your Honor, Sir Harry) I assure you.


Wild. Pshaw, hang my Honor; but what Street, what House?


Viz. Not so fast, Sir Harry, you must have my Pasport for your Admittance, and
you will find my Recommendation in a Line or two will procure you very civil
entertainment; I suppose 20 or 30 pieces handsomely placed will gain the Point;
I Will ensure her sound.


Wild. Thou dearest Friend to a man in necessity -- Here Sirrah, order my Coach
about to St. James's, I Will walk across the Park. To his Servant.


Enter Clincher Senior. Clinch. Here Sirrah, order my Coach about to St.
James's,
I Will walk across the Park too -- Mr. Vizard, your most
Devoted -- Sir, (to Wildair) I admire the mode of your
Shoulder-knot, methinks it hangs very emphatically, and
Carries an air of Travel in it; your Sword-knot too is most
Ornamentally modish, and bears a foreign Mein. Gentlemen,
My Brother is just arrived in Town, so that being upon the
Wing to kiss his Hands, I hope you will pardon this abrupt
Departure of, Gentlemen, your most Devoted, and most
Faithful humble Servant. Exit.

Wild. Prithee, do know him?

Viz. Know him! why it is Clincher who was Apprentice
To my Uncle Smuggler, the Merchant in the City.

Wild. What makes him so Gay?

Viz. Why, he is in mourning for his Father, the kind old man
In Hertfordshire 'tother day broke his Neck a Fox-
hunting; the Son upon the news has broke his Indentures,
Whipped from behind the Counter into the side Box,
Forswears Merchandise, where he must live by Cheating,
And usurps Gentility, where he may die by Raking.
He keeps his Coach, and Liveries, brace of Geldings,
Leash of Mistresses, talks of nothing but Wines,
Intreagues, Plays, Fashions, and going to the Iubilee.

Wild. Ha, ha, ha, how many pound of Pulvil must the fellow
Use in sweetning himself from the smell of Hops
And Tobacco, faugh -- I'my Conscience methought,
Like Olivia's Lover, he stunk of Thames Street. But now for Angelica,
That Is her name? we'll to the Princesse's Chocolate
House, where you shall write my Pasport, Aloons. Exeunt.

SCENE, Lady Lurewell's Lodgings.
Lurewell, and her Maid Parley. Lurewell. Parley, my pocket Book -- let me see --
Madrid,
Venice, Paris, London -- ay, London! they may talk
What they will of the hot Countries, but I find Love
Most fruitful under this Climate -- In a Months space
Have I gained -- let me see, Imprimis, Colonel Standard.

Parley. And how will your Ladyship manage him?

Lure. As all Soldiers should be managed, he shall serve me
Till I gain my ends, then I disband him.

Par. But he loves you, Madam.

Lure. Therefore I scorn him, I hate all that don't love me,
And slight all that do: would his whole deluding Sex
Admired me, thus would I slight them all; my Virgin and
Unwary Innocence was wronged by faithless Man,
But now glance Eyes, plot Brain, dissemble Face,
Lie Tongue, and be a second Eve to tempt, seduce, and
Damn the treacherous kind -- Let me survey my Captives --
The Colonel leads the Van, next Mr. Vizard, he courts me
Out of the Practice of Piety, therefore is a Hypocrite:
Then Clincher he adores me with Orangery, and is
Consequently a Fool; then my old Merchant, Alderman
Smuggler, he is a Compound of both -- out of which
Medley of Lovers, if I don't make good Diversion -- What do you think Parley?

Parl. I think, Madam, I Am like to be very virtuous in your Service,
If you teach me all those Tricks that you use to your Lovers.

Lure. You're a Fool, Child; observe this, that tho a Woman swear, forswear,
lie, dissemble, backbite, be proud, vain, malicious, any thing, if she secures
the main Chance, she is still virtuous, That Is a Maxim.


Parl. I cannot be persuaded tho, Madam, but that you really loved Sir Harry
Wildair in Paris.


Lure. Of all the Lovers I ever had, he was my greatest Plague, for I could
never make him uneasy; I left him involved in a Duel upon my Account, I long to
know whether the Fop be killed or not.

Enter Standard. O Lord, no sooner talk of killing, but the Soldier is
conjured up; you're upon hard Duty Colonel, to serve your King, your Country,
and a Mistress too.


Stand. The latter, I must confess, is the hardest; for in War, Madam, we ^^n
be relieved in our Duty; but in Love who would take our Post, is our ^n^my;
Emulation in Glory is transporting, but Rivals here intolerable.


Lure. Those that bear away the Prize in the Field, should boast the same
success in the Bedchamber; and I think, considering the weakness of our Sex,
we should make those our Companions who can be our Champions.


Stand. I once, Madam, hoped the Honor of defending you from all Injuries through
a Title to your lovely Person, but now my Love must attend my Fortune. This
Commission, Madam, was my Pasport to the Fair; adding a nobleness to my
Passion, it stamped a value on my Love; 'twas once the life of Honor, but now
its Hearse, and with it must my Love be buried.


Parl. What! Disbanded, Colonel?


Stand. Yes, Mrs. Parley.


Parl. Faugh, the nauseous Fellow, he stinks of Poverty already. aside.


Lure. His misfortune troubles me, 'cause it may prevent my designs. aside.


Stand. I Will choose, Madam, rather to destroy my Passion by absence abroad, than
have it starved at home.


Lure. I Am sorry, Sir, you have so mean an Opinion of my Affection, as to
imagine it founded upon your Fortune.

And to convince you of your mistake, here I vow by all that is Sacred, I own
the same Affection now as before. Let it suffice, my Fortune is considerable.


Stand. No, Madam, no, I Will never be a charge to her I love:
The man that sells himself for Gold is the worst of Prostitutes.

Lure. Now were he any other Creature but a man, I could love him. aside.


Stand. This only last request I make, that no Title recommend a Fool, Office
introduce a Knave, nor a Coat a Coward to my place in your Affections; so
farewell my Country, and adieu my Love. Exit.


Lure. Now the Devil take thee for being so honorable;
Here Parley, call him back, I shall lose half my Diversion
Else; now for a trial of Skill. Re-enter Colonel.
Sir, I hope you will pardon my Curiosity,
When do you take your Journey?

Stand. To morrow Morning early, Madam.


Lure. So-suddenly! which way are you designed to travel?


Stand. That I cannot yet resolve on.


Lure. Pray, Sir, tell me, pray Sir, I entreat you, why are you so obstinate?


Stand. Why are you so curious, Madam?


Lure. Because --


Stand. What?


Lure. Because, I, I, --


Stand. Because! what, Madam? -- pray tell me.


Lure. Because I design -- to follow you. crying.


Stand. Follow me! by all that is great! I never was proud
Before, but Love from such a Creature might
Swell the vanity of the proudest Prince; follow me!
By Heavens thou shall not. What! expose thee to the
Hazards of a Camp! -- Rather I Will stay, and here bear
The Contempt of Fools, and worst of Fortune.

Lure. You need not, shall not, my Estate for both is sufficient.


Stand. Thy Estate! no, I Will turn a Knave and purchase one my self; I'^^ cringe
to that proud Man I undermine, and fawn on him that I would bite to death; I Will
tip my Tongue with Flattery, and smooth my Face with Smiles; I Will turn Pimp,
Informer, Office-broker, nay Coward, to be great; and sacrifice it all to thee,
my generous Fair.


Lure. And I Will dissemble, lie, swear, jilt, any thing but I Would reward thy Love,
and recompense thy noble Passion.


Stand. Sir Harry, ha! ha! ha, poor Sir Harry, ha, ha, ha. Rather kiss her Hand
than the Pope's Toe, ha, ha, ha.


Lure. What Sir Harry? Colonel, What Sir Harry!


Stand. Sir Harry Wildair, Madam --


Lure. What! is he come over?


Stand. Ay, and he told me -- but I don't believe a Syllable on it.


Lure. What did he tell you?


Stand. Only called you his Mistress, and pretending to be extravagant in your
Commendation, would vainly insinuate the praise of his own Judgment and good
Fortune in a Choice --


Lure. How easily is the vanity of Fops tickled by our Sex!


Stand. Why, your Sex is the vanity of Fops.


Lure. OF my Conscience I believe so; this Gentleman, because he danced well, I
pitched on for a Partner at a Ball in Paris, and ever since he has so
persecuted me with Letters, Songs, Dances, Serenading, Flattery, Foppery, and
Noise, that I was forced to fly the Kingdom -- And I warrant he made you
jealous.


Stand. Faith, Madam, I was a little uneasy.


Lure. You shall have a plentiful Revenge, I Will send him back all his foolish
Letters, Songs and Verses, and you your self shall carry 'em, 'twill afford you
opportunity of triumphing, and free me from his farther impertinence; for of
all Men he is my Aversion. I Will run and fetch them instantly.


Stand. Dear Madam, a rare Project, how I shall bait him like Acteon, with his
own Dogs -- Well, Mrs. Parley, it is ordered by Act of Parliament, that you
receive no more pieces, Mrs. Parley --


Parl. It Is provided by the same Act, that you send no more Messages by me good
Colonel; you must not pretend to send any more Letters, unless you can pay the
Postage.


Stand. Come, come! don't be Mercenary, take example by your Lady, be
Honorable.


Parl. A lack a day, Sir, it shows as ridiculous and haughty for us to imitate
our Betters in their Honor, as in their finery; leave Honor to Nobility that
can support it: we poor Folks, Colonel, have no pretense to it; and truly, I
think, Sir, that your Honor should be cashiered with your Leading-staff.


Stand. It Is one of the greatest curses of Poverty, to be the Jest of
Chamber-maids!


Enter Lurewell. Lure. Here Is the Packet Colonel, the whole magazine of Love's
Artillery. gives him the Packet.


Stand. Which since I have gained, I will turn upon the Enemy;
Madam, I Will bring you the News of my Victory this Evening.
Poor Sir Harry! ha, ha, ha. Exit.

Lure. To the right about as you were, march Colonel: ha, ha, ha.


Vain Man, who boasts of studied Parts and Wiles;
Nature in us your deepest Art beguiles,
Stamping deep Cunning in our Frowns and Smiles.
You toil for Art, your Intellects you trace;
Woman without a Thought, bears Policy in her Face.
ACT II.
SCENE, Clincher Iunior's Lodgings.
Enter Clincher opening a Letter, Servant following. Clin -- reads. Dear
Brother;
I Will see you presently, I have sent this Lad to wait on you, he can instruct
you in the Fashions of the Town^ I am your affectionate Brother,

Clincher.


Very well, and what is your Name, Sir?


Dick. My Name is Dicky, Sir.


Clin. Dicky!


Dick. Ay, Dicky, Sir.


Clin. Very well^ a pretty Name! and what can you do Mr. Dicky?


Dick. Why Sir I can powder a Wig, and pick up a Whore.


Clin. O Lord! O Lord! a Whore! Why are there many Whores in this Town?


Dick. Ha, ha, ha, many Whores! there is a Question indeed; why Sir, there are
above five hundred Surgeons in Town -- Harkee Sir, do you see that Woman
therein the Velvet Scarf, and red Knots?


Clin. Ay Sir, What then?


Dick. Why she shall be at your Service in three minutes, As I Am a Pimp.


Clin. O Jupiter Ammon! why she is a Gentlewoman.


Dick. A Gentlewoman! Why so are all the Whores in Town, Sir.


Enter Clincher Senior. Clin. sen. Brother, you are welcome to London!


Clin. jun. I thought, Brother, you owed so much to the Memory of my Father, as
to wear Mourning for his Death.


Clin. sen. Why so I do Fool, I wear this because I have the Estate,
And you wear that, because you have not the Estate.
You have cause to mourn indeed, Brother. Well Brother,
I Am glad to see you, fare you well. going.

Clin. jun. Stay, stay Brother, where are you going?


Clin. sen. How natural it is for a Country Booby to ask impertinent Questions.
Harkee Sir, is not my Father dead?


Clin. jun. Ay, ay, to my sorrow.


Clin. sen. No matter for that, he is dead, and am not I a young powdered
extravagant English Heir?


Clin. jun. Very right Sir.


Clin. sen. Why then Sir, you may be sure that I am going to the Iubilee, Sir.


Clin. jun. Iubilee! what is that?


Clin. sen. Iubilee! why the Iubilee is -- faith I don't know what it is.


Dick. Why the Iubilee is the same thing with our Lord-Mayors Day in the City;
there will be Pageants, and Squibs, and Rary-Shows, and all that Sir.


Clin. jun. And must you go so soon Brother?


Clin. sen. Yes, Sir, for I must stay a Month in Amsterdam, to study Poetry.


Clin. jun. Then I suppose Brother, you travel through Muscovy to learn
Fashions, Don't you, Brother?


Clin. sen. Brother! Prithee Robin don't call me Brother; Sir will do every jot
as well.


Clin. jun. O Jupiter Ammon! why so?


Clin. sen. Because People will imagine that you have a spite at me -- But have
you seen your Cousin Angelica yet, and her Mother the Lady Darling?


Clin. jun. No, my Dancing Master has not been with me yet: How shall I salute
them, Brother?


Clin. sen. Pshaw, that is easy, it is only two Scrapes, a Kiss, and your humble
Servant: I Will tell you more when I come from the Iubilee. Come along.


Exeunt. SCENE, Lady Darling's House.
Enter Wildair with a Letter. Wild. LIke Light and Heat incorporate we lay,
We blessed the Night, and cursed the coming Day.
Well, if this Paper-kite flies sure, I Am secure of my Game -- Humph! the
prettiest Bordel I have seen, a very stately genteel one (Footmen cross the
Stage) Hey day! Equipage too! Now for a Bawd by the Courtesy, and a Whore with
a Coat of Arms -- God's Death, I Am afraid I Have mistaken the House.

( Enter Lady Darling.) No, this must he the Bawd by her Bulk.


Darl. Your Business, pray Sir?


Wild. Pleasure, Madam.


Darl. Then, Sir, you have no business here.


Wild. This Letter, Madam, will inform you further; Mr. Vizard sent it, with
his humble Service to your Ladyship.


Darl. How does my Cousin, Sir?


Wild. Ay, her Cousin too, that is right Procuress again.


Darl. reads. Madam --
EArnest Inclination to serve -- Sir Harry -- Madam -- Court my Cousin --
Gentleman -- Fortune --. Your Ladyship's most humble Servant,

Vizard.




Sir, your Fortune and Quality are sufficient to recommend you any where; but
what goes farther with me, is the recommendation of so sober and pious a young
Gentleman as Cousin Vizard.


Wild. A right sanctified Bawd of my word.


Darl. Sir Harry, your Conversation with Mr. Vizard argues you a Gentleman,
free from the loose and vicious Carriage of the Town; I Will therefore call my
Daughter. Exit.


Wild. Now go thy way for an illustrious Bawd of Babylon -- She dresses up a
Sin so religiously, that the Devil would hardly know it of his making.


Re-enter Darling with Angelica. Darl. Pray Daughter use him civily, such
Matches will not offer every Day.


Exit. Wild. O all ye Powers of Love! an Angel! God's Death, what Money have I got
in my Pocket, I cannot offer her less than twenty Guineas -- and by Jupiter
she is worth a hundred.


Angel. It Is he! the very same! and his Person as agreeable as his Character of
good Humor -- Pray Heaven his Silence proceed from respect.


Wild. How innocent she looks! how would that Modesty adorn
Virtue, when it makes even Vice look so charming! --
By Heaven there is such a commanding Innocence in her looks,
That I dare not ask the Question.

Angel. Now all the Charms of real Love and feigned Indifference assist me to
engage his Heart, for mine is lost already.


Wild. Madam -- I, I -- Zoons, I cannot speak to her -- But she is a Whore, and
I will -- Madam in short, I, I -- O Hypocrisy, Hypocrisy! What a charming Sin
art thou?


Angel. He is caught, now to secure my Conquest -- I thought Sir, you had
business to impart.


Wild. Business to impart! how nicely she words it! Yes Madam, Don't you, don't
you love singing Birds, Madam?


Angel. That Is an odd Question for a Lover -- Yes, Sir.


Wild. Why then Madam, here is a Nest of the prettiest Goldfinches that ever
chirpt in a Cage; twenty young ones, I assure you Madam.


Angel. Twenty young ones! What then, Sir?


Wild. Why then Madam, there are twenty young ones -- S'Life I think twenty is
pretty fair.


Angel. He Is mad sure -- Sir Harry, when you have learned more Wit and Manners,
you shall be welcome here again.


Wild. Wit and Manners! -- I Gad now I conceive there is a great deal of Wit
and Manners in twenty Guineas -- I Am sure it is all the Wit and Manners I have
about me at present. What shall I do?

Enter Clincher junior, and Dicky. What the Devil's here? another Cousin I
warrant ye! Harkee Sir, can you lend me ten or a dozen Guineas instantly? I Will
pay you fifteen for them in three hours upon my Honor.


Clin. jun. These London Sparks are plaguey impudent! this Fellow by his Wig and
Assurance can be no less than a Courtier.


Dick. He Is rather a Courtier by his borrowing.


Clin. jun. Faith Sir, I have not above five Guineas about me.


Wild. What business have you here then Sir, for to my knowledge twenty will not be
sufficient.


Clin. jun. Sufficient! for what Sir?


Wild What Sir? Why, for that Sir, what the Devil should it be, Sir; I k^^w
your business notwithstanding all your Gravity, Sir.


^. My Business! why my Cousin lives here.


(...) ^ know your Cousin does live there, and Vizard's Cousin, and my (...)
every Bodies Cousin -- Harkee Sir, I shall return immediately, (...) offer to
touch her till I come back, I shall cut your Throat, Rascal.


Exit. (...). Why the Man's mad sure.


^ic. Mad, Sir, ay, why he is a Beau.


^lin. A Beau! what is that! are all Madmen Beaux?


^ic. No Sir, but most Beaux are Madmen. But ^ow for your Cousin; remember your
three Scrapes, a Kiss, and your humble Servant.


Exeunt, as into the House. SCENE, the Street.
Enter Wildair, Colonel following. Stand. SIR Harry, Sir Harry.


Wild. I Am in haste^ Colonel; besides, if you're in no better humou^ than when
I parted with you in the Park this morning, your Company will not be very
agreeable.


Stand. You're a happy man, Sir Harry, who are never out of humor: Can nothing
move your Gall, Sir Harry?


Wild. Nothing but Impossibilities, which are the same as nothing.


Stand. What Impossibilities?


Wild. The Resurrection of my Father to disinherit me, or an Act of Parliament
against Wenching. A man of eight thousand Pound per Annum to be vexed! No, no,
Anger and Spleen are Companions for younger Brothers.


Stand. Suppose one called you Son of a Whore behind your back.


Wild. Why then would I call him Rascal behind his back, and so we are even.


Stand. But suppose you had lost a Mistress.


Wild. Why then I would get another.


Stand. But suppose you were discarded by the Woman you love, that would surely
trouble you.


Wild. You're mistaken, Colonel, my Love is neither romantically honorable,
nor meanly mercenary, it is only a pitch of Gratitude; while she loves me, I
love her; when she desists, the Obligation's void.


Stand. But to be mistaken in your Opinion, Sir, if the Lady Lurewell (only
suppose it) had discarded you -- I say only suppose it -- and had sent your
Discharge by me.


Wild. P'shaw! that is another Impossibility.


Stand. Are you sure of that?


Wild. Why 'twere a Soloecism in Nature, we are ^inger and Thumb, Sir, She
dances with me, sings with me, plays with me, swears with me, lies with me.


Stand. How Sir?


Wild. I mean in an honorable way, that is, she lies for me. In short, we are
as like one another as a couple of Guineas.


Stand. Now that I have raised you to the highest Pinnacle of Vanity, will I
give you to mortifying a Fall, as shall dash your hopes to pieces -- I pray
your Honor to peruse these Papers. Gives him the Packet.


Wild. What is it, the Muster Roll of your Regiment, Colonel?


Stand. No, no, it is a List of your Forces in your last Love Campaign; and for
your comfort all disbanded.


Wild. Prithee, good Metaphorical Colonel, what do you mean?


Stand. Read, Sir, read, these are the Sybils Leaves that will unfold your
Destiny.


Wild. So it be not a false Deed to cheat me of my Estate, what care I --
[opening the Pacquet] Humph! my Hand! to the Lady Lurewell -- to the Lady
Lurewell, -- to the Lady Lurewell -- What Devil have thou been tampering with
to conjure up these Spirits?


Stand. A certain Familiar of your Acquaintance Sir.


Wild. (reading) -- Madam, my Passion -- so natural -- your Beauty contending
-- Force of Charms -- Mankind -- Eternal Admirer Wildair! --

I never was ashamed of my Name before.


Stand. What, Sir Harry Wildair out of humor, ha, ha, ha, poor Sir Harry; more
Glory in her Smile than in the Jubilee at Rome, ha, ha, ha; but then her Foot,
Sir Harry, she dances to a miracle! ha, ha, ha! Fie, Sir Harry, a Man of your
Parts write Letters not worth a keeping! What say thou, my dear Knight
Errant? ha, ha, ha; you may go seek Adventures now indeed.


Wild. sings -- Let her wander, etc.


Stand. You are jilted to some tune, Sir, blown up with false Music, that is
all.


Wild. Now why should I be angry that a Woman is a Woman? since Inconstancy and
Falsehood are grounded in their Natures, how can they help it?


Stand. Then they must be grounded in your Nature; for you and she are Finger
and Thumb, Sir.


Wild. Here Is a Copy of Verses too, I must turn Poet in the Devil's name --
Stay -- God's Death, what is here? This is her Hand -- Oh the charming Characters!
My dear Wildair. (reading) That Is I -- this huff bluff Colonel -- that is he --
is the rarest Fool in Nature -- the Devil he is! and as such have I used him --
with all my heart faith -- I had no better way of letting you know that I lodge
in Pall Mall near the Holy Lamb -- Colonel, I Am your most humble Servant.


Stand. Hold, Sir, you shall not go yet, I have not delivered half my Message.


Wild. Upon my faith but you have, Colonel.


Stand. Well, well, own your Spleen, out with it, I know you're like to burst.


Wild. I am so, by Gad, ha, ha, ha, Laugh, and point at one another.


Stand. Ay, with all my heart, ha, ha.

Well, well, that is all forced, Sir Harry.


Wild. I was never better pleased in all my Life, by Jupiter.


Stand. Well, Sir Harry, it is prudence to hide your Concern, when there is no
help for it --: but to be serious now, the Lady has sent you back all your
Papers there -- I was so just as not to look upon 'em.


Wild. I Am glad on it, Sir; for there were some things that I would not have you
see.


Stand. All this she has done for my sake, and I desire you would decline any
farther Pretensions for your own sake. So honest, good natured Sir Harry, I Am
your humble Servant. Exit.


Wild. Ha, ha, ha, poor Colonel! -- O the delight of an ingenious Mistress!
what a life and briskness it adds to an Amor, like the Loves of mighty Jove,
still sueing in different shapes. A Legerdemain Mistress, who, presto, pass,
and she is vanished, then Hey, in an instant in your Arms again. Going.


Enter Vizard. Viz. Well met, Sir Harry, what news from the Island of Love?


Wild. Faith we made but a broken Voyage by your Card; but now I am bound for
another Port: I told you the Colonel was my Rival.


Viz. The Colonel! cursed Misfortune! another! Aside.


Wild. But the civilest in the world, he brought me word where my Mistress
lodges; the Story's too long to tell you now, for I must ^ly.


Viz. What! have you given over all thoughts of Angelica?


Wild. No, no, I Will think of her some other time, But now for the Lady
Lurewell; Wit and Beauty calls. That Mistress never can pall her Lover's Ioys,
Whose Wit can whet, when e're her Beauty cloys.
Her little amorous Frauds all Truths excel;
And make us happy, being deceived so well. Exit.



Viz. solus -- The Colonel my Rival too! how shall I manage? There is but one
way -- him and the Knight will I set a tilting, where one cuts to others Throat,
and the Survivor's hanged: So there will be two Rivals pretty decently disposed
of. Since Honor may oblige them to play the Fool, why should not Necessity
engage me to play the Knave? Exit.


SCENE, Lurewell's Lodgings.
Lurewell and Parley. Lure. HAS my Servant brought me the Money from my Merchant?


Parl. No, Madam, he met Alderman Smuggler at Charing Cross, who has promised
to wait on you himself immediately.


Lure. It Is odd, that this old Rogue should pretend to love me, and at the same
time cheat me of my Money.


Parl. It Is well, Madam, if he don't cheat you of your Estate; for you say the
Writings are in his hands.


Lure. But what satisfaction can I get of him? Enter Smuggler.

Mr. Alderman, your Servant, have you brought me any Money, Sir?


Smug. Faith, Madam, trading is very dead; what with paying the Taxes, raising
the Customs, Losses at Sea abroad, and maintaining our Wives at home, the Bank
is reduced very low.


Lure. Come, come, Sir, these Evasions will not serve your turn, I must have
Money, Sir, -- I hope you don't design to cheat me.


Smug. Cheat you, Madam! h^ve a care what you say: I Am an Alderman, Madam;
cheat you, Madam! I have been an honest Citizen these five and thirty years!


Lure. An honest Citizen! bear witness, Parley! I shall trap him in more Lies
presently --. Come, Sir, tho I Am a Woman, I can take a course.


Smug. What Course, Madam? You Will go to Law, will ye? I can maintain a Suit of
Law, be it right or wrong, these forty years, I Am sur^ of that, thanks to the
honest Practice of the Courts.


Lure. Sir, I Will blast your Reputation, and so ruin your Credit.


Smug. Blast my Reputation! he, he, he: why I Am a Religious Man, Madam, I have
been very instrumental in the Reformation of Manners; ruin my Credit! ah, poor
Woman: There is but one way, Madam, -- you have a sweet leering Eye.


Lure. You instrumental in the Reformation! how?


Smug. I whipped all the Whores Cut and Long-Tail, out of the Parish --:^ Ah!
that leering Eye! Then I voted for pulling down the Playhouse --: Ah that
Ogle, that Ogle! -- Then my own pious Example -- Ah that Lip, that Lip.


Lure. Here Is a Religious Rogue^ for you now! -- as I hope to be saved I have a
good mind to beat the old Monster.


Smug. Madam, I have brought you about a hundred and fifty Guineas (a great
deal of Money as times go) and --


Lure. Come, give it me.


Smug. Ah that hand, that hand, that pretty soft, white -- I have brought it
you see, but the condition of the Obligation is such, that whereas that leering
Eye, that pouting Lip, that pretty soft Hand, that -- you understand me, you
understand I Am sure you do, you little Rogue --


Lure. Here Is a Villain now, so'covetous that he will not wench upon his own Cost,
but would bribe me with my own Money. I will be revenged. -- Upon my word Mr.
Alderman you make me blush, what do you mean, pray?


Smug. See here, Madam (Puts a piece of Money in his Mouth) Buss and Guinea,
buss and Guinea, buss and Guinea.


Lure. Well, Mr. Alderman^ you have such pretty yellow Teeth, and green Gums,
that I will, ha, ha, ha, ha.


Smug. Will you indeed, he, he, he, my little Cocket; and when, and where, and
how?


Lure. 'Twill be a difficult point, Sir, to secure both our Honors, you must
therefore be disguised, Mr. Alderman.


Smug. P^shaw! no matter, I am an old Fornicator, I Am not half so Religious as
I seem to be. You little Rogue, why I Am disguised as I am, our Sanctity is all
outside, all Hypocrisy.


Lure. No man is seen to come into this House after Night fall; you must
therefore sneak in, when it is dark, in Woman's Clothes.


Smug. I gad so, cod so -- I have a Suit a purpose, my little Cocket, I love to
be disguised, I cod I make a very handsome Woman, I cod I do.


Enter Servant, whispers Lurewell. Lure. Oh! Mr. Alderman, shall I beg you to
walk into next Rome, here are some Strangers coming up.


Smug. Buss and Guinea first, ah my little Cocket. Exit.


Enter Wildair. Wild. My Life, my Soul, my all that Heaven can give.


Lure. Death's Life with thee, without thee Death to live.
Welcome, my dear Sir Harry, I see you got my Directions.

Wild. Directions! in the most charming manner, thou dear Matchiavel of
Intreague.


Lure. Still brisk and airy I find, Sir Harny.


Wild. The sight of you, Madam, exalts my Air, and makes Joy lighten in my Face.


Lure. I have a thousand Questions to ask you, Sir Harry; How do you like France?


Wild. Ah! est le plus bea^ pais du monde.


Lure. Then what made you leave it so soon?


Wild. Madam, Vous Voyez que je vous suy parto^t.


Lure. O Monsieur, je vouz suis fort obligee -- But where is the Court now?


Wild. At Marli, Madam.


Lure. And where my Count Le Valier?


Wild. His Body's in the Church of Nostre Dame, I don't know where his Soul is.


Lure. What Disease did he dye of?


Wild. A Duel, Madam, I was his Doctor.


Lure. How do you mean?


Wild. As most Doctors do, I killed him.


Lure. En Cavalier, my dear Knight Errant, well and how;
And how, what Int^eagues, what Gallantries are carrying on in the Bea^ Monde?

Wild. I should ask you that question, Madam, since your Ladyship makes the
Beau Monde wherever you come.


Lure. Ah! Sir Harry, I Have been almost ruined, pestered to death here by the
incessant Attacks of a mighty Colonel, he has besieged me as close as our Army
did Namur.


Wild. I hope your Ladyship did not surrender tho.


Lure. No, no, but was forced to capitulate; but since you are come to raise
the Seige, we'll dance, and sing, and laugh.


Wild. And love and kiss -- Montrez moy votre Chamber.


Lure. Attande, Attande, en pe^ -- I remember, Sir Harry, you promised me in
Paris never to ask that impertinent Question again.


Wild. P'shaw, Madam, that was above two months ago; besides, Madam, Treaties
made in France are never kept.


Lure. Would you marry me, Sir Harry.


Wild. Oh! Le marriage est une grand male -- but I will marry you.


Lure. Your Word, Sir, is not to be relied on: if a Gentleman will forfeit his
Honor in Dealings of Business, we may reasonably suspect his Fidelity in an
Amor.


Wild. My Honor in Dealings of Business! why, Madam, I never had any business
in all my life.


Lure. Yes, Sir Harry, I have heard a very odd Story, and am sorry that a
Gentleman of your Figure should undergo the Scandal.


Wild. Out with it, Madam.


Lure. Why the Merchant, Sir, that transmitted your Bills of Exchange to you in
France, complains of some indirect and dishonorable Dealings.


Wild. Who? old Smuggler!


Lure. Ay, ay, you know him I find.


Wild. I have no less than reason, I think; why the Rogue has cheated me of
above five hundred pound within these three years.


Lure. It Is your business then to acquit your self publicly, for he spreads
the Scandal every where.


Wild. Acquit my self publicly! -- Here Sirrah, my Coach, I Will drive instantly
into the City, and cane the old Villain round the Royal Exchange; he shall run
the Gauntlet through a thousand brusht Beavers and formal Cravats.


Lure. Why he is in the House now, Sir.


Wild. What, in this House?


Lure. Ay, in the next Room.


Wild. Then, Sirrah^ lend me your Cudgel.


Lure. Sir Harry, you will not raise a Disturbance in my House?


Wild. Disturbance, Madam, No, no, I Will beat him with the Temper of a
Philosopher; here, Mrs. Parley, show me the Gentleman. Exit with Parley.


Lure. Now shall I get the old Monster well beaten, and Sir Harry pestered next
Term with Bloodsheds, Batteries, Costs and Damages, Sollicitors and Attorneys;
and if they don't teize him out of his good humor, I Will never plot^agen. Exit.


SCENE, Changes to another Room in the same House.
Enter Smuggler. Smug. O This damned Tide-waiter! A Ship and Cargo worth five
thousand pound! why it is richly worth five hundred Perjuries.


Enter Wildair. Wild. Dear Mr. Alderman, I Am your most devoted and humble
Servant.


Smug. My best Friend Sir Harry, you're welcome to England.


Wild. I Will assure you Sir, there is not a Man in the King's Dominions I Am
gladder to meet.


Smug. O Lord, Sir, you Travelers have the most obliging ways with you.


Wild. There is a Business Mr. Alderman fallen out, which you may oblige me
infinitely by -- I am very sorry that I Am forced to be troublesome^ but
necessity, Mr. Alderman.


Smug. Ay, Sir, as you say necessity -- But upon my word, Sir, I am very short
of Money at present, but --


Wild. That Is not the matter, Sir, I Am above an Obligation that way, but the
Business is, I am reduced to an indispensible necessity of being obliged to you
for a Beating -- Here take this Cudgel.


Smug. A Beating Sir Harry! ha, ha, ha, I beat a Knight Baronet! an Alderman
turn Cudgel-Player, ha, ha, ha.


Wild. Upon my word, Sir, you must beat me, or I cudgel you, take your choice.


Smug. P'shaw, p'shaw, you jest.


Wild. Nay, it is as sure as fate; so Alderman I hope you will pardon my Curiosity.


Smug. Curiosity! Duce take your Curiosity, Sir, what do you mean.


Wild. Nothing at all, I Am but in jest, Sir.


Smug. O, I can take any thing in jest, but a Man might imagine by the
smartness of the Stroke, that you were in down right earnest.


Wild. Not in the least, Sir, (strikes him) not in the least indeed Sir.


Smug. Pray good Sir, no more of your Jests, for they are the bluntest Jests
that I ever knew.


Wild. (strikes.) I heartily beg your Pardon with all my Heart, Sir.


Smug. Pardon Sir, well Sir, that is satisfaction enough from a Gentleman; but
seriously now if you pass any more of your Jests upon me, I shall grow angry.


Wild. I humbly beg your permission to break one or two more. striking him.


Smug. O Lord, Sir, you will break my Bones: are you mad Sir; Murder, Felony,
Manslaughter. Wild. knocks him down.


Wild. Sir, I beg you ten thousand Pardons; but I am absolutely compelled to it
upon my Honor, Sir; nothing can be more averse to my Inclinations, than to
jest with my honest, dear, loving, obliging Friend, the Alderman.


( Striking him all this while, Smuggler tumbles over and over, and shakes out
his Pocketbook on the Floor; Lurewel enters, takes it up.) Lure. The old
Rogue's Pocketbook, this may be of use. aside.
O Lord, Sir Harry's murdering the poor old Man --

Smug. O dear Madam, I was beaten in jest, 'till I am murdered in good earnest.


Lure. Well, well, I Will bring you off Senior -- Frapez, Frapez.


Smug. O for Charity's sake, Madam, rescue a poor Citizen.


Lure. O you barbarous Man, hold, hold, Frapez, plus rudement,
Frapez, I wonder you are not ashamed, holding Wild.
A poor reverend honest Elder -- helps Smug. up.
It makes me weep to see him in this Condition, poor Man!
Now the Devil take you Sir Harry -- Fear not beating
Him harder: Well, my Dear, you shall come at Night, and
I Will make you amends. Here Sir Harry takes Snush.

Smug. Madam, I will have amends before I leave the Place, Sir; How durst you
use me thus?


Wild. Sir?


Smug. Sir, I say that I will have satisfaction.


Wild. With all my Heart. Throws Snush into his Eyes.


Smug. O, Murder, Blindness, Fire; O Madam, Madam, get me some Water, Water,
Fire, Fire, Water. Exit. with Lurewel.


Wild. How pleasant is resenting an Injury without Passion:
It Is the Beauty of Revenge.

Let Statesmen plot, and under Business groan,
And settling public Quiet lose their own;
Let Soldiers drudg and fight for Pay or Fame,
For when they are shot, I think it is much the same.
Let Scholars vex their Brains with Mood and Tense,
And mad with strength of Reason, Fools Commence.
Losing their Wits in searching after Sense;
Their Summum Bonum they must toil to gain,
And seeking Pleasure, spend their Life in Pain.
I make the most of Life, no hour mispend,
Pleasure's the Means, and Pleasure is my End.
No Spleen, no Trouble shall my time destroy.
Lif^'s but a Span; I^ll every Inch enjoy. Exit.
ACT III.
SCENE, The Street.
Enter Standard and Vizard. Stand. I Bring him word where she lodged! I the
Civilist Rival in the World! it is impossible.


Viz. I shall urge it no further, Sir; I only thought Sir,
That my Character in the World might add Authority
To my Words without so many Repetitions.

Stand. Pardon me, Dear Vizard -- Our Belief struggles hard,
Before it can be brought to yield to the Disadvantage
Of what we love; it is so great an Abuse to our Judgment,
That it makes the Faults of our Choice our own failing.
But what said Sir Harry?

Viz. He pitied the poor credulous Colonel, laughed heartily,
Flew away with all the Raptures of a Bridegroom, repeating these Lines^ A
Mistress ne'r^ can pall her Lover's Ioys,
Whose Wit can whet when e're her Beauty cloys.


Stand. A Mistress never can pall! By all my Wrongs he whores her! and I Am made
their Property, Vengeance! Vizard, you must carry a Note from me to Sir Harry.


Viz. What! a Challenge! I hope you don't design to fight?


Stand. What! wear the Livery of my King and Pocket an
Affront! 'twere an abuse to his Sacred Majesty, a
Soldier's Sword, Vizard, should start of it self to
Redress its Master's Wrong.

Viz. However, Sir, I think it not proper for me to carry any such Message
between Friends.


Stand. I have never a Servant here, what shall I do?


Viz. There Is Tom Errand, the Porter, that plys at the Blew Posts,
And who knows Sir Harry and his Haunts very well,
You may send a Note by him.

Stand. Here, you, Friend^


Viz. I have now some Business, and must take my Leave, I would advise you
nevertheless against this Affair.


Stand. No whispering now, nor telling of Friends to ^revent us. He that
disappoints a Man of an honorable Revenge, may love him foolishly like a Wife,
but never value him as a Friend.


Viz. Nay the Devil take him that parts you, say I. Exit.


Enter Porter running. Err. Did your Honor call a Porter?


Stand. Is your Name Tom Errand?


Err. People call me so, an't like your Worship --


Stand. Do You know Sir Harry Wildair?


Err. Ay, very well Sir, he is one of my Masters; many a round half Crown have I
had of his Worship, he is newly come home from France, Sir.


Stand. Go to the next Coffee-house, and wait for me.
O Woman, Woman, how blessed is Man, when favored by your
Smiles, and how accursed when all those Smiles are found
But wanton baits to sooth us to Destruction. Thus our chief Ioys with base
Allays are cursed,
And our best things, when once corrupted, worst. Exit.


Enter Wildair and Clincher senior following. Clin. sen. Sir, Sir, Sir, having
some Business of Importance to communicate to you, I would beg your Attention
to a trifling Affair that I would impart to you.


Wild. What is your trifling business of Importance pray sweet Sir?


Clin. sen. Pray Sir, are the Roads deep between this and Paris?


Wild. Why that Question, Sir?


Clin. sen. Because I design to go to the Iubilee, Sir; I understand that you
are a Traveller, Sir; there is an Air of Travel in the Tie of you Cravat, Sir^
there is indeed, Sir -- I suppose, Sir, you bought this Lace in Flanders.


Wild. No, Sir, this Lace was made in Norway.


Clin. sen. Norway, Sir!


Wild. Yes Sir, of the shavings of deal Boards.


Clin. sen. That Is very strange now, Faith -- Lace made of the shaving^ of deal
Boards; I Gad Sir, you Travelers see very strange things abroad, very
incredible things abroad, indeed. Well, I Will have a Cravat of that very same
Lace before I come home.


Wild. But Sir? what Preparations have you made for your Journey?


Clin. sen. A Case of Pocket-pistols for the Bravo's -- and a swimming Girdle.


Wild. Why these, Sir?


Clin. Sen. O Lord, Sir, I Will tell you -- suppose us in Rome now; away goes me
I to some Ball -- for I Will be a mighty Beau. Then as I said, I g^ to some Ball,
or some Bear-baiting, it is all one you know -- then comes a fine Italian Bona
Roba, and plucks me by the Sleeve, Siegniour Angle, Siegniour Angle, -- she is a
very ^ine Lady, observe that -- Seigniour Angle, shays she, -- Siegniora, says
I, and trips after her to the corner of a Street, suppose it Russ^l^Street
here, or any other Street; then you know I must invite her to the Tavern, I can
do no less. -- There up comes her Bravo, the Italian grows saucy, and I give
him an English douse of the Face. I can Box, Sir, Box tightly, I was a
Prentice, Sir, -- but then, Sir, he whips out his Stilletto, and I whips out my
Bull-Dog -- slaps him through, trip^ down Stairs, turns the corner of
Russel Street again, and whips me into the Ambassador's Train, and there I Am
safe as a Beau behind the Scene^.


Wild. Was your Pistol charged, Sir?


Clin. Sen. Only a brace of Bullets, that is all, Sir, I design to shoot seven
Italians a Week, Sir.


Wild. Sir, you will not have Provocation.


Clin. Sen. Provocation, Sir! Zauns, Sir, I Will kill any Man for treading upon
my Corn, and there will be a devilish Throng of People there; they say that all
the Princes in Italy will be there.


Wild. And all the Fops and Fiddlers in Europe -- but the use of your swimming
Girdle, pray, Sir?


Clin. Sen. O Lord, Sir, that is easy. Suppose the Ship cast away; now, whilst
other foolish People are busy at their Prayers, I whip on my swimming Girdle,
claps a Months Provision into my Pockets, and sails me away like an Egg in a
Duck's Belly. -- And heark'ee, Sir, I have a new Project in my Head. Where do you
think my swimming Girdle shall carry me upon this Occasion: It Is a new Project?


Wild. Where, Sir?


Clin. Sen. To Civita Vecchia, Faith and Troth, and so save the Charges of my
Passage! Well, Sir, you must Pardon me now, I Am going to see my Mistress. Exit.


Wild. This Fellow's an accomplished Ass^ before he goes abroad. Well! this
Angelica has got into my Heart, and I cannot get her out of my Head. I must pay
her the other Visit. Exit.


SCENE, Lady Darling's House.
Angelica sola. Angel. Unhappy State of Woman! whose chief Virtue is but
Ceremony, and our much boasted Modesty but a slavish Restraint. The strict
confinement on our Words makes our Thoughts ramble more; and what preserves our
outward Fame, destroys our inward Quiet. -- It Is hard that Love should be
denied the privilege of Hatred; that Scandal and Detraction should so much
indulged, yet sacred Love and Truth debarred our Conversation.


Enter Darling, Clincher, Iun. and Dicky. Darl. This is my Daughter, Cousin.


Dick. Now, Sir, remember your three scrapes.


Clin. saluting Angelica. One, two, three, [Kisses her.] your humble Servant.
Was not that right, Dicky.


Dick. Ay faith, Sir, but why don't you speak to her.


Clin. Jun. I beg your Pardon, Dicky. I know my distance, would you have me
speak to a Lady at the first sight?


Dick. Ay, Sir, by all means, the first Aim is the surest.


Clin. Jun. Now for a good Jest, to make her laugh heartily -- By Jupiter Amm^n
I Will go give her a Kiss. Goes toward her.


Enter Wildair, Interposing. Wild. It Is all to no purpose, I told you s^
before, your pitiful Five Guinea's will never do -- you may march, Sir, for as
far as Five Hundred Pounds will go, I Will out-bid you.


Clin. Jun. What the Devil! the Mad-man's here again.


Darl. Bless me, Cousin! what do you mean? Affront a Gentleman of his Quality in
my House.


Clin. Jun. Quality! why, Madam, I don't know what you mean by your Madmen, and
your Beaux, and your Quality. -- They Are all alike I believe.


Darl. Pray, Sir, walk with me into the next Room.


Exit Darl. leading Clin. Dicky follows. Angel. Sir, if your Conversation be no
more agreeable than 'twas the last time, I would advise you to make it as short
as you can.


Wild. The O^fences of my last Visit, Madam, bore their Punishment in the
Commission; and have made me as uneasy 'till I receive Pardon, as your
Ladyship can be 'till I sue for it.


Angel. Sir Harry I did not well understand the Offense, and must therefore
prop^rtion it to the greatness of your Apology; if you would therefore have me
think it light, take no great Pains in an Excuse.


Wild. How sweet must be the Lips that guard that Tongue! Then, Madam, no more
of past Offenses, let us prepare for Joys to come; let this seal my Pardon.
[Kisses her Hand.] And this [Again] initiate me to farther Happiness.


Angel. Hold, Sir, -- one Question, Sir Harry, and pray answer plainly, do you
love me?


Wild. Love you! Does Fire ascend? Do Hypocrites Dissemble? Usurers love Gold,
or Great Men Flattery? Doubt these, then question that I Love.


Angel. This shows your Gallantry, Sir, but not your Love.


Wild. View your own Charms, Madam, then judge my Passion; your Beauty ravishes
my Eye, your Voice my Ear, and your Touch has thrilled my melting Soul.


Angel. If your Words be real, it is in your Power to raise an equal Flame in me.


Wild. Nay then -- I seize --


Angel. Hold, Sir, it is also possible to make me detest and scorn you worse
than the most pros^igate of your deceiving Sex.


Wild. Ha! A very odd turn this. I hope, Madam, you only affect Anger, because
you know your ^rowns are Becoming.


Angel. Sir Harry, you being the best Judge of your own Designs, can best
understand whether my Anger should be real or dissembled, think what strict
Modesty should bear, then judge of my Resentments.


Wild. Strict Modesty should bear! Why faith Madam, I believe the strictest
Modesty may bear Fifty Guinea's, and I don't believe 'twill bear one Farthing
more.


Angel. What d'mean? Sir.


Wild. Nay, Madam, what do you mean? If you go to that, I think now Fifty
Guinea's is a very fine offer for your strict Modesty, as you call it.


Angel. It Is more Charitable, Sir Harry, to charge the Impertinence of a Man of
your Figure, on his defect in Understanding, than on his want of Manners -- I Am
afraid you're Mad, Sir.


Wild. Why, Madam, you're enough to make any Man mad. God's Death, are not you a --


Angel. What, Sir?


Wild. Why, a Lady of -- strict Modesty, if you will have it so.


Angel. I shall never hereafter trust common Report, which represented you,
Sir, a Man of Honor, Wit, and Breeding; for I find you very de^icient in them
all. Exit.


Wild. solus. Now I find that the strict Pretenses which the Ladies of Pleasure
make to strict Modesty, is the reason why those of Quality are ashamed to wear
it.


Enter Vizard. Viz. Ah, Sir Harry, have I caught you? well, and what Success.


Wild. Success! it is a shame for you young Fellows in Town here, to let the
Wenches grow so ^awcy: I offered her Fifty Guinea's, and she was in her Airs
presently. I could have had two Countesses in Paris for half the Money, and
Ievous rem^rcie in to the Bargain.


Viz. Gone in her Airs say you? And did not you follow her?


Wild. Whither should I follow her?


Viz. Into her Bedchamber, Man. She went on purpose; you a Man of Gallantry,
and not understand that a Lady's best pl^as'd when she puts on her Airs, as you
call it.


Wild. She talked to me of strict Modesty, and stuff.


Viz. Certainly most Women magnify their Modesty, for the same reason that
Cowards boast their Courage, because they have least on^t. Come, come, Sir
Harry, when you make your next Assault, encourage your Spirits with brisk
Burgundy, if you succeed, it is well; if not, you have a fair excuse for your
Rudeness. I Will go in, and make your Peace for what is past. Oh! I had almost
forgot -- Coll. Standard wants to speak with you about some Business.


Wild. I Will wait upon him presently, do you know where he may be found.


Viz. In the Piazza of Covent Garden, about an Hour hence, I promised to see
him, and there you may meet him; to have your Throat cut. Aside. I Will go in and
intercede for you.


Wild. But no foul play with the Lady, Vizard. Exit.


Viz. No fair play I can assure you. Exit.


SCENE, The Street before Lurewell's Lodgings; Clincher Sen. and Lurewell
Coqueting in the Balcony.
Enter Standard. Stand. How weak is Reason in disputes of Love? that daring
Reason which so often pretends to question Works of high Omnipotence, yet poorly
truckles to our weakest Passions, and yields implicit Faith to foolish Love,
paying blind Zeal to faithless Woman's Eyes. I Have heard her Falsehood with such
pressing Proofs, that I no longer should distrust it. Yet still my Love would
baffle Demonstration, and make Impossibilities seem probable. Looks up. Ha!
that Fool too! what! stoop so low as that Animal. -- It Is true, Women once
fallen, like Cowards in despair, will stick at nothing, there is no Medium in
their Actions. They must be bright as Angels, or black as Fiends. But now for
my Revenge, I Will kick her Cully before her Face, call her a Whore, curse the
whole Sex, and so leave her. Goes in.


Lurewell comes down with Clincher. The Scene changes to a Dining Room. Lure. O
Lord, Sir, it is my Husband: What will become of you?


Clin. Eh! Your Husband! Oh, I Shall be murdered: What shall I do? Where shall
I run? I Will creep into an Oven; I Will climb up the Chimney; I Will fly; I Will swi^;
-- I wish to the Lord I were at the Iubilee now. --


Lure. Cannot you think of any thing, Sir?

Enter Tom Errand. What do you want, Sir?


Erra. Madam, I am looking for Sir Harry Wildair; I saw him come in here this
Morning; and did imagine he might be here still.


Lure. A lucky Hitt! Here Friend, change Clothes with this Gentleman quickly:
Strip.


Clinc. Ay, ay, quickly strip: I Will give you Half a Crown. Come here: So.


They change Clothes. Lure. Now slip you, [(...) Clinch] down stairs, and wait
at the Door till my Husband ^e gone; And get you in there [to the Porter] till
I call you.

Puts Errand into the next Room. Enter Standard. Oh, Sir! Are you come? I
wonder Sir, how you have the Con^idence to approach me after so base a Trick.


Stand. O Madam, all your Artifices will not prevail.


Lure. Nay Sir, Your Artifices will not avail. I thought, Sir, that I gave you
Caution enough against troubling me with Sir Harry Wildair's Company when I
sent his Letters back by you: Yet you forsooth must tell him where I lodged,
and expose me again to his impertinent Courtship.


Stand. I expose you to his Courtship!


Lure. I Will lay my Life you will deny it now: Come, come, Sir, a pitiful Lie is
as scandalous to a Red Coat as an Oath to a Black. Did not Sir Harry himself
tell me, that he found out by you where I lodged?


Stand. You're all Lies: First, your Heart is false, your Eyes are double; one
Look belyes another: And then your Tongue does contradict them all. -- Ma'am, I
see a little Devil just now hammering out a Lie in your Pericranium.


Lure. As I hope for Mercy he is in the right on it. [Aside] Hold, Sir, You have
got the Playhouse Cant upon your Tongue; and think that Wit may privilege your
Railing: But I must tell you, Sir, that what is Satyr upon the Stage, is ill
Manners here.


Stand. What is feigned upon the Stage, is here in Reality. Real Falsehood. Yes,
yes, Madam, -- I exposed you to the Courtship of your Fool Clincher too? I hope
your Female Wiles will impose that upon me -- also --


Lure. Clincher! Nay, now, you're stark mad. I know no such Person.


Stand. O Woman in Perfection! not know him! S^ife, Madam, Can my Eyes, my
piercing jealous Eyes be so deluded? Nay, Madam, my Nose could not mistake him;
for I smelt the Fop by his Pulvilio from the Balcony down to the Street.


Lure. The Balcony! Ha, ha, ha, the Balcony! I Will be hanged but he has
mistaken. Sir Harry Wildair's Footman with a new French Livery, for a Bea^.


Stand. God's Death Madam, what is there in me that looks like a Cully? Did I not
see him?


Lure. No, no, you could not see him; You're dreaming, Colonel: Will you
believe your Eyes, now, that I have rubbed them open? -- Here, you Friend.


Enter Errand in Clincher 's Clothes. Stand. This is Illusion all; My Eyes
conspire against themselves. It Is Legerdemain.


Lure. Legerdemain! Is that all your Acknowledgment for your rude Behavior? --
Oh, what a Curse it is to love as I do! -- But don't presume too far, Sir, on
my Af^ection: For such ungenerous Usage will soon return my tired Heart. -- Be
gone Sir [to the Porter.] to your impertinent Master, and tell him I shall
never be at leisure to receive any of his troublesome Visits: -- send to me to
know when I should be at home! -- Be gone Sir: -- I am sure he has made me an
unfortunate Woman. Weeps.


Stand. Noy, then there is no Certainty in Nature; and Truth is only Falsehood
well disguised.


Lure. Sir, had not I owned my fond foolish Passion, I should not have been
subject to such unjust Suspicions; But it is an ungrateful Return. Weeping.


Stand. Now where are all my firm Resolves? I will believe her just. My Passion
raised my Jealousy; then why may not Love be blind in finding faults as in
excusing them? -- I hope, Madam, you will pardon me, since Jealousy that
magnified my Suspicion is as much the Effect of Love as my Easiness in being
satisfied.


Lure. Easiness in being satisfied! You Men have got an insolent way of
extorting Pardon, by persisting in your Faults. No, no, Sir, cherish your
Suspicions, and feed upon your Jealousy: It Is fit Meat for your squeamish
Stomach. With me all Women should this Rule pursue:
Who thinks us false, should never find us true.



Exit in a Rage. Enter Clincher in the Porter's Clothes. Clin. Well, Intriguing
is the prettiest pleasantest thing for a Man of my Parts: -- How shall we laugh
at the Husband when he is gone? -- How sillily he looks! He Is in labor of
Horns already, -- to make a Colonel a Cuckold! 'Twill he rare News for the
Aldermen. aside.


Stand. All this Sir Harry has occasioned; but he is brave, and will afford me
just Revenge: -- O! this is the Porter I sent the Challenge by: -- Well Sir,
have you found him?


Clin. What the Devil does he mean now?


Stand. Have you given Sir Harry the Note, Fellow?


Clin. The Note! What Note?


Stand. The Letter, Blockhead, which I sent by you to Sir Harry Wildair, have
you seen him?


Clin. O Lord, what shall I say now? Seen him! Yes Sir. -- No Sir. -- I have
Sir. -- I have not Sir.


Stand. The Fellow's mad. Answer me directly Sirrah, or I Will break your Head.


Clin. I know Sir Harry very well, Sir; but as to the Note Sir, I cannot
remember a Word on it: Truth is, I have a very bad Memory.


Stand. O Sir, I Will quicken your Memory. Strikes him.


Clin. Zauns, Sir, hold, -- I did give him the Note.


Stand. And what Answer?


Clin. I mean Sir, I did not give him the Note.


Stand. What, do you banter, Rascal? Strikes him again.


Clin. Hold Sir, hold, He did send an Answer.


Stand. What was it Villain?


Clin. Why truly Sir, I have forgot it: I told you that I had a very
treacherous Memory.


Stand. I Will engage you shall remember me this Month, Rascal.


Beats him off, and Exit. Enter Lurewell and Parley. Lure. Fortboon, fortboon,
fortboon, This is better than I expected; but Fortune still helps the
Industrious.


Enter Clincher. Clin. Ah! The Devil take all Intriguing, say I, and him who
first invented Canes: -- That cursed Colonel has got such a Knack of beating
his Men, that he has left the Mark of a Collar of Bandileers about my Shoulders.


Lure. O my poor Gentleman! And was it beaten?


Clin. Yes, I have been beaten: But where is my Clothes, my Clothes?


Lure. What, you will not leave me so soon, my Dear, will ye?


Clin. Will ye? If ever I peep into a Colonel's Tent again, may I be forced to
run the Gauntlet: -- But my Clothes, Madam.


Lure. I sent the Porter down stairs with them: Did not you meet him?


Clin. Meet him! No, not I.


Parl. No? He went out of the Backdoor, and is run clear away I Am afraid.


Clin. Gone, say you? And with my Clothes? my fine Jubilee Clothes? -- O, the
Rogue, the Thief! -- I Will have him hanged for Murder: -- But how shall I get
home in this Pickle?


Parl. I Am afraid, Sir, the Colonel will be back presently; for he dines at
home.


Clin. Oh, then I must sneak off! Was ever Man so managed! to have his Coat
well thrash'd, and lose his Coat too? Exit.


Lure. Thus the Noble Poet spoke Truth. Nothing suits worse with Vice than want
of Sense:
Fools are still wicked at their own Expense.



Parl. Methinks Madam, the Injuries you have suffered by Men must be very
great, to raise such heavy Resentments against the whole Sex.


Lur. The greatest Injury that Woman could sustain; They robbed me of that
Jewel, which preserved, exalts our Sex almost to Angels: But, destroyed,
debases us below the worst of Brutes, Mankind.


Parl. But I think, Madam, you Anger should be only confined to the Author of
your Wrongs.


Lur. The Author! Alas, I know him not, which makes my Wrongs the greater.


Parl. Not know him! It Is odd Madam, that a Man should rob you of that same
Jewel you mentioned, and you not know him.


Lur. Leave Trifling; -- it is a Subject that always sowres my Temper; but since
by thy faithful Service I have some Reason to conside in your Secrecy, hear
the strange Relation: -- Some twelve, twelve Years ago I lived at my Father's
House in Oxfordshire, blessed with Innocence, the ornamental, but weak Guard of
blooming Beauty: I was then just Fifteen, an Age often fatal to the Female Sex;
Our Youth is tempting, our Innocence credulous, Romances moving, Love powerful,
and Men are -- Villains. Then it happened that three young Gentlemen from the
University coming into the Country, and being benighted, and Strangers, called
at my Father's: He was very glad of their Company, and offered them the
Entertainment of his House.


Parl. Which they accepted, no Doubt: Oh! these strouling Collegians are never
abroad, but upon some Mischief.


Lure. They had some private Frolic or Design in their Heads, as appeared by
their not naming one another, which my Father perceiving, out of Civility, made
no enquiry into their Affairs, two of them had a heavy, pedantick, University
Air, a sort of disagreeable scholastic Boorishness in their Behavior, but the
third!


Parl. Ay! the third, Madam, -- the third of all things, they say, is very
Critical.


Lure. He was -- but in short, Nature cut him out for my undoing; -- he seemed
to be about Eighteen.


Parl. A fit Match for your Fifteen as could be.


Lure. He had a genteel Sweetness in his Face, a graceful Comeliness in his
Person, and his Tongue was fit to sooth soft Innocence to ruin: His very Looks
were Witty, and his expressive Eyes spoke softer prettier things than Words
could frame.


Parl. There will be Mischief by and by; I never heard a Woman talk so much of
Eyes, but there were Tears presently after.


Lure. His Discourse was directed to my Father, but his Looks to me. After
Supper I went to my Chamber, and read Cassandra, then went to Bed, and dreamt
of him all Night, rose in the Morning, and made Verses; so fell desperately in
Love -- my Father was so pleased with his Conversation, that he begged their
Company next Day; they consented, and next Night, Parley --


Par. Ay, next Night, Madam, -- next Night (I Am afraid) was a Night indeed.


Lure. He bribed my Maid with his Gold out of her Honesty, and me with his
Rhetoric out of my Honor -- she admitted him to my Chamber, and there he
vowed, and swore, and wep't, and sighed -- and conquered. Weeps.


Parl. Alack a day, poor Fifteen! Weeps.


Lure. He swore that he would come down from Oxford in a Fortnight, and marry
me.


Parl. The old bait! the old bait -- I was cheated just so my self aside. but
had not you the Wit to know his Name all this while?


Lure. Alas! what Wit had Innocence like mine? he told me that he was under an
Obligation to his Companions of concealing himself then, but that he would
write to me in two Days, and let me know his Name and Quality. After all the
binding Oaths of Constancy, joining Hands, exchanging Hearts, I gave him a Ring
with this Motto, Love and Honor, then we parted; but I never saw the dear
Deceiver more.


Par. No, nor never will, I warrant you.


Lure. I need not tell my Griefs, which my Father's Death made a fair Pretense
for; he left me sole Heiress and Executrix to Three Thousand Pounds a Year; at
last my Love for this single Dissembler, turned to a hatred of the whole Sex,
and resolving to divert my Melancholy, and make my large Fortune subservient to
my Pleasure and Revenge, I went to Travel, where in most Courts of Europe I
have done some Execution: Here I will play my last Scene; then retire tomy
Country House, live solitary, and die a Penitent.


Par. But don't you still love this dear Dissembler?


Lure. Most certainly: It Is Love of him that keeps my Anger wa^m^ representing
the Baseness of M^nkind full in View; and makes my Resentments work. -- We
shall have that old impotent Lecher Smugg^e^ here to Night: I have Plot to
swinge him and his precise Nephew ^iz^rd.


Par. I think, Madam, you manage every body that comes in your way.


Lure. No, Parley, hose Men, whose Pretensions I found just and honorable, I
fairly dismissed by letting them know my firm Resolutions never to marry. But
those Villains that would attempt my Honor, I Have seldom failed to manage.


Par. What do you think of the Colonel, Madam? I suppose his Designs are
honorable.


Lure. That Man's a Riddle; There Is something of Honor in his Tem^per that
pleases: I Am sure he loves me too, because he is soon jealous, and soon
satisfied: But he is a Man still. -- When I once tried his Pulse about Marriage,
his Blo^d ran as low as a Coward's: He swore indeed that he loved me; but could
not marry me forsooth; because he was engaged elsewhere. So poor a Pretense
made me disdain his Passion, which otherwise might have been uneasy to me. --
But, hang him, I have teizd him enough: -- Besides, Parley, I begin to be tired
of my Revenge; -- but this Buss and Guinea I must maul once more: I Will hansel
his Woman's Clothes for him. Go, get me Pen and Ink; I must write to Vizard too.


Fortune this once assist me as before.
Two such Machines can never work in vain,
As thy propitious Wheel, and my projecting Brain.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV.
SCENE, Covent Garden.
Wildair and Standard meeting. Stand. I Thought, Sir Harry, to have met you
'ere this in a more convenient Place; but since my Wrongs were without
Ceremony, my Revenge shall be so too. Draw, Sir.


Wild. Draw, Sir! What, shall I draw?


Stand. Come, come, Sir, I like your facetious Humor well enough: It shows
Courage and Unconcern: I know you brave; and therefore use you thus. Draw your
Sword.


Wild. Nay, to oblige you I will draw: But the Devil take me if I fight --
Perhaps, Colonel, this is the prettiest Blade you have seen.


Stand. I doubt not but the Arm is good; and therefore think both worth my
Resentment. Come, Sir.


Wild. But, prithee Colonel, do think that I am such a Madman as to send my
Soul to the Devil, and my Body to the Worms upon every Fool's Errand?


Stand. I hope you're no Coward, Sir.


Wild. Coward, Sir! I have eight thousand Pounds a Year, Sir.


Stand. You fought in Flanders to my Knowledge.


Wild. Ay, for the same Reason that I wore a Red Coat: Because 'twas
fashionable.


Stand. Sir, you fought a French Count in Paris.


Wild. True, Sir; he was a Beau, like my self: Now you're a Soldier, Colonel,
and Fighting's your Trade; And I think it downright Madness to contend with
any Man in his Profession.


Stand. Come, Sir, no more Dallying: I shall take very unseemly Methods if you
don't show your self a Gentleman.


Wild. A Gentleman! Why there again now. A Gentleman! I tell you once more,
Col^^el, that I am a Baronet, and have eight thousand Pounds a Year. I can
dance, sing, ride, fence, understand the Languages. Now, I cannot conceive how
running you through the Body should contribute one Jot more to my Gentility.
But, pray Colonel, I had forgot to ask you: What Is the Quarrel?


Stand. A Woman, Sir.


VVild. Then I put up my Sword. Take her.


Stand. Sir, my Honor's concerned.


Wild. Nay, if your Honor be concerned with a Woman, get it out of her Hands
as soon as you can. An honorable Lover is the greatest Slave in Nature; some
will say, the greatest Fool. Come, come, Colonel, this is something about the
Lady Lurewell, I warrant; I can give you satisfaction in that Affair.


Stand. Do so then immediately.


Wild. Put up your Sword first: You know I dare fight: But I had much rather
make you a Friend than an Enemy. I can assure you this L^dy will prove too hard
for one of your Temper. You have too much Honor, too much in Conscience, to be
a Favorite with the Ladies.


Stand. I am assured, Sir, she never gave you any Encouragement. --


Wild. A Man can never hear Reason with a Sword in his Hand. Sheath your
Weapon; and then if I don't satisfy you, sheath it in my Body.


Stand. Give me b^t Demonstration of her granting you any Favor, and it is
enough.


Wild. Will you take my Word?


Stand. Pardon me, Sir, I cannot.


Wild. Will you believe your own Eyes?


Stand. It Is ten to one whether I shall or no: They have deceived me already.


Wild. That Is hard. -- But some means I shall devise for your Satisfaction. --
We must fly this Place; else that Cluster of Mobb will overwhelm us. Exeunt.


Enter Mobb, Tom Errand 's Wife hurrying in Clincher senior in Errand's
Clothes. Wife. O, the Villain, the Rogue, he has murdered my Husband: Ah, my
poor Timothy! Crying.


Clin. Them your Timothy; -- Your Husband has murdered me, Woman: For he has
carried away my sine Jubilee Clothes.


Wife. Ah, you Cutthroat, have you not got his Clothes upon your Back there?
-- Neighbors, don't you know poor Timothy's Coat and Apron?


Mobb. Ay, ay, it is the same.


First Mobb. What shall we do with him, Neighbors?


Second Mobb. We'll pull him in pieces.


First Mobb. No, no; then we may be hanged for Murder; but we'll drown him.


Clin. Ah, good People, pray don't drown me; for I never learnt to swi^ in all
my Life. Ah, this plaguey Intriguing!


Mobb. Away with him, away with him to the Thames.


Clin. Oh, if I had but my Swimming Girdle now.


Enter Constable. Constable. Hold, Neighbors, I command the Peace.


Wife. O, Mr. Constable, here is a Rogue that has murdered my Husband, and
robbed him of his Clothes.


Constable. Murder and Robbery^ then he must be a Gentleman. Hands off there, he
must not be abused. -- Give an Account of your self: Are you a Gentleman?


Clin. No, Sir, I am a Beau.


Constable. Then you have killed no body, I Am pe^swaded. How came you by these
Clothes, Sir?


Clin. You must know, Sir, that walking along, Sir, I don't know how, Sir; I
cannot tell where, Sir; and -- so the Porter and I changed Clothes, Sir.


Constable. Very well, the Man speaks Reason, and like a Gentleman.


Wi^e. But pray Mr. Constable, ask him how he changed Clothes with him.


Constable. Silence, Woman, and don't disturb the Court. -- Well, Sir, how did you
change Clothes?


Clin. Why, Sir, he pulled off my Coat, and I drew off his: so I put on his
^oat, and he puts on mine.


C^nst. Why Neighbors, I don't find that he is guilty: Search him; and if he
car^ies no Arms about him, we'll let him go.


They search his Pockets, and pull out his Pistols Clin. O Gemini! my Jubilee
Pistols.


Constable. What, a Case of Pistols! Then the Case is plain. Speak, what are you,
Sir? whence come you, and whither go you?


Clin. Sir, I came from Russel street, and am going to the Jubilee.


Wise. You shall go to the Gallows, you Rogue.


Constable. Away with him, away with him to Newgate straight.


Clin. I shall go to the Jubilee now indeed. Exeunt.


Re-enter Wildair and Standard. Wild. In short, Colonel, it is all Nonsense:
Fight for a Woman! Hard by (...) the Lady's House; if you please, we'll wait on
her together: You shall draw your Sword, I Will draw my Snush-Box: You shall
produce your Wounds received in War; I Will relate mine by Cupid's Dart: -- You
shall look big; I Will ogle: -- You shall swear; I Will sigh: -- You shall sa, sa,
and I Will coupee; And if she flies not to my Arms, like a Hawk to its Perch, my
Dancing Mas^er dese^ves to be damned.


Stand. With the generality of Women, I grant you, these Arts may prevail.


Wild. Generality of Women! Why there again you're out. They Are all alike, Sir:
I never heard of any one that was particular, but one.


Stand. Who was she, pray?


Wild. Penelope, I think she is called; and that is a Poetical Story too. When
will you find a Poet in our Age make a Woman so chaste?


Stand. Well, Sir Harry, your facetious Humor can disguise Falsehood, and make
Calumny pass for Satyr: But you have promised me ocular Demonstration that she
favors you: make that good, and I shall then maintain Faith and Fem^le to be
as inconsistent as Truth and Falsehood.


VVild. Nay, by what you have told me, I am satisfied that she imposes on us
all; And Vizard too seems what I still suspected him: but his Honesty once
mis^^^^^d, spoils his Knave^y: -- But will you be convinced if our P^ot
succeeds;


Stand. I rely on your Word and Honor, Sir Harry; which, if I doubted, my
Distrust would cancel the Obligation of their Security.


VVild. Then meet me half an hour hence at the Rumm^r: You must oblige me by
taking a hearty Glass with me toward the fitting me out for a certain Project
which this Night I undertake.


Stand. I guess by the P^eparation, that Woman's the Design.


VVild. Yes, faith, -- I am taken dangerously ill with two foolish Maladies,
Modesty and Love; the first I Will cure with Burgundy, and my Love by a N^ght's
Lodging with the Damsel. A sure Remedy. Probatum est.


Stand. I Will certainly m^et you, Sir. Exeunt s^verally.


Enter Clincher junior and Dicky. Clin. Ah! Dicky, this London is a sad Place,
a sad vicious Place: I wish that I were in the Country again: And this Brother
of mine! I Am sorry he is so great a Rake: I had rather see him dead than see him
thus.


Dick. Ay, Sir, He Will spend his whole Estate at this same Jubilee. Who, do you
think lives at this same Jubilee?


Clin. Who pray?


Dick. The Pope.


Clin. The Devil he does! my Brother go to the Place where the Pope dwells!
he is bewitched sure.


Enter Tom Errand in Clincher Senior's Clothes. Dick. Indeed I believe he is,
for he is strangely attired.


Clin. Altered! why he looks like a Jesuit already.


Erra. This Lace will sell. What a Blockhead was the Fellow to trust me with
his Coat! If I can get cross the Garden, down to the Waterside, I Am pretty
secure. Aside


Clin. Brother! -- Alaw! O Gemini? are you my Brother?


Dick. I seize you in the King's Name, Sir.


Erra. O Lord, should this prove some Parliament Man now!


Clin. Speak you Rogue, what are you.


Erra. A poor Porter, Sir, and going of an Errand.


Dick. What Errand? speak you Rogue.


Erra. A Fools Errand, I Am afraid.


Clin. Who sent you?


Erra. A Beau, Sir.


Dick. No, no, the Rogue has murdered your Brother, and stripped him of his
Clothes.


Clin. Murdered my Brother! O Crimini! O my poor Jubilee Brother! -- stay, by
Jupiter Ammon, I Am Heir: Though speak Sirrah, Have you killed him? Confess that
you have killed him, and I Will give you Half a Crown.


Erra. Who I, Sir? alack-a-day, Sir, I never killed any Man, but a Carrier's
Horse once.


Clin. Then you shall certainly be Hanged, but confess that you killed him, and
we'll let you go.


Erra. Telling the Truth hangs a Man, but confessing a Lie can do no harm,
besides, if the worst comes to the worst, I can but deny it again -- Well, Sir,
since I must tell you, I did kill him.


Clin. Here Is your Money, Sir, -- but are you sure you killed him dead.


Erra. Sir, I Will swear it before any Judge in England.


Dick. But are you sure that he is Dead in Law.


Erra. Dead in Law! I cannot tell whether he be Dead in Law. But he is as dead as
a Door Nail; for I gave him seven knocks on the Head with a Hammer.


Dick. Then you have the Estate by the Statute. Any Man that is knocked of the
Head is Dead in Law.


Clin. But are you sure he was Compos Men^is when he was killed?


Erra. I suppose he was, Sir, for he told me nothing to the contrary afterward.


Clin. Hey! -- then I go to the Iubilee -- Strip, Sir, strip. By Jupiter Ammon
strip.


Dick. Ah! don't swear, Sir. Puts on his Brother's Clothes.


Clin. Swear, Sir, Zoons, have NOT I got the Estate, Sir? Come, Sir, now I Am in
Mourning for my Brother.


Err. I hope you will let me go now, Sir. --


Clin. Yes, yes, Sir, but you must first do me the Favor, to swear positively
before a Magistrate, that you killed him dead, that I may enter upon the Estate
without any Trouble. By Jupiter Ammon all my Religion's gone, since I put on
these fine Clothes -- Hey, call me a Coach somebody.


Erra. Ay, Master let me go, and I Will call one immediately.


Clin. No, no, Dicky, carry this Spark before a Justice, and when he has made
Oath, you may discharge him. And I Will go see Angelica. Exeunt Dick and Errand.
Now that I Am an Elder Brother. I Will Court, and Swear, and Rant, and Rake, and
go to the Iubilee with the best of them. Exit.


SCENE, Lurewell's House.
Enter Lurewell and Parley. Lure. Are you sure that Vizzard had my Letter.


Par. Yes, yes, Madam, one of your Ladyships Footmen gave it to him in the
Park, and he told the Bearer, with all transports of Joy, that he would be
punctual to a Minute.


Lure. Thus most Villains, some time or other, are punctual to their Ruin; and
Hypocrisy, by imposing on the World, at last deceives it self. Are all things
prepared for his Reception.


Par. Exactly to your Ladyships Order, the Alderman too is just come, dressed
and cooked up for Iniquity.


Lure. Then he has got Woman's Clothes on.


Parl. Yes, Madam, and has passed upon the Family for your Nurse.


Lure. Convey him into that Closet, and put out the Candles, and tell him, I Will
wait on him presently. As Parley goes to put out the Candle, somebody Knocks.


Lure. This must be some Clown without Manners, or a Gentleman above Ceremony.
Who Is there?


Wild. Sings. Thus Damon knocked at Celia's Door,
He sighed, and begged, and wept, and swear,
The Sign was so,
[knocks] She answered, No,
[knocks thrice] No, no, no.
Again he sighed, again he prayed,
No, Damon, no, I am a^raid,
Consider, Damon, I Am a Maid,
Consider,
No,
I Am a Maid.
No, etc.
At last his Sighs and Tears made way,
She rose, and softly turned the Key,
Come in, said she, but do not stay.
I man conclude
You will be rude,
But if you are, you may.



Enters. Exit Parley. Lure. It Is too early for Serenading, Sir Harry.


Wild. Wheresoever Love is, there Music is proper, there is an harmonious
consent in their Natures, and when ^ightly joined, they make up the Chorus of
Earthly Happiness.


Lure. But, Sir Harry, what Tempest drives you here at this Hour.


Wild. No Tempest, Madam, but as fair Weather as ever enticed a Citizens Wife
t^ Cuckold her Husband in fresh Air.

Love, Madam. Wild. taking her by the Hand.


Lure. A^ p^re and white as Angels soft desires, is it not so?


W^^d. Fi^^ce, as when ripe consenting Beauty F^^es.


Lure. O Villain! what Privilege has Man to our Destruction, that thus they
hunt our Ruin? [Aside] If this be a Love Token, Wild. drops a Ring, she takes
it up. your Mistresses Favors hang very loose about you, Sir.


Wild. I cannot justly, Madam, pay your Trouble of taking it up by any thing,
but desiring you to wear it.


Lure. You Gentlemen have the cunningest ways of playing the Fool, and are so
industrious in your Profuseness. Speak seriously, am I beholding to Chance or
Design for this Ring?


Wild. To design upon my Honor, and I hope my Design will succeed.


Aside. Lure. And what shall I give you for such a fine thing. Both sing.


Wild. You Will give me another, you will give me another fine thing.


Lure. Shall I be free with you, Sir Harry.


Wild. With all my Heart, Madam, so I may be free with you.


Lure. Then plainly, Sir, I shall beg the favor to see you some other time,
for at this very Minute I have two Lovers in the House.


Wild. Then to be as plain, I must be gone this Minute, for I must see another
Mistress within these two Hours.


Lure. Frank and free.


Wild. As you with me -- Madam, your most humble Servant. Exit.


Lure. Nothing can disturb his Humor. Now for my Merchant and Vizard. Exit,
and takes the Candles with her.


Enter Parley, leading in Smugler, dressed in Woman's Clothes. Parl. This way,
Mr. Alderman.


Smug. Well, Mrs. Parley, -- I Am obliged to you for this Trouble, here are a
couple of Shillings for you. Times are hard, very hard indeed, but next time
I Will steal a pair of silk Stockings from my Wife, and bring them to you -- What
are you fumbling about my Pockets for --?


Parl. Only settling the Plates of your Gown, here, Sir, get into this Closet,
and my Lady will wait on you presently.


Puts him into the Closet, runs out, and returns with Vizard. Viz. Where
wou'd'st thou lead me, my dear auspicious little Pilot?


Parl. You're almost in Port, Sir, my Lady's in the Closet, and will come out
to you immediately.


Viz. Let me thank thee as I ought. Kisses her.


Parl. Pshaw! who has hired me best? a couple of Shillings, and a couple of
Kisses. Exit.


Viz. Propitious Darkness guides the Lovers Steps, and Night that shadows
outward Sense, lights up our inward Joy. Night! the great awful Ruler of
Mankind, which, like the Persian Monarch hides its Royalty to raise the
Veneration of the World. Under thy easy Reign Dissemblers may speak Truth; all
slavish Forms and Ceremonies laid aside, and generous Villainy may act without
Constraint.


Smug. peeping out of the Closet. Bless me! what Voice is this?


Viz. Our hungry Appetites, like the wild Beasts of Prey, now scour abroad, to
gorge their craving Maws, the pleasure of Hypocrisy, like a chained Lion, once
broke loose, wildly indulges its new Freedom, ranging through all unbounded
Joys.


Smug. My Nephew's Voice! and certainly possessed with an Evil Spirit, he talks
as profanely, as an Actor possessed with a Poet.


Viz. Ha! I hear a Voice, Madam, -- my Life, my Happiness, where are you, Madam?


Smug. Madam! he takes me for a Woman too, I Will try him. Where have you left
your Sanctity, Mr. Vizard?


Viz. Talk no more of that ungrateful Subject -- I left it where it has only
business with Daylight, it is needless to wear a Mask in the Dark.


Smug. O the Rogue, the Rogue! -- The World takes you for a very sober virtuous
Gentleman.


Viz. Ay, Madam, that adds Security to all my Pleasures -- with me a
Cully-Squire may squander his Estate, and never be thought a Spend-thrift --
With me a Holy Elder may zealously be drunk, and toast his tuneful Nose in
Sack, to make it hold forth clearer -- But what is most my Praise, the formal
Rigid she that rails at Vice and Men, with me sec^res her loosest Pleasures,
and her strictest Honor -- she who with scornful Mien, and virtuous Pride,
disdains the Name of Whore, with me can Wanton, and laugh at the deluded World.


Smug. How have I been deceived! then you are very great among the Ladies.


Viz. Yes, Madam, they know that like a Mole in the Earth, I dig deep but
invisible, not like those fluttering noisie Sinners, whose Pleasure is the
proclamation of their Faults, those empty Flashes who no sooner kindle, but
they must blaze to alarm the World. But come, Madam, you delay our Pleasures.


Smug. He surely takes me for the Lady Lurewell -- she has made him an
Appointment too -- but I Will be revenged of both -- Well, Sir, what are these
you are so intimate with.


Viz. Come, come, Madam, you know very well -- those who stand so high, that
the vulgar envy even their Crimes, whose Figure adds privilege to their Sin,
and makes it pass unquestioned; fair, high, pampered Females, whose speaking
Eyes, and piercing Voice, would warm the Statue of a Stoic, and animate his
cold Marble with the Soul of an Epicure, all ravishing, lovely, soft, and kind,
like you.


Smug. I am very lovely and soft indeed, you shall find me much harder than you
imagine, Friend -- Well, Sir, but I suppose your Dissimulation has some other
Motive besides Pleasure.


Viz. Yes, Madam, the honestest Motive in the World, Interest -- you must know,
Madam, that I have an old Uncle, Alderman Smuggler, you have seen him, I
suppose.


Smug. Yes, yes, I have some small Acquaintance with him.


Viz. It Is the most knavish, precise, covetous old Rogue, that ever died of a
Gout.


Smug. Ah! the young Son of a Whore. Well, Sir, and what of him?


Viz. Hell hungers not more for wretched Souls, than he for ill-got Pelf -- and
yet (what is wonderful) he that would stick at no profitable Villainy himself,
loves Holiness in another -- he prays all Sunday for the Sins of the Week past
-- he spends all Dinnertime in too tedious Graces, and what he designs a
Blessing to the Meat, proves a Curse to his Family -- he is the most --


Smug. Well, well, Sir, I know him very well.


Viz. Then, Madam, he has a swinging Estate, which I design to Purchase as a
Saint, and spend like a Gentleman. He got it by Cheating, and should lose it by
Deceit. By the pretense of my Zeal and Sobriety, I Will cozen the old Miser one
of these Days out of a Settlement, and Deed of Conveyance --


Smug. It shall be a Deed to convey you to the Gallows then, you young Dog.
aside.


Viz. And no sooner he is Dead, but I Will rattle over his Grave with a Coach and
Six, to inform his covetous Ghost how genteelly I spend his Money.


Smug. I Will prevent you, Boy, for I Will have my Money buried with me.


Aside. Viz. Bless me, Madam, here is a Light coming this way, I must fly
immediately, when shall I see you, Madam.


Smug. Sooner than you expect, my Dear.


Viz. Pardon me, dear Madam, I would not be seen for the World. I would sooner
forfeit my Life, nay, my Pleasure, than my Reputat^on.


Exit. Smug. Reputation! Reputation! that poor Word suffers a great deal --
Well! thou art the most accomplished Hypocrite that ever made a grave plodding
Face over a Dish of Coffee, and a Pipe of Tobacco; he owes me for seven Years
maintenance, and shall pay me by seven Years Imprisonment; and when I die, I Will
leave him the Fee-Simple of a Rope and a Shilling -- who are these? I begin to
be afraid o^ some Mischief -- I wish that I were safe within the City Liberties
-- I Will hide my (...)


Star as close. Enter Butler, with other Servants and Lights. But. I say there
are Two Spoons wanting, and I Will search the whole House -- Two Spoons will be
no small gap in my Quarter's Wages --


Serve. When did you miss them, James?


But. Miss them. Why, I miss them now; in short they must be a^ong you, and if
you don't return them, I Will go to the Cunning-Man to Morrow-Morning; my Spoons
I want, and my Spoons I will have.


Serve. Come, come, search about. Search and discover Smugler.
Ah! who is this?

But. Hark'ee, good Woman, what makes you hide your self? What are you ashamed
of.


Smug. Ashamed of! O Lord, Sir, I Am an honest Old Woman that never was ashamed
of any thing.


But. What are you, a Midwife then? Speak, did not you see a couple of stray
Spoons in your Travels?


Smug. St^ay Spoons!


But. Ay, ay, stray Spoons; in short you stole them, and I Will shake your old
Limbs to pieces, if you don't deliver them presently.


Smug. Bless me! a Reverend Elder of Seventy Years old accused for
Petty-Lacenary! -- why, search me, good People, search me, and if you find any
Spoons about me, you shall burn me for a Witch.


But. Ay, ay, we will search you Mistress.


They search and pull the Spoons out of his Pockets. Smug. Oh! the Devil, the
Devil!


But. Where, where is he? Lord bless us, she is a Witch in good earnest, may be.


Smug. O, it was some Devil, some Covent Garden, or St. James's Devil, that put
them in my Pocket.


But. Ay, ay, you shall be hanged for a Thief, burnt for a Witch, and then
carted for a Bawd. Speak, what are you?


Enter Lurewell. Smug. I Am the Lady Lurewell's Nurse.


Lure. What Noise is this?


But. Here is an old Succubus, Madam, that has stole two silver Spoons, and
says, she is your Nurse.


Lure. My Nurse! O the Impudent old Jade, I never saw the withered Creature
before.


Smug. Then I Am finely caught. O Madam! Madam don't you know me? Don't you
remember Buss and Guinea?


Lure. Was ever such Impudence? I know thee! why you are as Brazen as a Bawd in
the Side-Box -- Take her before a Justice, and then to Newgate, away.


Smug. O! consider, Madam, that I Am an Alderman.


Lure. Consider, Sir, that you're a Compound of Covetousness, Hypocrisy, and
Knavery; and must be punished accordingly -- You must be in Petticoats, Gouty
Monster, must ye! You must Buss and Guinea too, you must tempt a Ladies Honor,
old Satyr, away with him.

Hurry him off.
Still may our Sex thus Frauds of Men oppose,
Still may our Arts delude these tempting Foes.
May Honor Rule, and never fall betrayed,
But Vice be caught in Nets for Virtue laid.
The End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V.
SCENE, Lady Darling's House.
Darling and Angelica. Darling. DAughter, since you have to deal with a Man of
so peculiar a Temper, you must not think the general Arts of Love can secure
him; you may therefore allow such a Courtier some Encouragement extraordinary,
without reproach to your Modesty.


Angel. I am sensible, Madam, that a formal Nicety makes our Modesty sit
awkard, and appears rather a Chain to Enslave, than Bracelet to Adorn us -- it
should show, when unmolested, easy and innocent as a Dove, but strong and
vigorous as a Faulcon, when assaulted.


Darl. I Am afraid, Daughter, you mistake Sir Harry's Gaiety for Dishonor.


Angel. Though Modesty, Madam, may Wink, it must not Sleep, when powerful Enemies
are abroad -- I must confess, that of all Men's, I would not see Sir Harry
Wildair's Faults; nay, I could wrest most suspicious Words a thousand ways, to
make them look like Honor -- but, Madam, in spite of Love I must hate him,
and curse those Practices which taint our Nobility, and rob all virtuous Women
of the bravest Men --


Darl. You must certainly be mistaken, Angelica, for I Am satisfied Sir Harry's
designs are only to court, and marry you.


Angel. His pretense, perhaps, was such, but Women now, like Enemies, are
attacked; whether by Treachery, or fairly Conquered, the Glory of Triumph is
the same -- pray, Madam, by what means were you made acquainted with his
Designs?


Darl. Means, Child! why my Cousin Vizard, who, I Am sure is your sincere
Friend, sent him. He brought me this Letter from my Cousin --


Gives her the Letter, which she opens. Angel. Ha! Vizard! then I Am abused in
earnest -- would Sir Harry, by his Instigation, fix a base Affront upon me? no,
I cannot suspect him of so ungenteel a Crime -- this Letter shall trace the
Truth -- [Aside.] my Suspicions, Madam, are much cleared, and I hope to satisfy
your Ladyship in my Management, when next I see Sir Harry.


Enter Servant. Serve. Madam, here is a Gentleman below calls himself Wildair.


Darl. Conduct him up. Daughter, I wont doubt your Discretion.


Exit Darling. Enter Wildair. Wild. O, the Delights of Love and Burgundy --!
Madam, I have toasted your Ladyship fifteen Bumpers successively, and swallowed
Cupids like Loches, to every Glass.


Ang. And what then, Sir?


Wild. Why then, Madam, the Wine has got into my Head; and the Cupids into my
Heart: and unless ^y quenching quick my Flame, you kindly ease the Smart, I Am a
lost Man, Madam.


Ang. Drunkenness, Sir Harry, is the worst Pretense a Gentleman can make for
Rudeness: For the Excuse is as scandalous as the Fault: -- Therefore pray
consider who you are so free with, Sir; a Woman of Condition, that can call
half a dozen Footmen upon Occasion.


Wild. Nay, Madam, if you have a mind to toss me in a Blanket, half a dozen
Chamber-maids would do better Service. -- Come, come, Madam, though the Wine
makes me lisp, yet has it taught me to speak plainer. By all the Dust of my
ancient Progenitors I must this Night quarter my Coat of Arms with yours.


Angel. Nay, then who waits there? Enter Footmen.
Take hold of that mad Man, and bind him.

Wild. Nay, then Burgundy's the Word, and Slaughter will ensue. Hold, -- do you
know, Scoundrils, that I have been drinking victorious Burgundy?


draws. Servants. We know you're drunk, Sir.


Wild. Then how have you the Impudence, Rascals, to assault a Gentleman with a
couple of Flasks of Courage in his Head?


Servants. Sir, we must do as our young Mistress commands us.


Wild. Nay, then, have among ye, Dogs. Throws Money among them: They scramble
and take it up: He pelting them out, shuts the Door, and returns. Rascals,
Poultrons, -- I have charmed the Dragon, and now the Fruit's my own.


Angel. O, the mercenary Wretches! This was a Plot to betray me.


Wild. I have put the whole Army to flight: And, now take the General Prisoner.
La^ing hold on her.


Angel. I conjure you, Sir, by the sacred Name of Honor, by your dead Father's
Name, and the fair Reputation of your Mother's Chastity, that you offer not the
least Offense. -- Already you have wronged me past Redress.


Wild. Thou art the most unaccountable Creature.


Angel. What Madness, Sir Harry, what wild Dream of loose Desire could prompt
you to attempt this Baseness? View me well. -- The Brightness of my Mind,
methinks, should lighten outward, and let you see your Mistake in my
Behavior. I think it shines with so much Innocence in my Face, that it should
dazzle all your vicious Thoughts: Think not I am defenceless' cause alone. Your
very self is Guard against your self I Am sure there is something generous in
your Soul; My Words shall search it out, and Eyes shall sire it^ for my own
Defense.


Wild. Ha! Her Voice bears a commanding Accent! Every Syllable is pointed. --
By Heavens I love her: -- I feel her piercing Words turn the wild Current of my
Blood; and thrill through all my Veins.


Angel. View me well: consider me with a sober Thought, free from those Fumes
of Wine that cast a Mist before your Sight; and you shall find that every
Glance from my reproaching Eye is armed with sharp Resentment, and with
repelling Rays that look Dishonor dead.


Wild. I cannot view you, Madam: For when you speak, all the Faculties of my
charmed Soul crowd to my attentive Ears; desert my Eyes, which gaze insensibly.
-- Whatever Charm inspires your Looks, whether of Innocence or Vice, it is
lovely, past Expression.


Angel. If my Beauty has power to raise a Flame, be sure it is a virtuous one:
if otherwise, it is owing to the Foulness of your own Thought, which throwing
this mean Affront upon my Honor, has alarmed my Soul, and ^ires it with a
brave Disdain.


Wild. Where can the Difference lie 'twixt such Hypocrisy and Truth^ Madam,
whatever my unruly Passion did at first suggest; I now must own you have turned
my Love to Veneration, and my unmannerly Demands to a most humble Prayer. --
Your surprising Conduct has quenched the gross material Flame; but raised a
subtle piercing Fire, which flies like lamben^ Lightning, through my Blood,
disdaining common Fuel, preys upon the nobler Part, my Soul.


Ang. Grants, Heavens, his Words be true! [aside] Then, as you hope that
Passion should be happy, tell me without Reserve, what Motives have engaged you
thus to affront my Virtue?


Wild. Affront her Virtue! Ah, something I fear. -- Your Question, Madam is a
Riddle, and cannot be resolved; but the most proper Answer the old Gentlewoman
can make, who passes for your Mother.


Ang. Passes for my Mother! O Indignation! Were I a Man, you durst not use me
thus: -- But the mean poor Abuse you cast on me, reflects upon your self: Our
Sex still strikes an Awe upon the Brave, and only Cowards dare affront a Woman.


Wild. Then, Madam, I have a fair Claim to Courage; for, by all Hopes of
Happiness, I never was awed so much, nor ever felt the Power of Fear before: --
But since I cannot dissolve this Knot, -- I Will cut it at a Stroke.


Vizard (who, I fear is a Villain) to'd me you were a Prostitute; that he had
known you, and sent a Letter, intim^ting, my Designs to the old Gentlewoman,
who, I supposed had licensed my Proceedings by leaving us so often in private.


Ang. That Vizard is a Villain, damned beyond the Curses of an injured Woman,
is most true; But, that his Letter signified any dishonorable Proceedings, is
as fa^se.


Wild. I appeal to that for Pardon or Condemnation: He read it to me^ and the
Contents were as I have declared, only with this Addition; That I would scruple
no price for the Enjoyment of my Pleasure.


Ang. No price! What have I suffered? to be made a Prostitute for Sale! -- It Is
an unequalled Cu^se upon our Sex, That Woman's Virtue should so much depend on
lying Fame, and scandalous Tongues of Men. -- Read that: Then judge how far I Am
injured, and you deceived.


Wild. reads. Out of my earnest Inclination to serve your Ladyship, and my
Cousin Angelica, I have sent Sir Harry Wildair to court my Cousin. -- [The
Villain read to me a clear different thing.] He Is a Gentleman of great Parts
and Fortune: -- [ Damn his Compliment.] and would make your Daughter very happy
in a Husband. -- [O Lord, O Lord, what have I been doing! -- ] I hope your
Ladyship will entertain him as becomes his Birth and Fortune, and the Friend
of, Madam,

Your Ladyship's most Devoted and Humble Servant, VIZARD.





Ang. Now, Sir, -- I hope you need no Instigation to redress my Wrongs, since
Honor points the Way.


Wild. Redress your Wrongs! Instruct me, Madam: for all your Injuries ten-fold
recoiled on me. I have abused Innocence, murdered Honor, stabbed it in the
nicest part: A fair Lady's Fame. -- Instruct me, Madam: For my Reason's sled,
and hides its guilty Face, as conscious of its Master's Shame.


Ang. Think, Sir, that my Blood, for many Generations, has run in the purest
Channel of unsullied Honor.

Consider what a tender Flower is Woman's Reputation, which, the least Air of
foul Detraction blasts. -- Call then to mind your rude and scandalous
Behavior: -- Remember the base Price you offered: -- then think that Vizard,
Villain Vizard, caused all this, yet lives. That Is all. -- Farewell.


going. Wild. Stay, Madam; he is too base an Offering for such Purity: But
Justice has inspired me with a nobler Thought. -- I throw a purer Victim at
your Feet, my honorable Love and Fortune: If chastest, purest Passion, with a
large and fair Estate, can make amends, they are yours this Moment. -- The
matrimonial Tie shall bind us Friends this Hour. -- Nay, Madam, no Reply,
unless you smile. -- Let but a pleasing Look fore-run my Sentence: then raise
me up to Joy.


Ang. Rise, Sir, [smiling] I Am pleased to find my Sentiments of you, which were
always Generous, so generously answered: And since I have met a Man above the
common Level of your Sex, I think my self disengaged from the Formality of
mine, and shall therefore venture to inform you, that with Joy I receive your
honorable Love.


Wild. Beauty without Art! Virtue without Pride! and Love without Ceremony! The
Day breaks glorious to my o'erclouded Thought, and darts its sm^ling Beams into
my Soul. My Love is heightened by a glad Devotion; and Virtue ra^ifies the
Bliss to feast the purer Mind.


Ang. You must promise me, Sir Harry; to have a ^are of Burgundy henceforth.


Wild. Fear not, sweet Innocence; Your Presence, like a Guardian Angel^ shall
fright away all Vice. In your swe^t Eyes and Words there is a Charm
To settle Madness, or a F^end disarm
Of all his Spite, his Torments and his Cares:
And make him change his Curses into Prayers.



Exeunt. SCENE Newgate, Clincher senior solus.
Clin. How severe and melancholy are Newgate Re^lections? Last Week my Father
died: Yesterday I turned Beau: To day I am laid by the heels, and to morrow
shall be hung by the Neck. -- I was agreeing with a Bookseller about Printing
an Account of my Journey through France to Italy; But now, the History of my
Travels through Holborn to Tyburn, -- The last and dying Speech of Beau Clincher,
that was going to the Iubilee. -- Come, a Halfpenny apiece. A sad Sound, a sad
Sound, faith. It Is one Way to have a Man's Death make a great Noise in the
World.


Enter Smugler and Jailer. Smug. Well, Friend, I have told you who I am: so
send these Letters into Thames Street, as directed; they are to Gentlemen that
will bail me. Ex. Jailer.

Eh! -- this Newgate is a very populous Place: Here Is Robbery and Repentance in
every Corner. -- Well, Friend, what are you, a Cutthroat or a Bum-Bayliff?


Clin. What are you, Mistress, a Bawd or a Witch? Hearkee, if you are a Witch,
do you see, I Will give you a hundred Pounds to mount me on a Broom-staff, and whip
me away to the Jubilee.


Smug. The Jubilee! O, you young Rake-hell, what brought you here?


Clin. Ah, you old Rogue, what brought you here, if you go to that?


Smug. I knew, Sir, what your Powdering, your Prinking, your Dancing and your
Frisking would come to.


Clin. And I knew what your Cozening, your Extortion, and your Smugling would
come to.


Smug. Ay, Sir, you must break your Indentures, and run to the Devil in a full
Bottom Wig, must you?


Clin. Ay Sir, and you must put off your Gravity, and run to the Devil in
Petticoats: -- You design to swing in Masquerade, Master, d^ye?


Smug. Ay, you must go to Plays too, Sirrah: Lord, Lord! What Business has a
Prentice at a Playhouse, unless it be to hear his Master made a Cuckold, and
his Mistress a Whore? It Is ten to one now, but some malicious Poet has my
Character upon the Stage within this Month: It Is a hard matter now, that an
honest sober Man cannot sin in private for this plaguey Stage. I gave an honest
Gentleman five Guineas my self toward writing a Book against it: And it has
done no good, we see.


Clin. Well, well, Master, take Courage; our Comfort is, we have lived
together, and shall die together, only with this difference, that I have lived
like a Fool, and shall die like a Knave; and you have lived like a Knave, and
shall die like a Fool.


Smug. No, Sirrah! I have sent a Messenger for my Clothes, and shall get out
immediately, and shall be upon your Jury by and by. -- Go to Prayers, you
Rogue, go to Prayers. Exit Smug.


Clin. Prayers! It Is a hard taking, when a Man must, say Grace to the Gallows.
-- Ah, this cursed Intriguing! Had I swung handsomely in a silken Garter now, I
had died in my Duty; but to hang in Hemp, like the Vulgar, it is very ungenteel.

Enter Tom Errand. A Reprieve, a Reprieve, thou dear, dear -- damned Rogue,
where have you been? Thou art the most welcome -- Son of a Whore, where is my
Clothes?


Erra. Sir, I see where mine are: Come, Sir, strip, Sir, strip.


Clin. What, Sir, will you abuse a Gentleman?


Erra. A Gentleman! ha, ha, ha, do you know where you are, Sir? Were all
Gentlemen here, -- I stand up for Liberty and Property. -- Newgate's a
Commonwealth. No Courtier has Business among us; Come, Sir.


Clin. Well, but stay, stay till I send for my own Clo^ths: I shall get out
presently.


Erra. No, no, Sir, I Will ha you into the Dungeon, and uncase you.


Clin. Sir, you cannot master me; for I Am twenty thousand strong.


Exeunt struggling. The SCENE changes to Lady Darling's House.
Enter Wildair with Letters, Servants following. Wild. Here, ^ly all around,
and bear these as directed; you to Westminster, -- you to St. James's, -- and
you into the City. -- Tell all my Friends a B^idegroom's Joy invites their
Presence: Look all of ye like Bridegrooms also: All appear with hospitable
Looks, and bear a Welcome in your Faces. -- Tell 'em I Am married. If any ask to
whom, make no Reply; but tell 'em that I Am married, that Joy shall crown the
Day, and Love the Night. Be gone, fly.

Enter Standard. A thousand Welcomes, Friend: my Pleasure's now complete, since
I can share it with my Friend: Brisk Joy shall bound from me to you: Then back
again; and, like the Sun, grow warmer by Reflection.


Stand. You're always pleasant, Sir Harry; but this transcends your self;
whence proceeds it?


Wild. Can thou not guess? my Friend -- whence flows all Earhtly Joy? What is
the Life of Man, and Soul of Pleasure? -- Woman: -- What fires the Heart with
Transport, and the Soul with Raptures? Lovely Woman. -- What is the Master
Stroke and Smile of the Creation, but Charming Virtuous Woman? -- When Nature
in the general Composition first brought Woman forth, like a flushed Poet,
ravished with his Fancy, with Ecstasy: The blessed, the fair Production. --
Methinks, my Friend, you relish not my Joy. What is the Cause?


Stand. Can thou not guess? -- What is the Bane of Man, and Scourge of Life,
but Woman? -- What is the Heathenish Idol Man sets up, and is damned for
worshipping? Treacherous Woman: -- What are those Eyes, like Basiliksks, shine
beautiful for sure Destruction, whose Smiles are dangerous as the Grin of
Fiends? But false deluding Woman. -- Woman whose Composition inverts Humanity;
their Body's Heavenly, but their Souls are Clay.


Wild. Come, come, Colonel, this is too much: I know your Wrongs received from
Lurewell, may excuse your Resentments against her: But it is unpardonable to
charge the Failings of a single Woman upon the whole Sex. -- I have found one,
whose Virtues --


Stand. So have I, Sir Harry; I have found one whose Pride's above yielding to
a Prince: And if Lying, Dissembling, Perjury and Falsehood be no Breaches in
Woman's Honor, she is as innocent as Infancy.


Wild. Well, Colonel, I find your Opinion grows stronger by Opposition, I shall
now therefore wave the Argument, and only beg you for this Day to make a Show
of Complaisance at least. -- Here comes my Charming Bride. --


Enter Darling and Angelica. Stand. saluting Angelica. I wish you, Madam, all
the Joys of Love and Fortune.


Enter Clincher junior. Clin. Gentlemen and Ladies, I Am just upon the Spur, and
have only a Minute to take my Leave.


Wild. Whither are you bound, Sir?


Clin. Bound, Sir! I Am going to the Iubilee, Sir.


Darl. Bless me, Cousin! how came you by these Clothes?


Clin. Clothes! Ha, ha, ha, the rarest Jest! Ha, ha, ha, I shall burst, by
Jupiter Ammon, I shall burst.


Darl. What Is the Matter, Cousin?


Clin. The matter! Ha, ha, ha: why an honest Porter, ha, ha, ha, has knocked
out my Brother's Brains, ha, ha, ha.


Wild. A very good Jest, in faith, ha ha, ha.


Clin. Ay Sir, but the best Jest of all is, he knocked out his Brains with a
Hammer, and so he is as dead as a Door-nail, ha, ha, ha.


Darl. And do you laugh, Wretch?


Clin. Laugh! ha, ha, ha, Let me see ever a younger Brother in England that
will not laugh at such a Jest.


Ang. You appeared a very sober pious Gentleman some Hours ago.


Cl^n. Pshaw, I was a Fool then: but now, Madam^ I Am a Wit: I can rake now. --
As for your part, Madam, you might have had me once: -- But now, Ma'am, if you
should chance f^ll to eating Chalk, or gnawing the Sheets, it is none of my
Fault -- Now, Madam, -- I have got an Estate, and I must go to the Iubilee.


Enter Clincher senior in a Blanket. Clin. sen. Must you so, Rogue, must ye? --
you will go to the Iubilee, will you?


Clin. jun. A Ghost, a Ghost! -- Send for the Dean and Chapter presently.


Clin. sen. A Ghost! no, no, Sirrah, I Am an Elder Brother; Rogue.


Clin. jun. I don't care a Farthing for that; I Am sure you're Dead in Law.


Clin. sen. Why so, Sirrah, why so?


Clin. jun. Because, Sir, I can get a Fellow to swear he knocked out your
Brains.


Wild. An odd way of swearing a Man out of his Life.


Clin. jun. Smell him, Gentlemen, he has a deadly Scent about him --


Clin. sen. Truly the apprehensions of Death may have made me savor a little
-- O Lord -- the Colonel! the apprehension of him may make me savor worse, I Am
afraid.


Clin. jun. In short, Sir, were you Ghost, or Brother, or Devil, I will go to
the Iubilee, by Jupiter Ammon.


Stand. Go to the Iubilee! go to the Bear-Garden -- the Travel of such Fools as
you, doubly injure our Country, you expose our Native Follies, which ridicules
us among Strangers, and return fraught only with their Vices, which you vend
here for fashionable Gallantry; a Traveling Fool is as dangerous as a
Homebred Villain -- Get ye to your Native Plough and Cart, converse with
Animals, like your selves, Sheep and Oxen, Men are Creatures you don't
understand.


Wild. Let 'em alone, Colonel, their Folly will be now diverting. Come,
Gentlemen, we'll dispute this Point some other time, I hear some Fiddles
tuning; let us hear how they can entertain us: Be pleased to sit.


Here Singing and Dancing. After which a Servant whispers Wildair. Wild. Madam,
shall I beg you to entertain the Company in the next Room for a Moment. To
Darling.


Darl. With all my Heart -- Come, Gentlemen. Ex. Omnes but Wild.


Wild. A Lady to enquire for me! Who can this be? Enter Lurewell. O, Madam,
this Favor is beyond my Expectation, to come uninvited to dance at my Wedding
-- What do you gaze at, Madam?


Lure. A Monster -- if thou art married, you are the most perjured Wretch that
e're avouch'd Deceit.


Wild. Hey day! why, Madam, I Am sure I never swore to marry you, I made indeed
a slight Promise, upon condition of your granting me a small Favor, but you
would not consent, you know.


Lure. How he upbraids me with my Shame -- can you deny your binding Vows when
this appears a Witness against your Falsho^d Shows a Ring. Methinks the Motto
of this sacred Pledge should flash Confusion in your guilty Face -- read, read
here the binding Words of Love and Honor, Words not unknown to your perfidious
Eyes. -- though utter Strangers to your treacherous Heart.


Wild. The Woman's stark staring Mad, that is certain.


Lure. Was it maliciously designed to let me find my Misery when past redress;
to let me know you, only to know you false -- had not cursed Chance showed me
the surprising Motto, I had been happy -- The first Knowledge I had of you was
fatal to me, and this second worse.


Wild. What the Devil's all this! -- Madam, I Am not at leisure for Rallery at
present, I have weighty Affairs upon my hands; the business of Pleasure, M^^a^,
any other time -- Going.


Lure. Stay, I conjure you stay.


Wild. Faith I cannot, my Bride expects me; but hark'ee, when the Honey-Moon is
over, about a Month or two hence, I may do you a small Favor. Exit.


Lure. Grant me some wild Expressions, Heavens, or I shall burst -- Woman's
Weakness, Man's Falsehood, my own Shame, and Love's Disdain, at once swell up my
Breast -- Words, Words, or I shall burst. Going.


Enter Standard. Stand. Stay, Madam, you need not shun my sight; for if you are
perfect Woman, you have Confidence to outface a Crime, and bear the Charge of
Guilt without a Blush.


Lure. The charge of Guilt! what? making a Fool of you? I Have don't, and glory
in the Act, the height of Female Justice were to make you all hang or drown,
dissembling to the prejudice of Men is Virtue; and every Look, or Sigh, or
Smile, or Tear that can deceive is Meritorious.


Stand. Very pretty Principles truly -- if there be Truth in Woman, it is now in
thee -- Come, Madam, you know that you're discovered, and being sensible, you
cannot escape, you would now turn to Bay. That Ring, Madam, proclaims you Guilty.


Lure. O Monster, Villain, perfidious Villain! has he told you?


Stand. I Will tell it you, and loudly too.


Lure. O name it not -- yes, speak it out, it is so just Punishment for putting
Faith in Man, that I will bear it all; and let credulous Maids that trust their
Honor to the Tongues of Men, thus hear their Shame proclaimed -- Speak now,
what his busy Scandal, and your improving Malice both dare utter.


Stand. Your Falsehood cannot be reached by Malice, nor by Satyr; your Actions
are the justest Libel on your Fame -- your Words, your Looks, your Tears, I did
believe in spite of common Fame. Nay, against my own Eyes, I still maintained
your Truth. I imagined Wildair's boasting of your Favors to be the pure result
of his own Vanity, at last he urged your taking Presents of him, as a
convincing Proof of which; you Yesterday from him received that Ring -- which
Ring, that I might be sure he gave it, I lent him for that purpose.


Lure. Ha! you lent him for that purpose!


Stand. Yes, yes, Madam, I lent him for that purpose -- no denying it -- I know
it well, for I have worn it long, and desire you now, Madam, to restore it to
the just Owner.


Lure. The just Owner, think Sir, think but of what importance it is to own it,
if you have Love and Honor in your Soul. It Is then most justly yours, if not,
you are a Robber, and have stolen it basely.


Stand. Ha -- your Words, like meeting Flints, have struck a Light to show me
something strange -- but tell me instantly, is not yo^^ real Name Manly?


Lure. Answer me first, did not you receive this Ring about Twelve Years ago?


Stand. I did.


Lure. And were not you about that time entertained two Nights at the House of
Sir Oliver Manly in Oxfordshire.


Stand. I was, I was, [runs to her, and embraces her] the blessed remembrance
fires my Soul with transport -- I know the rest -- you are the charming She,
and I the happy Man.


Lure. How has blind Fortune stumbled on the right! -- But where have you
wandered since, 'twas cruel to forsake me.


Stand. The particulars of my Fortune were too tedious now; but to discharge my
self from the stain of Dishonor, I must tell you, that immediately upon my
return to the University, my Elder Brother and I quarreled; my Father, to
prevent farther Mischief, posts me away to Travel: I writ to you from London,
but fear the Letter came not to your Hands.


Lure. I never had the least account of you, by Letter or otherwise.


Stand. Three Years I lived abroad, and at my Return, found you were gone out
of the Kingdom, though none could tell me whither; missing you thus, I went to
Flanders, served King 'till the Peace commenced; then fortunately going on
Board at Amsterdam, one Ship transported us both to England. At the first sight
I loved, though ignorant of the hidden Cause -- You may remember, Madam, that
talking once of Marriage, I told you I was engaged; to your dear self I meant.


Lure. Then Men are still most Generous and Brave -- and to reward your Truth,
an Estate of Three Thousand Pounds a Year waits your acceptance; and if I can
satisfy you in my past Conduct, and the reasons that engaged me to deceive all
Men, I shall expect the honorable performance of your Promise, and that you
would stay with me in England.


Stand. Stay, not Fame, nor Glory, e're shall part us more. My Honor can be no
where more concerned than here.

Enter Wildair, Angelica, both Clinchers. Oh, Sir Harry, Fortune has acted
Miracles, the Story's strange and tedious, but all amounts to this. That
Woman's Mind is charming as her Person, and I am made a Convert too to Beauty.


Wild. I wanted only this to make my Pleasure perfect.


Enter Smuggler. Smug. So, Gentlemen and Ladies, is my Gracious Nephew Vizard
among ye?


Wild. Sir, he dares not show his Face among such Honorable Company, for your
Gracious Nephew is a --


Smug. What, Sir? Have a care what you say.


Wild. A Villain, Sir.


Smug. With all my Heart -- I Will pardon you the beating me for that very Word.
And pray, Sir Harry, when you see him next, tell him this News from me, that I
have Disinherited him, that I will leave him as poor as a disbanded
Quartermaster. And this is the positive and stiff Resolution of Threescore and
Ten, an Age that sticks as obstinately to its Purpose, as to the old Fashion of
its Cloak.


Wild. You see, Madam, [ to Angel.] how industriously Fortune has punished his
Offense to you.


Angel. I can scarcely, Sir, reckon it an Offense, considering the happy
Consequences of it.


Smug. O, Sir Harry, he is as Hypocritical --


Lure. As your self, Mr. Alderman, how fares my good old Nurse, pray, Sir?


Smug. O Madam, I shall be even with you before I part with your Writings and
Money, that I have in my Hands.


Stand. A word with you, Mr. Alderman, do you know this Pocketbook?


Smug. O Lord, it contains an Account of all my secret Practices in Trading
[Aside.] how came you by it, Sir.


Stand. Sir Harry here dusted it out of your Pocket, at this Lady's House,
yesterday: It contains an Account of some secret Practices in your
Merchandising; among the rest, the Counterpart of an Agreement with a
Correspondent at Bourdeaux, about transporting French Wine in Spanish Casks --
First return this Lady all her Writings, then I shall consider, whether I shall
lay your Proceedings before the Parliament or not, whose Justice will never
suffer your Smuggling to go unpunished.


Smug. O my poor Ship and Cargo.


Clin. sen. Hark'ee, Master, you had as good come along with me to the Iubilee,
now.


Angel. Come, Mr. Alderman, for once let a Woman advise; Would you be thought
an Honest Man, banish Covetousness, that worst Gout of Age; Avarice is a poor
pilfering quality of the Soul, and will as certainly Cheat, as a Thief would
Steal --

Would you be thought a Reformer of the Times, be less severe in your Censures,
less rigid in your Precepts, and more strict in your Example.


Wild. Right, Madam, Virtue flows freer from Imitation, than Compulsion, of
which, Colonel, your Conversion and Mine are just Examples.


In vain are musty Morals taught in Schools,
By rigid Teachers, and as rigid Rules,
Where Virtue with a frowning Aspect stands,
And frights the Pupil from its rough Commands.
But Woman --
Charming Woman can true Converts make,
We Love the Precepts for the Teachers sake.
Virtue in them appears so bright, so gay,
We hear with Transport, and with Pride obey.
FINIS.

