A VOICE OF THE FIRST TRUMPET, Sounding an Alarm to call to Judgment.

TOGETHER WITH A flying Roll to the scattered and dispersed ones among the
Outcasts of the professed Israelites in England; and where it shall meet with
them.

Written in the time of Isreal's Captivity, by one whom the people of the World
call a Quaker; By name, RICHARD FARNEVVORTH.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1653.

A VOICE OF THE FIRST TRUMPET, Sounding an Alarm to call to JUDGMENT.
ALL people every where repent, and turn to the Lord with speed, Isa. 34.1, 2,
3, 4, 5. Isa. 66.15, 16.
for the great day of the Lord is coming, Now the abomination of the
desolation, spoken of by Daniel the Prophet stands in the holy place, let him
that reads understand; Awake, Awake, and stand up to Judgment, Repent and
turn to the Lord with speed, for the great day of the Lord comes; it hastes
greatly, wherein the Lord will plead with all flesh, by his sword and by fire,
and great shall be the slain of them; he will cut off the Chemerims, the
Black-Coats, Zeph. 1.4.
with the Priests, and they shall wear no more a rough Garment, to deceive,
and the Lord will cut off them that bear Silver out of the Land. The day of
the Lord comes, wherein the great man shall cry bitterly; Zeph. 13.4. Zeph.
1.11, 12. Joel 2.10, 11, 12. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13.
Thus says the Lord, Blow the Trumpet in Sion, sound ^n alarm in my holy
mountain, let all the Inhabitants of ^he land tremble, the Sun shall be turned
into darkness, and ^he Moon into blood, and the Stars shall withdraw their
^^ining, And Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but ^^ot one jot nor tittle of
my word, shall in no wise fail, till ^^^l be fulfilled; Now the Lord is
fulfilling ^is promises, made in the time of old, and the earth shall be burnt,
^. chapter 13.8,
with all the works therein: Nevertheless, according to his promise, we look
for new Heavens and new Earth, ^ev. 21.23, (...) the end. ^ev. 32.^ 4.5.
wherein shall dwell righteousness, and the Nations that are saved, shall
walk in the glorious light and liberty of the Sons of God, and shall come and
see his glory.

Now all people whose minds are abroad, and whose hearts are in the earth,
running on in the broad way that leads to destruction, consider where you are,
and return to the Lord whilst you have time, Mat. 7.13.
now the Lord is coming to call all to an account, whose servants they are, and
whose works they have wrought. Know ye not, Romans 6.16.
that his servants you are, to whom ye do obey? he that commits sin is the
servant of sin; Let every one that names the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity, Mal. 4.
the Lord is of purer eyes then to behold Iniquity, he is a consuming fi^e, and
no unclean thing shall stand before him; Every tree that brings not forth
good fruit, ^^ Joh. 4.
shall be hewn down, and cast into the fire; behold the day comes that
shall burn as an Oven, and all that are proud, and all that do wickedly,
shall be as stubble, ^sa. 66.15, 6.
and the day that comes shall burn and consume them up, and shall leave them
neither root nor branch; every one in particular consider whose servan^s you
are, for he that commi^s sin is the servant of the Devil, and every one must
be trye^ by fire, the Lord is coming to plead with all flesh, by his sword and
by fire, and all fruitless trees must be cut down and cast into the Lake,
Mat. 25.41* o there 46.
that burns with fire and Brimstone; see what trees you are every one and
what fruit is brought forth by you, for the day does discover every man's
works, of what sort it is and every man must be rewarded according to hi^
deeds; see what trees you are, and what fruits are brought forth by you; cumber
not the ground ye fruitless trees, Rev. 13.18
that brings forth nothing but wild grapes as Pride and Drunkenness,
Covetousness and Anger, Wrath and Maliciousness, and Envy, and Oppression,
grinding the faces of the poor, and Pleasure, and Wantonness, and foolish
Jeasting, and filthy Communication, for every Idle word, Rev. 13.^^ 16, 17, 1^
that men shall speak, they must give an account, now that the Lord is coming
to Judgment; fear the Lord God Almighty, and give glory to his name, for the
hour of his Judgments is coming, and give over worshipping the Beast, for
all the world wonders and worships the Beast, but those who have found heir
names written in the Lambs book of Life; 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9, 10
and they that worship the Beast and his Image, must drink of the wine of the
wrath of the Almighty poured forth into the cup of his Indignation, wrath
without mixture, and must be tormented with fire and Brimstone, in the
presence of his holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb; and the smoke
of their torment ascends up for ever and ever, and they have no rest day nor
night that worships the Beast and his Image; Isa. 28.
and whosoever receives the mark of the Beast, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11. fear the
Lord God Almighty, and give glory to his name, and depart from Iniquity, lest
the Judgments of the Lord fall down from Heaven upon you; for the wrath of
God is to be revealed from Heaven, in flames of fire, upon all the children of
disobedience. Houle and weep for the misery that is coming, Isa. 34.1 2, 3, 4,
5.
except ye repent and turn to the Lord with speed; haste haste to meet the
Lord, by true repentance. Houle ye Drunkards of what sort soever, the curse of
God is upon you; woe to all proud and lustful ones, that lust after envy,
devourers and murderers of the righteous ones in your hearts; The day of
vengeance is coming upon you, all that delight in unrighteousness: Vengeance
is mine, and I will repay says the Lord; and he that envies is a Murderer, as
says the Scripture, and no murderer has eternal life abiding in him, 1 Job.
3.15. Woe to all Hypocrites and dissemblers, that says one thing and do
another: a double minded man is unstable in all his ways, and the wrath of God
abides on the children of disobedience. Woe to all Backbiters, ^ct. 13.41.
Cozeners and Cheaters, woe to all Scoffers, and Scorners, and Deriders, that
speak evil of that they know not. Woe to all Lustful and Revengefull ones,
that delight in mischief, living in Iniquity, and so departs from the living
God and follow vain delights: Let no man deceive you with vain words, for
because of these things, the wrath of God comes upon the children of
disobedience, Ephesians. 5.1 to ^he 7. Woe to ro^m that add sin unto sin, and that
draw Iniquity, as with cords of Vanity, that add D^unkennesse to Thirst, and
Pride to Covetousness, and Envy to Wrath, and Backbiting to Maliciousness,
and Cozening to Cheating, and Scoffing to Scornefulnesse, and Pleasure to
Wantonness, and so nourish their hearts as in a day of slaughter, Jam. 5.5.
and kill and slaye the holy one and the Just. Woe to them that call evil good,
that put light for darkness, and darkness for light, and so draw Iniquity as
with Cart-ropes, and add sin to sin, Gaming to Sporting, and Swearing to
Lying, and Hypocrisy to Dissimulation, and so lust after Revenge to
Persecution, which are fruits of the Devil: they that are after the Flesh,
they persecure them that are after the Spirit; and the fruits of the flesh are
manifest, which are these, A^^ul^ery, Fornication, Uncleanenesse,
Lasciviousness, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife, Seditions,
Heresies, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, and such like; as Pride and
Oppression, and grinding the faces of the Poor, and Lying and Swearing, and
Pleasures and wantonness, and Scoffing and scornfulnesse and Cozening and
Chearing, and doublemindednesse, which is Hypocrisy, but they which do such
things, shall not inherit the kingdom of Heaven, Gal. 5.19, 20, 21. God is
pure, and of purer eyes, then to behold Iniquity; be not deceived, God will not
be mocked, for such as ye sow, such shall ye reap, Romans 8.8.
they that sow to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption, and they that
are in the flesh cannot please God: Isa. 2.10, 11, 12.
cumber not the ground ye fruitless trees, that bring forth no fruit, but that
which is corrupt; thou proud and lofty one, thou are a fruitless tree, and
must be cut down, Mat. 3.10.
Isa. 2.17. All the haughtiness of man must be brought down, and all the
loftiness of man laid low, that the Lord alone may be exalted, and the day of
the Lord is coming upon all flesh houle and weep, you that live in envy and
wrath, which are fruitless trees, Cumberers of the ground, and must be cut
down and cast into the fire of the Indignation of the Lord God Almighty. Mat.
7.19, 20.
Cumber not the ground ye Drunkards, ye are all fruitless trees, and must be
cut down by the power of the Lord, and cast into the fire; Rev. 18.
cumber not the ground ye Scoffers, and Scorners, and Deriders, your deeds make
you manifest: you are cumberers of the ground, ye Cozeners and Cheaters,
Backbiters and malicious ones, and Persecuters, Rev. 1.14, 15.
you are fruitless trees that Jude speaks of, that defile the flesh in living
in lust and excess to that which is evil, no fruit is brought forth by you,
but wild grapes; Envy, Wrath, Malice, Rev. 20.10.
Scoffing, and Scorning, and foolish Jeasting, and Drunkenness and
Persecution, which are fruits of unrighteousness; but know you not, Rev.
20.14, 15.
that the unrighteous shall not inherit the kingdom. See 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11.
and Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. and Romans 29.30, 31, 32. and Romans 2.8, 9. and Rev. 21.8.
Rev. 22.15. Read these Scriptures and see if you can own your selves to be in
the condition that they are spoken to: All that follow the Imaginations of your
own hearts, the Leaders of the people cause them to err, Isa. 9.16. And, the
blind lead the blind, and both shall fall into the ditch together, Mat. 15.14.
Like Priest, like People, and drunk in Iniquity, Hosea 4.
and live in Envy and Wrath, persecuting the Righteous as the Jews and Scribes
and Pharisees did, and holds up the same things that they did as in Mat. 23.
But woe was their portion then, and it is the portion of all the world that
walks on in their steps now. Repent and turn to the Lord with speed, for the
great and mighty day draws near, which is foretold of by the Prophet
Zephaniah: Read Zeph. 1.14.18. read them over an^ weigh them well, and return
to the Lord with all you^ hearts, that he may have mercy upon you. Now yo^ have
time prize it, and fear the Lord God Almighty and worship not the Beast, for
the hour of his Judgment is coming. Rev 14.6, 7. Woe to all that act in
unrighteousness of what sort soever: The Princes are Rebellious and companions
of Thieves, every one loves gifts, an^ follows after rewards, Isa. 1.23, 24.
they judge not the Fatherless neither does the cause of the Widow come unto
them. Therefore says the Lord, the Lord of Hosts, the mighty one to Israel:
Ver. 22.
Ah I will ease me of mine enemies, and avenge (...) of mine adversaries;
Vengeance is mine, and I will repa^ says the Lord. How is the beautiful City
become an harlot, it was full of Judgment, Righteousness lodged in i^ but now
Murderers: But Zion shall be redeemed wi^^ Judgments, and her Converts with
Righteousness, a^^ the destruction of the transgressors and of the sinners
sh^^ be together: and they that forsake the Lord shall be consumed, Isa. 1.27,
28. And the Lord will purchase (...) him a peculiar people, that they may
worship him i^ spirit and in truth, and he will return to them a pu^ Language,
that they may call upon the name of the Lord with one consent, and the remnant
of Israel sh^^ not do Iniquity, nor speak Lies, neither shall a d^ceitfull
tongue be found in their mouth; for they sha^^ feed and lie down and none
shall make them afrai^ Zeph. 2.9. to the 15. and the Lord alone will be the
delig^^ of his people; and thus says the Lord, I will turn (...) hand upon
thee, and purely purge away thy dross, and ta^^ ^way all thy tin, and I will
Restore thy Judges as at the first, and thy Counselors as at the beginning;
afterward thou shall be called the City of righteousness, the faithful City,
Isa. 1.25, 26. And then every m^n shall sit under ^is own Vine and under his
Fig tree, and no^e shall make them afraid: Rejoice ye Saints and righ ^ous ones,
^he time of Isreal's deliverance draws nigh; woe to ^he world, and to all that
live and act in unrighteousness, the great day of the Lord draws nigh, it
hast^th greatly. Repent and turn to the Lord, Seek ^ighteousnesse, seek
peace if so be ye may be hid in the day ^f the Lords wrath, Zeph. 2.3. A fire
is kindled, and who shall quench it? Mal. 4.1.

This was read on the Market-Crosse at Rotheram, upon a Market day. Richard
Farneworth.

A FLYING ROLL To the scattered and dispersed Ones, among the Outcasts of the
professed ISRAELITES in England; and where it shall meet with them.
THat they may mind the light within, which will gather them out of all the
worlds ways, and worships, and customs, and fashions, up into love and pu^ity,
to have Communion and fellowship with the spirit of love in yiedling obedience
to it, written by one that has been in Egypt, and is got up into the Land of
the living mercies of the Lord; where there is fullness of joy and pleasu es
for evermore: and he is sending into Egypt, to those that are in Bondage, and
darkness, to visit them there, sending them a staff to walk by, that they
may come and meet with him at New Jerusalem, to worship the Father in spirit
and in truth, and sing Halleluj^hs to the highest, the Lord God omnipo^ent, who
is King of Saints, King of Salem, King of Peace, ruling and reigning in power,
in the hearts of his people, fulfilling his promises made of old; to whom be
glory and honor for ever more.

Now this is to you who are yet in Egypt, where the house of bondage is, and
darkness over-spreading a^^ the earth, such darkness as may be felt; still
wait upon the Lord, and stay a while, but see that you do no^ your watch
neglect, lest that you do the Lords fre^^ love reject; but wait within
continually, having you minds kept free, that when the Angel of the Lord i^
coming to set you free from under the hands o^ Pharaoh, that proud
hard-hearted one; you may be willing for to follow him, to see the Lords own
power made manifest, and operating still within, to slay the first borne in the
Land; and proud Pharaoh unto a stand, by reason of the Lords own powerful
hand which is so strong in might, his enemies all to overthrow, and quite
destroy both Pharaoh and his Host, in the very heat of persecution, that he
may glorify his name, and put the Heathen all to shame; he is the mighty
Counselor that does so make his power known, in confounding the wise ones of
the world, and all the earthly wisdom, first within, and makes it swim in
the sea of confusion; where it is by his Counsel overthrown, and so the pure
seed (the Israelites) they are preserved by his might. And thus the Lord alone
does give them power and victory, even in the enemies sight: and so he gets his
name a great renown, and still he leads his people on a way which is not to
them known, that they may trust in him, and mind the leadings of his love, in
all their progress as they go, both in the wilderness where he does try them
all; and there they either stand or fall, because the tempter does himself so
much bestirre to draw them there for to despair, not minding still to stand
there always in the Lords own will, which would their own wills cross; and
so the enemy will come continually unto a loss: look up to the light that is
held forth by the Angel there, the Messenger of the Covenant of grace, which
is sent by the Lord alone to lead his seed from place to place, following this
Angel continually, yet will the enemies subtilties to you evermo^e discry,
that so abiding in the light, it will the way unto you show that leads
through the cross, taking the shield of faith along: it drives down the
bulwarks, strong holds, and fenced Cities all along, and through the inhabited
Countries to turn to flight the Armies of the Aliens all, following the Angel
of the Lord within, which will lead up the promised seed unto the King that
sits upon the Throne of grace, where all the ransomed ones do meet there with
the Lord, in his own holy place, at New Jerusalem, to sing forth praises unto
him, who is Isreal's Keeper and their King, who leads his people home to him,
that they may meet at Sion, there to sing the songs of their deliverance, even
in the presence of their King, rejoicing in his love for evermore, Amen.
Hallelujah to the highest.

All people every where, cease from all your Priests, they deceive you, they
are blind guides, Ezekiel. 2. to the
and are ignorant of the true guide which is the spirit of truth, that guides
and leads into all truth: cease from them all, they are found in the same
state and condition that the false Prophets were in among the children of
Israel, after they were backslided, and had broken the Covenant of the Lord,
and the Lord was displeased with them, Hos. 4.5
and sent his true Prophets to cry out against them, as the Scriptures make
mention. See Isa. 56.10, 11, 12. verses, and Ier. 5.30, 31. and Ezekiel. 34. and
Hos. 6.9. and Mica 3.5, 6, 7. and v. 11. Read those Scriptures, Jer. 5.8
and see if your Priests be not now in the same condition that these false
Prophets were in, which ran as they did, but the Lord never sent them;
therefore cease from them, Ier. 23.16, 17, 18, 19, 20. verses, but the woe was
to them then, and the woe is to all that follow their steps now, Mal. 2.
Ier. 23, 1, 2. Ezekiel. 34.2. Zach. 11.17. Therefore hold them not up least the
Judgments of God come upon both them, Job. 4.8.
and all that hold them up, for there is like Priest, like People, Hosea ^.9.
and the leaders of them cause them to err, Isa. 9.16. and the blind leads the
blind, and both shall fall together, Mat 15.14. A foolish people that have
eyes and see not, Mat. 7.19, ^0.
ears and hear not, hearts and do not understand. What will you do in the
end (says the Lord?) Ier. 5.31. Shall not my soul be avenged of such a People
as this? Mat. 3.10.
ver. 9. hold them not up for the Lord is against them, Ier. 23.30, 31, 32.
Cease from them, the Lord will make them contemptible in the eyes of his
people, the curse of God is upon them and their Doctrine, ^al. 5.19, ^0, 21.
so that there is nothing brought forth by them, but B^yers and Thorns as Pride
and Covetousness, Envy and Wrath, Malice and Scoffing, Scornfulnesse and
Revenge, and oppression, and g^inding the faces of the poor, and persceution,
which are the fruits of the Devil; and know you not that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of Heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10. Ephesians 5.3, 4, 5 Gal. 5.19,
20, 21. Rev 21.8. Rev. 22.15. Be not deceived, ^a. 1.16, 17.
God will not be mocked, he is of purer eyes then to beh^ld iniquity; cease to
do evil, learn to do well; but down with all your Priests, blind Guides,
whited Walls, and painted Sepulchers; the Lord is utterly against them, they
are found unprofitable servants, their Kingdom must be taken from them and
given to a People that will bring forth the fruits thereof. Thus says the
Lord, concerning the Priests, and false Prophets, which have been foretold of
these things, I will (says the Lord) even send a curse upon you, and will
curse your blessings, and I will corrupt your seed, and spread dung upon your
faces, and make you contemptible in the eyes of the People, Mal. 2.1. to the 10
verse, And they shall wears no more a rough garment to deceive the people
withal, Zach. 13.4, 5. For the Lord will dest^oy the Chemarims (the Black
Coats) with the Priests, as in Zeph. 1.4 But read all the Chapter, Mal. 2.1 the
10.
and all these other Scriptures, and weigh them well, they are now to be
fulfilled; take warning betime, and cease from all your Hirelings, and
Idoll-Shepheards, they are all deceivers, hold them not up, cease from them
all, every one; for he that is highest in notion, is the highest deceiver, and
as your eyes are enlightened you will see it, though now you do not; but it is
because your light is darkness that you see by, and if that light which is in
you be darkness, how great is that darkness? If you would know the truth, as
it is in Jesus, Cease from man whose breath is in his nostrills, for wherein is
he accounted of? Isa. 2.22. Cease from all great and small, wait wholly upon
the Lord for teaching, who has promised to teach all his himself, as in Ier.
31.31. to 34. All the children of the Lord, they shall need no man to teach
them. Now the Lord is fulfilling and making good these promises to his people,
and he teaches them to profit; likewise Isaiah he prophesied and foretold of
this, in the 54. chap. and the 13. ver. where he has said, All the Children
of the Lord shall be taught of the Lord, and in righteousness shall they be
established, and they shall be far from oppression; and the Lord has foretold
of this, by his servant the Prophet in Ezekiel. 34 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. The Lord
alone is the teacher of all his himself, and it is said in John, that they
shall all be taught of the Lord, John 6.45. and in Heb. 8.11. There it is said,
they shall not need to teach one another, says the Lord, they shall all know
me, whom to know is life eternal; To know God, is to keep his Commands, as in
the first Epistle of John 2.3. He that says he knows God and keeps not his
commandments, is a liar, ver. 4. But some will say, that none can keep the
Commandments of the Lord; there is none says so but the slothful servant,
that hides his talent in the earth; and he counts God a hard Master, because
his heart is in the earth, and his love is to the world, which is enmity with
God. The Saints which were taught of the Lord, their souls were purified in
yielding obedience to the commands of the spirit, 1 Pet. 1.22. they said it was
their joy to keep the commands of the Lord: ^ohn 3.
By this we know that we love the Children of God, when we love God and keep
his Commandments, for this is the love of God that we keep his Commandments,
and his Commandments are not grievous to him that is borne again; and none
else keeps them, 1 John 5.2, 3, 4. 1 John 3.7, 8, 9, 10. and he that keeps
his Commandments dwells in him, and hereby we know that he dwells in us,
by the spirit that be has given us, 1 John 3.24. 1 John 2.5* Luke 1.6. Rev.
14.1. to the 6* This was the condition of those which were redeemed to the
Lord; Hereby receive we the love of God, because he has laid down his life
for us, and we ought to lay down our lives for the Brethren, 1 John 3.16, 17.
he that loves not, ^oh. 4.7.
knows not God, for God is love, 1 John 4.7. In this was made manifest the
love of God, because he sent his only begotten Son into the World, that we
might live through him, 1 John 4.9. Now the world is set in man's heart, (...).
1.4, 5*
so that he cannot find out the beginning nor the end of the work of God,
Eccles. 3.11. and (says Jesus Christ) I am the light of the world, that
enlightneth every one that comes into the world: he that loves this light,
brings his deeds to the light, that the light may prove them: he that hates
the light, hates to be reproved, because his deeds are evil: and there is
his condemnation, John 3.19, 20, 21. This light is within that shows sin and
evil: he that loves this light, will hate the evil discovered by it, to cast
it off and forsake it. Mind your Teacher within, you have a light, whereunto
you do well to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place,
until the da^ dawne, and the day star arise in your bearts, 2 Pet. 1.19.
Mind that light within, and see what that does discover to you, and be
obedient to it, and there is your Teacher present with you, that light obeying
it; there is your condemnation, that light diso beying it: Examine your selves,
prove your selves, Romans 14 17.
know you not your own selves how that Jesus Christ is in you except ye be
Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. Learn to know Christ within, and believe them not,
that would draw your minds to seek for him without; for many shall say, lo
here is Christ, and lo there is Christ, but believe them not, Mat. 24.25, 26,
27. for (says Jesus Christ) the Kingdom of Heaven comes not with
observations, as, Lo here, and lo there, but the Kingdom of Heaven is within
you, Mat. 7.1^
Luke 17.21. The Kingdom of Heaven consists not in meat, or drink, but in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; but the Kingdom of the World
stands altogether in unrighteousness, envy, hatred, and persecution, debate,
and strife, vain pleasures, oppression, and grinding the faces of the poor,
and joys, and rejoices in iniquity, Mat. 23.
which the woe is to: likewise the Kingdom of Heaven stands not in word but
in power; but the Kingdom of the World stands altogether in word, without
either life or power: they say and do not, but in the truth of God its not the
sayer, but the doer, that shall be justified before him, Mat. 17.21. Be not
professors, but possessors; for all profession is of the cursed Fig Tree, that
brings forth nothing but leaves; for there is nothing brought forth by the
highest professors but leaves, fair shows, and sine words, phrases which the
curse of God is unto; woe to you Scribes, and fair Sayers, Hypocrites, that
appear to be in words, that which you deny in actions; in words profess love
to God, but in actions deny him, Tit. 1.16. All poor simple hearts that have
not such eloquent words (as some have) be faithful, as unto the Lord, in what
you know, as the light within does discover it unto you, that is the true light,
that which checks you, when you either lie, or swear, or use any deceit; it
checks you when you do amiss, hearkening to that it will turn your mind
within, and cause a watch to be set over all your thoughts, words, and actions,
and bring you to stand in the fear of the Lord continually, to cast off and
forsake that which is discovered to you to be evil, by that light within you;
and so you will be brought to faithfulness in all things, both to God and Man,
that your Yea may be Yea, and your Nay may be Nay, therein purity will grow,
and patience will be exercised; your wills being kept in the Cross, to wait on
the Lord in patience, till an entrance be made to your souls, and virtue and
refreshment come from the presence of the Lord, and there is your Teacher
always present, and the Lord has said that he will teach the simple, and
cause them that erred in spirit to understand Doctrine; therefore wait wholly
on him within, that you may know the power of his truth within, working out all
unrighteousness, and the power of his resurrection, ruling by his spirit in
the Kingdom of grace and glory, shining forth in brightness to the praise of
him who is the holy Lord God omnipotent, who does shed abroad his eternal love
in the spirits of his people, drawing out their minds from all earthly carnal
and visible objects, to live holy within in that which is eternal, and
invisible, who draws his people as with the cords of his love, to taste how
gracious he is, calling us out o^ darkness into his mavelous light,
quickening us by his spirit, the divine power of righteousness drawing up our
affections into the eternal invisible inflowing of his free love, which is the
joy and delight of the beloved ones of the Lord: to him alone be a^praise, and
honor, and glory, for overmore Amen.

All people every where that have a desire to know the truth, know that it is
the word of life, that sanctifies and purifies soul and Spirit, and is the
power of God to salvation, that does set free from sin and wrath, and redeemeth
from under the curse, for all have sinned and fallen from the Lord, and are
feeding upon dust, which is the Serpents meat, and whose minds are yet in the
E^r^h; delighting in visible objects, are not acquainted with the Lord Jesus
Christ; who is the delight of his people, and leads them out of all the ways
and works of darkness, and redeemeth them to himself, out of all things that
are earthly and carnal, to have their affections and hearts upon that which is
invisible and eternal, that they may partake of all his soule-satisfying
comforts, and reign with him in the Kingdom of his Father, being brought by
him, into the glorious liberty of the Sons of God.

To live with him in the full fountain of his Eternal Love, he being the
everlasting Prince of peace, and sits upon his Throne of Glory in his Saints;
That they may have free access to the Throne of Grace, where the Lords delight
is, to whom be all honor, and glory for evermore, Amen. All you whose minds
are yet in the Earth; cease from all your Priests, they do deceive you, they
are blind guides and do not profit you at all, because they were never sent
of the Lord, Ier. 23.16. Thus says the Lord, they ran but I did not send them,
therefore they shall not profit this people at all 23. v. Cease from them all
every one, and wait upon the Lord for teaching, who has promised to teach all
his himself, as in Isa. 54 13. All the Children of the Lord are taught of the
Lord, in righteousness they are established, and they are far from oppression,
and they shall not need any man to teach them, Ier. 31.34. The Lord alone is
the Teacher of all his himself; and he teaches them to deny all ungodliness,
and worldly Lusts, and he teaches them to be tender, and to be loving one to
another and to walk as obedient Children, before him, in all holy
conversaiion, not fashioning themselves like unto the World, but he teaches
his Children to deny it; And faith, be not you conformed like unto the World,
but be ye transformed by the renewing of your minds, that ye may know, what is
that good, that acceptable, and perfect will of God, who is pure, and will have
his people so, a holy people, to bring forth fruit to his own praise, says he,
be ye holy as I am holy; for holiness becomes mine house for ever, and let
your love be without dissimulation, love not in word but in deed and truth;
Love one another even with the same love, that I loved you withal, and be what
you speak in all things; Let your yea be yea, and your nay nay in all things,
says the Lord, its the upright in heart that I delight in, and I love truth in
the inward parts; and I would have you all my dear Children, to walk worthy
of your Calling, that you may be a chosen Generation, a royal Priesthood, a
peculiar people, to show forth my praise, who has called you out of darkness
into my marvelous light, walk as Children of the day, and bring forth fruit to
my praise and glory. Fruits of the Spirit, Love and Peace, and Joy,
Gentleness, Goodness and Meekness, Temperance, Patience,
Brotherly-kindnesse, Longsuffering, forbearing and forgiving one another, and
live in love and purity, building up one another in live, for this is well
pleasing unto me, says the Lord God Almighty, I would not have you to be as
the World is, because they are Ignorant, and walk on in blindness; being
Children of the night, and they are carnal, and sottish, and know me not.
Therefore they know not you, my faithfulness, whom I have made choice of; and
redeemed you to my self, by the blood of the Lamb, that you may sit at my
Table, and be planted in my House to shine forth in purity, having Union and
Communion with me, being of the seed of Abraham, borne again and par^akers of
the word of Life, which lives and abides for ever, that you may rejoice in my
love, and reign with me in my Kingdom of glory; I have made my Name known
unto you, through my Eternal Power and Free-love, that it may be as a precious
Ointment, pouring forth continually, to cheer up ^our hearts, my presence
being with you, having the word of lif in you, to feed upon, which is daily
Bread, Bread of life, which the World knows not of; Therefore do they speak
evil of you my dear ones, who are as dear to me, as the Apple of mine Eye; I
have loved you with an everlasting love, freely for ^y Namesake, abide in it,
and walk worthy of this high Calling, that I may be glorified by you, who ^ath
done such great things for you, as to make you ^ne with my self, I in you, and
you in me, that your whole delight may be in me, who gives you ^he desire of
your hearts: rejoice you Saints and Righteous ones, the Lord is King, King of
love, that rules above in glory, taking our affections into ^he Eternal
excellencies, being taken up into that ^eavenly Paradise, and eats of the
spices there, where the King of Peace is their Keeper of that sweet Garden of
Spices where there is all varieties, joy in love, and love in joy; Peace in
rest and rest in peace, and mercy is the Seat, where the King of Salem does
abide, and brings his love that's made his Bride, betrothed and espoused to him,
in his own righteousness to be his darling and delight, to feed upon the Spices
of his love; where there is a Banqueting house prepared, in the heat time of
the Day, to go and drink deep draughts of his new Wine, to take full Cups of
Comfort there, which does the heart continually cheer, and keeps it free from
slavish fear, the King ^s Keeper of his Vines and hedgeth them about, and
causes them to grow, and flourish in brightness round about, and takes the
Foxes that would them spoil, and gives all his enemes the foil, ta^ing the
wise in their own craftiness, and hangs them in their own snares, and that's the
reason why the wicked rage and fumes and says, truly the Lord is good an^
gracious indeed, and is a a present help in the greate^ time of need; he does
preserve and keep all thos^ that trust in him; even in the Treasury of his
own^ Defense, that he alone may bring them all, from thenc^ up to Mount Sion,
where his Vin^yard is, that the^ may all rejoice together, the ove^flowing
scorge being past; that they in him may have their joy, their peac^ and eke
their rest; to sing forth Halelujah, unt^ him, who is their keeper and their
King, Rejoice for evermore.

Written in the time of Isreal's captivity, by one whom the People of the World
call a Quaker, by name RICH. FARNVVORTH

FINIS.

