THE CONTENT OF A WAYFARING MAN: AND THE ACCOUNT OF A MINISTERS REMOVAL.

TWO SERMONS.

The one preached at the Morning Lecture in the City of London; the other more
enlarged in another Congregation.

BY J. F. M. A.

Nihil tibi aeque proficiet ad temperantiam omnium rerum, q.a.n frequens
cogitatio brevis aevi and hujur incerti.

Hieron. ad H^liod. (...).

Chrysostom. in 1 Timothy Hom. 17. LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN LORD ROBERTS, Baron of TRURO, All increase of
lasting Honor and Felicity.
Right Honorable,
THis hasty undrest Birth, being forced out of doors by the importunity of
diverse godly Ministers and Friends, begges a covering from your Honors Name,
whose merits are so well known unto the world in those public employments to
which you have been engaged, as, if I should attempt to add any luster, I
should but light a Candle to the Sun, and shadow that beauty which an abler
pensill has lately drawn. Master Samuel Bolton in his Epist. Dedic. to his
Arraignment of Error.
I had not adventured upon the Acumen of your wisdom and parts, for patronage
of this infirm labor, had not your accustomed candor prompted me with
afavourable excuse of this honest ambitiion, partly from that wel-known love
your Honor bears to learning and piety, partly from the constant experience of
your abundant favors, of which I desire in this small monument to perpetuate
the acknowledgements, and partly from the subject of the first ensuing
discourse, which may be not unsuitable to your affection of a co^templative
retirednes and a contentive sweetness in your self-injoyments: your Honor not
aspiring great things for your self in Jacobs day of small things, most nobly
disdaining to make your Morsels fat out of the public wants, although your
losses may be as great as some others.

Heroic Sir, I trust neither of these Sermons will be unsavory to your
goodness, though both unworthy your learning.

The first Sermon presents you the felicity of an humble content and peaceable
retiredness, a Discourse not unseasonable in times so full of trouble and
uncertaintie as ours are.

The second discovers the lawful ends, and unkind provocations of a Ministers
removal, yielding both an Apology for the Minister, and an Alarm to the
people whatsoever they are. Hope, which is the Mother of Boldness, and
Mistress of Endeavor, has brought them unto your hands, to do some service
to the Church of God, and to your Honor, wherein if they shall (...) so happy,
it will both Comfort and Crown him who is servant to both

In all Gospel duties entirely obliged, JOHN FATHERS.

THE CONTENT OF A WAYFARING MAN: OR, Jeremies Cottage in the Wilderness.
JEREM. 9.2. O that I had in the Wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men,
that I might leave my people and go from them.

Or thus, Oh that I had the Cottage of a Wayfaring man in the Wilderness.


WE have here Jeremies Content, and Jeremies Account: His Content was moderate,
He aspired no great things for himself, nor Bishops Lands, nor Deanes Houses.
A Cottage was his Content, and his Content was suitable to his Condition.

His Condition was a Wayfaring-man, Non lequitur de diversoriis quae trant in
pagis and urbibus, sed de diversoriis deserti quemadmodum videhimus ubi per
sylvas longum est and molestum iter, tuguria quaedam componisi forte
deprehensus fuerit viater tenebris noctis ut possit latere sub tecto, scil. ne
sub die cubet. Calv. in Loc.
and the Cottage of a Wayfaring-man was his Content, only a hole to hide his
head in a storm, and to afford him a nights lodging in his Way: And that in no
stately City, where perhaps a small Cottage may be of more value then a large
Farm in the Country.

But the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wilderness. And Wilderness,
whether you take it literally, for a place sma^y inhabited; as that wilderness
wherein the Priests had 6 Cities; or for a place not at all inhabited, as that
to which Jeremies wild Ass was used; or figuratively for a rude and untaught
people, as Wilderness does often signify in holy Scriptures. Either way it
suits very well with Jeremies Content, who desired to enjoy himself in a
peaceable retiredness, which he could not in a tumultuous City; and probably
as he had better hopes of the safety of his person amongst wild beasts, then
wicked men: so of the success of his Ministry amongst a rude and ignorant
people in the wilderness, then amongst those whose knowledge did puff them up
in Jerusalem. For so we find Jeremies Account, why he desired the Cottage of a
wayfaring-man in the wilderness, That I might leave my people, and go from
them.

My people: His they were though they were so bad. Jeremy you will yield, was
an able, painful, faithful, courageous Minister, who feared not the frowns
of Kings nor Princes, Fetters nor Dungeon, for the faithful discharge of his
Ministry; and yet so good as he was, he was unhappily matched with a bad
people, and so bad they were, as that he did desire to leave them, and yet not
leave them without leave from God, or love to them.

leave from God; for these words we must not conceive to fall at randum from
Jeremy, as if he were hurried away from his people by passion, or discontent,
but as he says, Chap. 11. v. 20. Unto thee, O Lord, have I revealed my cause.
And Chap. 20. 12. Unto thee, O Lord, have I opened my cause. He seeks to God
for a place of remove, and would remove as the Israelites in the wilderness at
Gods command.

love to them; for though he did leave them, yet he would not leave to pray
for them, and to pray in tears, and tears in abundance; and that abundance
not sufficient to content his love, but that he wishes for more. O that my head
were full of waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day
and night for the captivity of the daughter of my people, verse 1. of this
Chapter. For so you must join that verse to this, and you have then and there a
double account of Jeremies option for a Cottage in the wilderness.

Jerusalem, he was desirous to retire himself to prayer, and to pray in
tears, as Jeremy did, retiredness is best.

Jerusalem with fire over his head. O that I had the Cottage of a Wayfaring man
in the wilderness, that I might leave my people and go from them.

I have now given you the Analysis of the Text, and you see there is much in
it, and I have little time, I shall endeavor as well as I can, to contract
much into little, and shall confine my self to the two general heads of the
Text: Jeremiahs Content, and Jeremiahs Account.

From the first, I observe; How moderate gracious desires should be in these
earthly things.

From the second; How good Ministers may upon warrantable grounds desire to
remove from an unkind people.

And first, I shall apply my self to the first, Jeremies Content: O that I had
the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wilderness, that I might leave my
people, and go from them.

Gracious desires should be moderate in these earthly things. I do not say,
The desires of grace should be moderate. For that is our great corruption, that
in those things wherein unsatiablenesse of desire is only lawful, our
affections are too remiss; as in spiritual and heavenly things; and too
intense in those things wherein unsatiablenesse of desire is most unlawful: as
in temporary and earthly things. And therefore I say, If our desires are
gracious, they are and should be moderate in earthly things.

Will you please to look upon your example in the Text, Jeremiah was one of
noble birth, of great parts, of eminent gifts, of admirable courage, of
unparalleld fidelity in his Ministry: and yet neither his birth, nor place,
nor parts nor gifts, did make him ambitious: A cottage did content him who
might deserve a palace.

Will you take another instance to this? It is that of Agur, Prove. 30.8.
Give me not riches lest I be too full, but feed me with food convenient for
me. Give me not riches.

Quis nisi mentis inops? You will scarce think him a reasonable man that should
desire riches not to be given unto him? But stay a while, and hear his reason:
Lest I be too full. He would not have his food to become his disease. You well
know the danger of surfeits, you know it, but feel it not whilst the sweet
morsel is going down; but he that fears it, puts the knife unto his throat,
and moderates his appetite. Feed me with food convenient for me. Victum, Food
he does desire: So much of these outward things as may afford him a livelihood.
Dimensum, Food convenient, a portion suitable and competent to his place and
calling. This is lawful, and this is moderate.

To these two instances will you please to take one Rule from him that is our
Rule. ^ohn 14.6. Matthew. 6.11.
He that blesses our prayers, taught us to pray for our daily bread. Bread,
Panem indigentiae, so much as may supply our wants in our way: A Jacobs scrip
to virtuall us over Jordan. Our daily Bread, sine solicitudine, without anxious
thought for to morrow: for to morrow [saith the same divine Oracle] will care
for it self: Sufficient unto the day is the evil thereof.

Nor did our blessed Lord and Savior set this Boundary unto others, which he
kept not himself: For he who had the fullness of Heaven and earth for his foot
stool, was yet content with his daily Administrations. You have now the proof
of the Doctrine: Matthew. 8.15. Mark 15.41.
That gracious desires are and should be moderate. I might give you many
Reasons for further confirmation of it; but time confines me to those only
which offer themselves in the Text.

The first is this:

Content should be suitable to our Condition. Wayfaring-men we are by our
Mortal Condition, and our Spiritual Content should be the Cottage of a
wayfaring-man, only that which may suffice us in our way.

The life of Man is not unfitly compared to a way wherein persons of diverse
conditions travel, Matthew. 5.22. Psalm 49.13. Psalm. 24.6.
and this is the brood of Travelers, we all meet in this one condition to be
wayfaring-men. There are many conditions of the wayfaring-man which suit with
ours, should I travel them all, I should scarce part with the wayfaring-man,
before this travel were ended. I will only restrain my self unto two. 1.
What we are in respect of our mortal Condition? Wayfaring-men. 2. What we
ought to be in respect of our spiritual desires. Content with our cottage in
this wilderness of sin.

This World is a through-fare either to Heaven or to Hell, and whether Judas
goes to his place, or Peter to his, we all are as a ship under sail, passing
swiftly to our haven, and every moment of time does hasten us to our last home.

The travailes of men indeed are to diverse ends: Some to be great, others to be
rich; some for knowledge, others for wealth, [few for grace.] And whilst for
the increase of these, we desire increase of years, what do we desire, but
that [which unto the carnal man is so undesired] our hastening to our journeys
end: the way in which we all meet, the way of all flesh.

It is not without a mystery, and this of our condition, that the worlds first
entertainment of our Savior was in an Inn, Luke 2.7.
and his Mother fell in travel with him, whilst she was in travel. How much
do they mistake their condition, that take their Inn for their home, and make
their way their rest.

I cannot blame worldlings to build (...) tabernacles here, and to wish they
might ever dwell in them, being with Pharaohs Baker loath to go out of their
earthly prisons, because they fear a worse condition out of them. But you my
Beloved, that have good hopes of Heaven, account your selves strangers and
pilgrims here, and let your affections, your conversations be in Heaven,
whilst yet your commoration is in your removing tabernacles.

Should a wayfaring man be so taken up with the delights and profits of a
foreign Country, as to dislike the Laws and Government of his own, and so
to dislike it, as to take up arms against it: What does he but make his
travail his exile, and may perhaps come short of a pardon, when he desires to
return home again. Heaven is the Country, from whence our immortal souls
did all set forth. Every sin is a war against it, which if in disdain of
our home we do maintain, we are not travailers, but traitors and fugitives,
and may be to seek of mercy, when our travail is ended.





When the Israelites travailed through the Moabites Country, Deuteronomy. 2.6.
they would meddle with nothing, but necessaries in their way; and when they
were journeying into the Land of Promise, Exodus 11.2.
they left their brick and clay to the Egyptians, and borrowed of them only
Jewels of gold and Jewels of silver; such things as were portable in their way
to the holy Land.

You that have a birth above the world, ye sons and daughters of the
Highest, foul not your fingers with this world. Let the Egyptians take their
brick and clay unto themselves, and borrow you only of this earthly Mammon so
much as may be portable in your way to Heaven; or, by an holy exchange into
heavenly treasures, Matthew. 6.20. Luke 16.9.
may be transported thither before you.

Our forefathers that lived six and eight hundred years, were content with
removing tents, and we whose lives are but of three days to theirs, must
provide houses so great, and inheritances so large, as if we did forget that
our condition is mortal, or that it is our duty, to suite our content unto our
condition. Let worldlings bear with a chiding from the Poet; O curvae in
terras animae and coelestium inanes: O ye crooked souls, bowed down unto the
earth, and empty of all that is heavenly: why are ye so serious in trifles,
and do so trifle in that which is most serious.

Fond Earthworme, give me leave to reason with thee a little; thou have
provided for thy self a great and stately mansion, with ponds, and orchards,
and vineyards, and all things that may delight and content thy flesh, but what
have thou laid up for thy precious soul, in those (...), 2 Cor. 5.1.
buildings made without hands, eternal in the heavens. It will not be long,
ere thy stately mansion will disdain to lodge thee. Thy delicate wife, thy
tender children, and thy dearest friends refuse to keep thee, yea be glad to
bury thee out of their sight: as Abram his beloved Sarah; and then think what
will become of thy poor and naked soul. Are thy comforts no surer then his
which said, Quo iturus sum nescio? Whether I am going I know not. Have thou
taken so much care for a life so transitory, for which a cottage might have
sufficed, and left an eternal felicity upon a peradvanture? I tell thee, and
be not angry with me, if I tell thee the truth; the basest vermin that crawleth
upon the earth, is in a far better condition then thou art.

O that men heaping up earthly riches, according to the utmost measure of their
will and power, would yet learn to measure their will and power, according to
the frailty of their mortal condition; and whilst thy gaze so much on the
golden head of their Babylonian Idol, in which they glory, they could yet
look down upon the seet of clay wherewith they travel.

When I hear my fellow-travailer tell me of the danger of thieves and
plunderers in my way; I begin to think of securing the money I have about me,
and if I were to set forth, I would carry no more with me then is needful in
my way. I need not Interpret, Breve iter magno viatico non instruitur sed
oneratur; Large provisions for a short journey are not an help but a burden
unto it, and if we cannot unloade our selves, it is not from the impossibility
of the duty, but from the perverseness of our affections, and wretched
creatures that we are, who for a temporary security, can do that which for an
eternal felicity we reject as impossible to be don.

I have now don with the first reason, why gracious desires in these earthly
things should be moderate; Because our spiritual content should be suited to
our mortal condition.

Jeremies desire to retire into a cottage in the wilderness, that his soul
might be free from the strifes and vexations that were in Jerusalem. Luke 3.7.
to the 18.
And for this probably John Baptist might retire to exercise his Ministry in
the Wilderness rather then in the City, because he saw so much disquiet and
ungodliness in it, as appears by the sharp reproves of his Sermon to those
that came out of it. And Moses doubtless saw some rich content in a peaceable
retiredness, that he was so unwilling to leave his private enjoyment for a
public employment, his following his father in laws sheep in Midian, to be
the Leader of the people of Israel, although the Lord answered all his four
doubts, and took off all his excuses in the third of Exodus.

David likewise saw very much in this, who was so willing to have changed his
Throne in Israel, for a porters office in the Lords house; Psalm. 84.10.
and reckoned one day there spent, to be better unto him, then a thousand in
the tents of ungodliness. For his experience had taught him, that the tempter
never gat so much advantage against him at his fathers sheepfold, as in his
palace at Jerusalem. Great estates and high Employments, 2 Samuel 11.2.
are but the bellows of pride and passion; if there be not a great measure of
wisdom and grace to keep the heart down.

Solomon likewise was not unacquainted with the comfort and content of a
peaceable retiredness, Eccles. 2.8.11.
who had tired himself in searching out the vanity and vexation of high
estates: Better (says he) is a saellat of green herbs where peace is, then a
stalled ox and contention therewith. Prove. 15.17.


Surely, great estates carry with them great disquiets, and not less in
mannaging, then in getting. How much better might a man enjoy himself in a
mean and low estate? And how much better is it for a man to enjoy himself,
then to enjoy an estate?

He discovered a rich content in himself, that boar for his divise a Torteis
in his shell, with this Motto: Mecum habito, I dwell with my self: and he
also, that gave auother word to it; Vbicunque sum, meus sum, Wheresoever I am,
I am my self.

Seneca that divine Philosopher, that was very studious in searching out
beatitudes, discovered this amongst others: Beatus est, qui id se esse putat:
he is happy that can find his happiness within himself, and Bias-like does
carry his treasure and felicity with him. It is a poor and contemptible
felicity, which one fit of an ague, stone, or gout, can deprive us of: and this
is the top-excellency of all earthly comforts.

It was an enigma no less elegant then acute of Heraelytus, who compared
earthly-minded-men (coveting so much to be rich and great) unto those that
dug in silver-mines, who by all their hard toil and care, got Parvum in
magno, a little silver-oare in a great deal of dirty dross: how much better
is it to enjoy Magnum in parvo, a great and rich content in a mean and low
estate. And as Cosmographers, who contract the whole world into a little Map,
to enjoy all in a little; which he enjoyes, who in a little enjoyes God and
himself, whose estate does not possess him, but he his estate: and whilst he
is in the world, lives in Christ above it.

The wise and holy God does not unequally dispense his providence; Some have
high places, and little comfort, great estates, and small content in them:
others enjoy a rich and great content in a mean estate. Some with those
Israelites fare daintily, and whilst the flesh is in their teeth, there is
leanness in their souls: Others with Daniel, do eat their pulse with quiet
consciences, and do enjoy a richer content in God, and his Christ, then the
whole creature can afford the worldling without them.

It was an hot dispute amongst ancient Philosophers, whether a private
enjoyment, or public employment were more desirable? Howsoever Seneca's
writings approved the public, yet his desires lead him unto the private: when
being tired with the temptations of Nero's Court, endeavored if he might to
have enjoyed himself in a solitary retiredness; And though he placed not
happiness in Contemplation, as other Philosophers did, yet in Tranquillity:
which he rarely enjoys who aspires greatness, as he well showed that laid down
a Crown for the burden of it.

Our Ecclesiastical History reports of Albertus Magnus, that he was so
affected with a peaceable retiredness, as that he left his Bishopric of
Ratisbone, to give himself to his private studies.

I do not undertake to determine the question, because to a wise man, says
the Philosopher both estates may be comfortable, much more comfortable to him
that is gracious, without all dispute, good the more public it is, the more
good it is: and virtus in nobili plus placet, quia plus claret, Virtue and
grace the more eminent it is, the more beautiful it is, and beneficial not
only in its employment, but by its example: But, where grace and wisdom is
wanting to keep down lust and pride, which are the usual pedissequas of high
employments and great estates, there that lazy and unthrifty adage is made
good: Been vixit qui been latuit: It had been some kind of good to such a man,
that he had enjoyed less opportunities of doing good, wherein he did evil. I
presume that many in these times do wish with Jeremy, or the time may shortly
come, (how soon they know not) that they might wish, they had lived in some
obscure cottage in the Wilderness, rather then to have been acquainted with
those great temptations, in which their high places and employments have
ensnared them.

It is reported of the Hedge-hogge, which in our vulgar reproach is the
character of a covetous man, that he goes to a pile of apples and gathers up as
many as he can upon his prickles, and when he comes to his hole, he goes in
with his prickles, but leaves his apples behind him. How many are there that
have wallowed themselves in the apples of their sweet contentments, which they
have pursued with many pricks and gripes of conscience, who when they shall
descend, as shortly they must, to their holes of darkness, they must then
leave all the sweet apples of their false delights behind them, and can carry
nothing with them, but the stings and stripes of a wounded conscience. Will you
hear what they say that have gone before them, what has pride profited us? or
what has the pomp of riches brought us? All those things are passed away like
a shadow, and as a post that passes by -- but we are consumed in our
wickedness.

Is there now, that says if I were not Alexander, I could wish my self
Diogenes, if I were not called to a public place, I could desire a private
retiredness; surely, I could desire it likewise in thy behalf, if the Lord
has not given thee grace, to make thy place serviceable to him and to his
Saints.

I have now done with the Doctrinall part of this portion of the Text, to wit,
Jeremies Content, and I shall give you a very short application of it.

desires of these earthly things.

Esaus hands we see every where hunting after the prey, and quoquomodo rem, all
is good fish with the most, that comes to the net: but where do we hear
Jacobs voice? Genesis 33.11. Phil. 4.11.
The Lord has had mercy on me, and I have enough. Or that of Paul, a
Christian; I have learned in whatsoever estate I am, therewith to be content.

Paul a Pharisee had never learned this lesson, Acts 9.4. compared with Gal.
1.6.
before he came to Christ, whose ambition hurried him to serve the lusts of the
Council at Jerusalem, in making havoc of the Saints at Damascus. But when the
heavenly vision had once struck down his high thoughts, which lay with his
body on the ground before the Lord Jesus; then, and not till then, Phil. 3.8.
had he learned all to be loss unto him, and Christ only his gain.

Christians, we speak much of contentment, and it is usual to say, I thank God
I am content with what I have; but certainly, if thou art not brought over from
the world unto Christ, and do not enjoy thy self in him, thou did never
yet know what contentment means.

The Prophet Habakkuk sees the worldling loading himself with thick clay,
Habak. 2.9.
and calls unto him, Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness. There is
a covetousness which is good, to covet (as the Spirit directs us) the best
gifts, 1 Cor. 12.31.
and be you herein as covetous as your hearts can hold, and spare not. But
there are other gifts which the Heathens call gifts of Fortune, because of
their inconstancy: and of these is the evil covetousness, to covet to make
the House great, and not the heart good. Habak. 2.10.
The same Prophet calls to such and tells them in plain language, that they
consult shame to their own house. But how is that, you will say? Without all
question, the covetous man takes counsel within himself, with Edom, to build
his Nest on high: he consults nothing but glory to his House; but consulting
not with God and his Word in his ways, the wise and holy Providence turns his
counsels into foolishness, and the glory of his House into shame.

Little do many think how soon and how sad the Accounts may be to them and to
their families, who have raised their houses by the undoing of their brethren.
Some that have willingly emptied themselves to make them full, and others that
have been drained by them to make their morsels fat, and their cups to
overflow. He has swallowed down riches, Job. 20.15.
(says Z^phar in Job) and he shall vomit them up again; but when Judas would
have vomited up his prize of blood, it choked him with an halter.

This is all I shall say more to this point, He only is a poor man that is
ever in wa^^s, and he is ever in wants that covets to be rich: and, which is
far worse, a worse tyrant there cannot be then a man's own lusts, nor a worse
flave then he that serves it. And what does he that covets to be rich having a
sufficiency, but covet to serve his unsatisfied lust; at least as he that
wears a thin silk cloak upon a thick fur'd gown, does show the wantonness of
his spirit, not any useful employment he makes of it: even so when superfluity
and not necessity does excrutiate the soul with worldly cares, it argues the
mind full of vanity, and the heart full of pride.



walks upon snares, 2 Timothy 6.9.
and had need of much grace to keep his soul, that he be not entangled and
undone by them.

mane and vesper, of adays continuance, so soon passes it away, and we are
gone.

O that these reasons now, would make your reason to yield to Jeremies Content:
a Content suitable to your mortal Condition. O that I had the Cottage of a
wayfaring-man in the wilderness.

That was the first General of our Text, which I have now compassed, Jeremies
Content: I had a desire to have given you his Account why he desired his
Cottage in the wilderness, That I might leave my people, and go from them. But
I know the limits of your time in these morning Exercises, and I shall not
exceed.

Reader, here were some counsels added upon the second point which follow in
the end of the second Sermon.

The second Sermon.

THE ACCOUNT OF A MINISTERS REMOVE: OR JEREMY DEPARTING FROM JERUSALEM.

Caveat magistratus ne stipendia a piis majoribus instituta diminuat, vel
diminui and interverti patiatur, Deus enim vindex horum omnium, and famem
ministrorum sequi solet fames verbi in ingrata illa regione.

Joh: Gerhard loc. com. de Magistrate. polit. sect. 185. Hebr. 13.17. Obey them
that have the oversight over you, and submit your selves, for they watch for
your souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and
not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

LONDON; Printed by Matthew Simmons. 1648.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, FRANCIS BVLLER, ESQUIRE, Member of the House of
COMMONS; Abundance of Grace, and assurance of Glory.
Noble Sir,
THIS Account of a Ministers Removal, being pressed into public, does hand
unto me this public acknowledgement of what I owe unto your Family, for my
first induction unto a Pastoral charge; wherein, although it pleased God to
make my Cup exceeding bitter by two that bore the marks of Gods manifest
displeasure, the one killed by the Sword of his Comrade in an Alehouse; the
other stigmatized as Cain, a fugitive from Gods House, and from all Civil
Societies, for eight or nine years together: yet it pleased God to make my
comforts superabundantly sweet in some spiritual seed there, the growth
whereof I saw, especially in that Ordinance of Catechizing, wherein your Family
blessed the Congregation with a fruitful example.

It is our happiness if we may be serviceable to God, and to his Church in our
generations, and then is greatness both honorable and comfortable, when it is
acted by grace.

The good God of heaven encourage your power and parts to shine as a light upon
an Hill, to all that are in the valley beneath you, and make you happy in the
saving comforts of your Family. Which is the earnest prayer of

Your Worships and your Families most humbly devoted, JOHN FATHERS.

THE ACCOUNT OF A Ministers Remove: OR, Jeremy departing from Jerusalem: THE
SECOND SERMON.
JEREM. 9.2. O that I had the Cottage of a wayfaring man in the wilderness,
that I might leave my people, and go from them.


WE have lately in another Exercise, and place, lodged Jeremy in his Cottage,
and in him and it, have observed, how moderate gracious desires are, how
suitable a mean Content is unto a mortal Condition? and how much better a low
and peaceable estate, then an high and troublesome? We are now to look back
unto Jerusalem, and to see how it stands between Jeremy and his people, that he
is so pressed to leave them, to examine the Account or reason of his former
desire. From whence (not to lose time in opening particulars) some of you may
remember, that I presented to you this general Observation:

That good Ministers may, upon warrantable grounds, desire to remove from an
unkind people.

In pursuance of this Doctrine, we shall make out two Questions, which if we
do not bring into question, the people will for us.





da Ambrosios and habebis Theodosios: Let the Minister be good, and the people
will be easily wrought unto good by him: But either his life is amiss, or his
labors too remiss; either he is too loose, or too precise in his
conversation; or too profound, or too plain in his doctrine; either he wants
bountifulness, or peaceablenesse, humility or familiarity: Or perhaps the
people may want themselves in all these.

I deny not but the fault may be sometimes the Ministers, and good Ministers may
have their faults, and his discomfort sure it is, that his people are no
better, Heb. 13.17.
and his discomfort is the peoples disprofit: Obey them that have the oversight
of you, and submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that
must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not with grief, for that
is unprofitable unto you: unprofitable unto you (says the Apostle) that you
should make their lives grievous, who spend their lives to make yours good.

But say my beloved, show me the fault if you can, in Jeremies life, or labor,
and yet his people so bad, as that he was not only weary of them, Jerem. 20.15.
but of his life too, because he could make theirs no better. Perhaps you will
say he was passionate; It is true, he was, but it was in compassion of the
peoples good, and in zeal to Gods glory. You will say he was stout and stiff,
Jerem. 14.17, 19. Jerem. 15.19.
and it was needful he should be so: for the Lords charge unto him was, Let
them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them.

The Ministry of the Word must not comply with the froward humors and ways
of men, but their untoward ways and humors must yield unto the Ministry of
the Word. Yea, but his Ministry was of heavy things: yea, and he would not
abate one syllable of his message, Jerem. 36.32.
though he saw the Kings wrath, the Nobles frowns, and the stinking Dungeon
before him.

But what say you then to Isaiah? He was a man for these times, he was styled
the Evangelicall Prophet, Sam. 19.2.27
and as David spoke of Abimaaz, He is a good man, and brings good tidings.
His prophesies were (for the most part) Gospel; he did mysteriously and sweetly
hold forth Jesus Christ, and yet if you will believe him, he had as little
comfort amongst his people, as other Mininisters might have amongst theirs. I
have labored in vain (says he) and spent my strength for nothing, Isai. 49.4.

But what speak I of the servant? the Lord it is, of whom this prophecy
speaks, as appears by that which follows, verse 6. Acts 13.47.
I will also give thee for a light of the Gentiles, and for salvation unto the
ends of the earth. Which words the Apostle Paul in his Sermon at Antioch, 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 Pet. 2.22. Matthew. 22.16. Luke 20.21.
brings home unto that admirable piece of that great mystery of Godliness,
Christ preached unto the Gentiles. And now for Christ, the Sun saw never any
man's life more inoffensive then his. His Doctrine was with authority, he was a
Teacher sent from God, and taught the word of God truly, his greatest opposites
being his witnesses: and yet it is the succeslesnesse of his own Ministry
unto the circumcision, of which himself by the Prophet complains, I have
labored in vain, I spent my strength for nothing. Of him also the Divine
Evangelist testifies, that He came unto his own, and his own received him not.
John 1.11.
It is more then manifest, he gave that blessing to the Ministry of the
Apostles, which he withheld from his own: There were more converted at one
Sermon of Peter, then we can read of by Christ in all his life time: such was
our Lords condescension to honor his Ordinances in his servants more then in
himself.

Now by two or three witnesses truths may be established; but if for further
confirmation you desire reasons, why a good Minister may be ill matched with a
bad people, and the fault not his, may you please to consider these:

Jacob, Are we in Gods stead, who has withheld from us the fruit of our
Ministry, whose prerogative alone it is to make the sterill heart fruitful,
Genesis 30.2. 1 Cor. 3.7.
and to beget the new creature in the barren conscience: the labor is our
work, the blessing is his.

Isaiah 10.22.


Ezekiels to a rebellious House, that will not hear them. Gods glory is never
the less, Ezekiel. 2.3. Isai. 15.11. Ezekiel. 2.5.
though ours be under foot. His Word does the work for which he sends it; and
if the people know no more, yet this they shall know, that the Lord has sent a
Prophet amongst them. He was not wanting to their good in outward means, if by
not improving them, they had not been wanting unto their own.

Give me leave now to make some short application of this point, and I have two
words to say, to People, to Minister.



Yet one word more, (good people) bear, and I pray bear with your Ministers
complainings under your unprofitablenesse: for surely their discomforts are
exceeding great, not as you give out, for their went of outward comforts: [For
without all question, God will never leave a godly Minister unprovided for. If
he straghten him in one place, he will make room for him in another.] But
because Gods glory and your souls are dearer unto them then their lives. Moses
for the glory of Gods name, Exodus 32.32. Romans 9.3.
was contented to have his own blotted out of the book of life; and Paul for
the salvation of many, was pressed in zeal to have parted with his own.

Nay, beloved, I will speak a bold word and a true, your souls are much dearer
unto your Ministers, then they are unto your selves. For did you bestow but
half those pains and cares about your own souls, which they bestow upon
yours, how good, how much better would they be!

How prodigal are many of the sons of Adam, to barter away the precious
purchase of Christ's blood for an Apple, their Birthright for a mess of
pottage, their souls upon every slight temptation, when it costs their
Minister many a night watches, many a painful swets, many a careful thoughts,
and heavy Ephialts, to recover the spoil out of the strong man's hands again.

Faelices nimium bona si sua norint, I would have them to bless God much for
this rich mercy, who have cast their lot amongst a people reverently affected
unto their Ministry. And I would persuade them with all tenderness of spirit
and condescension to blow up every spark of good, which they see amongst their
people.

A word more I have to my fellow sufferers, who are discomfortably matched with
an unkind and untractable people, though their comfort be less then others,
yet their reward may not: for our reward is not according to our success, but
according to our labors. I have labored in vain, I have spent my strength
for nothing; says Christ, says Esaias: But my Judgment is with the Lord, and
my work with the most High. Though Israel be not gathered; yet shall I be
glorified.

The clouds do kindly serve divine providence in dropping down their fatness,
though the earth be not fruitful, and the Sun in giving out his influences,
though the clay be hardened; should we cast our pearls before swine? Which do
not only refuse our pearls, but rend our persons. Our pearls are not the
less precious, nor our kindness the less acceptable unto Jesus Christ; for
whose sake we both labor and suffer.

I remember a passage between Christ and Peter, Luke 5.4, 5.
Christ coming into Peter's ship to preach, after he had don his Sermon, bad
Peter to cast out his net into the Sea, for a draught of fish, why Sir, says
Peter, I have fisht all night, and have caught nothing; nevertheless, at thy
command, I will let down the net. And the holy Story says, He enclosed a great
multitude of fishes. You know what Christ intended in this, to show Peter what
he should expect when he should shortly be made a fisher of men. He might fish
all night, and all day too, and catch nothing, if Christ be not with him:
nevertheless, having a word of command from Christ, he must do his work, and
wait upon Christ for the word of his blessing.



Jeremies case was here.
These sad and troublesome times have occasioned many remooves of Ministers,
and their remooves many disputes among the people. A word to these will not be
u^ seasonable in these times.

O that I bad the cottage of a wayfaring man in the Wilderness, that I might
leave my people. My people, says Jeremy. But how so. The Prophets were not
assigned unto peculiar charges, as the Priests were at Jerusalem, and the
Levites unto their particular Cities; and yet Jeremy's delegation we shall
find to be chiefly to the head-Citie, as appears by Chapter the first of this
Prophecy, and ver. 18. Where his Commission is directed unto the Kings of
Judah, and to the Princes and Priests that were in Jerusalem. In order
whereunto we shall read Chapter 5 ver. 1. and 5. He went up and down the
streets of Jerusalem, to find out one righteous and pious man. Upon this
ground it is not improbable that he calls those of Jerusalem my people, to
distinguish them from those in the Wilderness of Judea, of Ziph, or of Maon;
into some one of which he might desire to remoove: O that I had the cottage of
a wayfaring man in the Wilderness, that I might leave my people. But whether
we confine Jeremy's Dioces unto Jerusalem, or enlarge it over all Judea, a
propriety of relation he had, and every Minister has in that people to whom
the Lord does send him.

Ministers and people have mutual interests one in the other.

St Paul claims as genuine and natural right in his Corinthians and
Galatians, 1 Cor. 4.15. Gal. 4.19.
as their father that did beget them, or their mother that did travail in
birth for them. Notwithstanding it was not Paul that did beget the Corinthians,
but the Lord by him. Nor was it he that did bring forth the new creature in the
Galatians, but the Spirit by him. Such is our good Lords condescension unto his
worthless Ministers, as that he does often times in Scripture transfer over,
as it were his right unto his Ministers, by ascribing that unto their power,
which belongs unto his own, and allowing them to assume that right in his
people, which none can truly challenge but himself; as he says to Moses,
Deuteronomy. 9.12.
Thy people which thou have brought out of Egypt; when the people were neither
of Moses constitution, nor of his bringing out of Egypt, but the Lords.







I conceive, they urge it by much too far, that would have it as fixed and
absolute, as between man and wife, To have and to hold, for richer, for poorer,
for better, for worse, till death us depart.

Be the Ministers condition or peoples carriage what it will, the Minister in
their opinion can no more lawfully leave his people, then a man his wife. Would
these likewise allow the wise, to have no right in what is hers, but what is
her husbands? I trow they would not. I hear the Apostle say unto his
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11.2.
I have espoused you unto one husband, which is Christ, but he does not say, I
have espoused you unto one husband, which is my self.

But grant the relation to be so fixed, as between man and wife, yet there are
some cases in which man and wife may separate: And that is now our Third labor
to find out that case.

Et Vtinam, I would to God -- But this is not the case between Jeremy and his
people.

Leo has a decree against those, who do remove from small livings unto great:
Si quis mediocritate sedis suae dispecta administrationem loci celebrioris
ambiret, non salum a Cathedra pellatur aliena sed car^bit and propria. I need
not interpret to those by whom I desire to be understood. Qui ad curas
pervenerint tanquam sine cura victuri, honori totum dati, sanitati nihil. Who
as those Ecclesiastics in Barnards time pursue their own preferment, not the
peoples well fare.

The Council of Chalcedon has another Canon, not much unlike the former,
against removing from a Country to a Citie-charge; The caution in both is: Si
quis ambiret, if authority draws the Minister; But Si majorum authoritate
inductus: If authority calls the Minister, and (I will add too) the love of
the Congregation, the case is otherwise: But neither of these cases does hitt
ours; for Jeremy was contented to have changed his province in Jerusalem, for a
cottage in the Wilderness.

That clause then in the eighteenth Canon of the Council of Antioch better
fits us: Si non vitio suo, sed plebis contradictione pastor abierit; If the
removal of a Minister, be not occasioned by any miscarriage in the Minister,
but provoked by the ill carriage of the people: And so it was here: O that I
had the cottage of a wayfaringman in the Wilderness, that I might leave my
people, and go from them. Do you ask why? Jeremy will tell you in the words
below my text, that his people were so bad, he could not tell how with any
comfort to live longer with them. And how bad they were, I had rather you
should there read, then I report unto you.







Jeremy's ends, for which he desired his remoovall into the Wilderness; And
his ends I conceive, may be three.







In reference to which, I shall reminde you of that threefold acception of this
word Wilderness in Scripture, which I mentioned in the opening of the Text.
Suitable to Jeremy's threefold end of removal.

Jeremy might hope for better success of his Ministry in such a Wilderness
then in Jerusalem.

Jeremy might expect more safety of his person amongst wild beasts, then
amongst wicked men.

Jeremy's soul vexed with the sins of Jerusalem, he might desire the peace
and comfort of it, in some safe and solitary retiredness: O that I had the
cottage of a waysaring-man in the Wilderness, that I might leave my people,
and go from them.

I shall now overlooke these again; and hand you out some few observations
from them, and then apply unto the general Doctrine.

Vtinam liceat mihi agere in solitudine ut non cogar per vocatione^ meam
servire isti impio popule. Pomeran. in Loc.
is the hopeful success of his Ministry, and for this Jeremy might desire a
cottage in the Wilderness of Judea, of Ziph, or of Maon, expecting better
success of his Ministry, in such a barren place, then in Jerusalem, which was
fruitful in wickedness.

Sancta rusticitas coelesti regno aptior, quam docta malitia, The poor and
simple usually give that entertainment unto the Ministry of the Word, which the
great and worldly wise do not neglect only, but despise: for worldly greatness
thinks it self too great, 1 Cor. 1.27.
and fleshly wisdom too wise to be ordered by that which they call, the
foolishness of preaching. Therefore has the Lord chosen the weak and foolish
things of the world, to confound the wise and mighty. And Wisdom will tell
you, Prove. 9.4.26.12.
that her preparations are for the simple, and she has reason for it: Because
there is more hope of a fool, then of him that is wise in his own conceit.

When John Baptist sent his Disciples to know of Christ, Whether he were the
Messiah, or whether they should look for another; Christ told them of the
Wonders which were done by him: The deaf hear, the blind receive their sight,
the dead are raised to life, and amongst other wonders of his Kingdom, he
brings in this with (if not above) the rest; The poor receive the Gospel: Our
latter English reads it, Matthew. 11.15.
To the poor is the Gospel preached. But that is no wonder; for to poor and
rich the Gospel is preached. But this is the wonder to the scornful world, and
indeed a great secret it is of Christ's Kingdom, that the poor receive the
Gospel better then the rich.

It was no Paradox to him that said; The Devil has more a do to win the
simple, then the subtle, and the Minister less: Because the worldly wise are
sooner enraged by the Ministry of the Word, then won by it: For that the
Ministry of the Word crosses with the contentments of the world, and the
wisdom of the Spirit bids open war against the wisdom of the flesh; Whereas
in the poor and ignorant temptations against the Word being less, the
entertainment of it is easier.

Peter's may sometime catch great fishes as well as small, and when great fishes
come to our net, and break not through, the labor is not better answered, then
the labourer comforted. But where we labor all night and catch nothing,
surely neither comfort nor Christ is there.

foundation, then to make superstructures; But if the labor prove effectual,
the comfort is exceeding: for this we need not travail the Deserts of
America. There are too many Wildernesses within the borders of our Israel.
Congregations which with Zebulon and Nepthali yet sit in darkness, and in the
shadow of death. Should my Brethren enforce themselves with Paul, to preach the
Gospel where Christ is not named, they might possibly with Paul find better
entertainment amongst the Barbarians at Malta, then proselytes at Jerusalem. I
mean amongst those that are humbly ignorant, sooner then those that are
conceitedly knowing. And this is now the first end of Jeremy's desire of
removal, the hopeful success of his Ministry in the Wilderness; O that I
had the cottage of a Wayfaring-man in the Wilderness, that I might leave my
people, and go from them.

Jeremy's desired removal, was the safety of his person: and here we take
Wilderness for a Defert of wild beasts, and as Jeremy might hope for more
comfort of his Ministry amongst a rude and untaught people; so more safety of
his person, among wild and savage beasts. You will take it as a very hard
saying, but it is more hard and heavy that it should be true, yet too true it
is, that

The servants of God have found more security amongst wild beasts, then
amongst wicked men.

That decree in Paradise of enmity between the Woman's and the Serpents seed,
Genesis 3.15.
is both literally and mystically true. The natural seed is not so envious to
man, but the supernatural is much more envious to the Christian man. The Woman
in the twelfth of the Revelation fled for her security into the Wilderness,
and her blessed man child the Lord Christ was safe in the Wilderness, who
suffered in Jerusalem. Daniel found more mercy from the Lions, Mat. 4. Dan.
6.22.
then from the Babylonians. And the Ravens which of all birds are most envious
to man, 1 King. 17.6.
were more pitiful to the Prophet then man was. Eusebius reports of certain
Christians of Tire in Phoenicia, whose bodies were exposed unto wild beasts,
and whilst the beasts by an instinct of reverence abstained from them, they
did not yet escape the cruelties of men, more rabid then the beasts.

Isa. is set forth by wild beasts changed from the rabidnesse of their
natures, and the kingdoms of men in the 7. of Daniel by wild beasts that do
continue and exercise their native fierceness: the kingdoms of men will prove
little better then the kingdoms of beasts, where the kingdom of Christ is
opposed. Homo homini lupus: there is no beast more savage by nature then man
is, unless the Kingdom of Christ does either regenerate or restrain him.

There is much in that, and I desire it may be noted, the holy Scriptures do
often tutor the reasonable man by unreasonable beasts; because man being in
honor little lower then the Angels, by his fall became worse than beasts:
Beasts yielding that obedience to God, and service to man, which men deny both
to God and man. Basil of Seleucia not improperly observes, that the beasts
before the flood were more tractable to the command of God, and to the
ministry of Noah, then the men of the old world were: for they entered into the
Ark and were saved, the other refused, and perished.

Nineveh, a Wilderness of untaught people, but the Lions of Babylon, a
Wilderness of savage Beasts, shall rise up in judgment against the men of
this generation, and condemn them; who do most cruelly bite and devour one
the other, whilst the beasts of the field are at peace with us.

This is now the second end of Jeremy's desire of removal, the safety of his
person, which he would rather venture in the wilderness, then in Jerusalem. O
that I had the Cottage of a Wayfaring-man in the Wilderness, that I might
leave my people, and go from them.

Jeremy's desired removal, Melius est habit are in extrema solitudine, qua^
inter ta^ta hominu^ scelera commorari. Hier. in loc. Psalm 120.5.
was the tranquillity of his conscience, being grieved with the abominations
that were in Jerusalem, he desired to retire into the wilderness. How much
better is an harmless and homely retiredness, then the merry-madnesse of
ungodly Societies? An Hermites life then a Ruffians? To be always without
company, then not to keep good? To dwell in the wilderness, then in the tents
of wickedness? You know whose complaint it is, Woe is me that I am constrained
to dwell in Meshek, and to inhabit the tents of Kedar, my soul has too long
dwelt with them that are enemies to peace. And yet I hear him say elsewhere,
Psalm. 16.6.
The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places, and I have a goodly heritage.
Bona terra, mala gens. In regard of the place, so it may be; but in regard of
the people, woe is me.

Jacob in Genesis 49. and the sixth, is that which I shall apply for caution
against evil Societies, Into their secret let not my soul come, my glory be
not thou joined with their Assembly. Or that prayer of David, Psalm 141. verse.
4. Lord let not my soul eat of their delicates. Lots eye was great upon the
fat and pleasant valleys of Sodom, Genesis 13.10.19.12.
but his righteous soul was vexed with the detestable wickedness of the
people, and because he did not dislodge himself, the Lord did suddenly fire him
out. Est aliquid mali, vicinum esse malo, it is bad to live by bad neighbors.
If we fear not an house infected, we should dread an house on fire. The house
infected is their sin, the house on fire is their judgment; and in as much
as we are partakers of their sins, Rev. 18.4.
we shall be partakers of their judgments. Jeremy, to avoid both, desired to
retire wi^h safety into the wilderness, rather then to live in Jerusalem with
fire over his head: O that I had the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the
wilderness, that I might leave my people and go from them.

I have now done with the ends which might be lawful in the Minister to desire
his removal; I come to the provocations which are sinful in the people to
enforce his removal. And lawful ends, and sinful provocations joined
together, Observe.
will certainly warrant a Ministers removal.

There are sour great provocations wherewith Jeremy does charge his people.


Now I charge none with these, but shall show how lawful the removal is where
these may be charged.

Judah had belied the Lord their God, and accounted the words of his Prophets
as wind. And Chap. 8. v. 9. They had rejected the word of the Lord, and there
was no understanding left in them.

Now this is a very sad provocation unto a Minister, which may not unjustly
occasion his removal, as appears by that clause in the Ministers commission,
Luke 10. v. 10, 11. Into whatsoever City you enter, and they receive you not,
go your ways into the streets of the same, and say, even the very dust of the
City which cleaves on us, we do wipe off against you.

And according to the tenor of this Commission, Paul and Barnabas shook off
the dust of their feet against the unbeleeving Jews at Antioch, and told them,
It was necessary that the word of God at first should have been spoken unto
you: but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life; Lo, we turn to the Gentiles. Acts 13. v. 51. and 46. And in
Acts 22. v. 18. The Lord charged the Doctor of the Gentiles to make have, and
to get him quickly out of Jerusalem, upon this ground, because, says he, they
will not receive thy testimony concerning me. And when Paul had a great desire
to stay at Jerusalem, as appears by his reasoning with the Lord, v. 19. and
20. No, says Christ, do not plead for thy stay, but haste thee to be gone, for
I have a purpose to remove thee far hence to the Gentiles, verse. 21. What
should God do with such a people with whom his Word can do no good? If they
say to God, Depart from us, we will have no knowledge of thy ways, it is time
for God to say to his Ministers, Depart from them. Ex ore suo, out of their own
mouth will I judge this people, because they would not have the knowledge of my
ways, they shall not. And this is now their first provocation, their
untractablenesse to the ministry of the Word.

Jer. 38.9. 1 Cor. 9.13.
Their unmercifulness in withholding maintenance from their Ministers. The
Princes of Jerusalem would have starved Jeremy in the Dungeon, if an Aethyopian
had not been more pitiful unto him then any Israelite was.

Maintenance is allowed on all sides, that he who waits at the Altar, V. 7.9.
should live by the Altar. And the Apostle makes it out by diverse arguments
drawn from Natures laws, and if men would but measure the quotum by half that
allowance which they give to one lust, they would be more reasonable in judging
what were a competency.

It is a great provocation when people withdraw their affections from their
Ministers, and bestow them on those who withdraw their souls from the truth,
as those Galatians gave their hearts to such as plucked out their spiritual
eyes, who a little before would have plucked out their corporal eyes to have
given Paul. Gal. 4.15.
But when people also withdraw maintenance. the bond of covenant between
Minister and people is broken. For though the Covenant be not always
expressed, yet it is always implied, that the people, plus multo, should be
as careful, and as certain unto the Minister in temporals, as the Minister
unto them in spirituals, 1 Cor. 9. v. 11.

The Civil law allows the wife (and if it did not, the law of Nature does)
receiving not victum, livelihood from him to whom she is a helper, to seek
alimentum, subsistence elsewhere.

Jeremy charges double on Jerusalem, both in worship and in practice: In
reference to the one, in the words below my Text, he calls them Adulterers and
Adulteresses: In reference to the other, an assembly of evil doers. What
adultery is to the Marriage-contract, that is Apostasy to the Gospel Covenant,
and no adultery like to the adulterating of the truth and wo^ship of God.

Now Apostasy is a grievous provocation unto the Lord himself to depart from a
people. Nos. 9.12.
Woe unto them when I shall depart from them, (says the Lord.) And when is
that? When they depart from his truth and worship. And where the Lord ^oes, the
servant goes after; If the Son of Peace abide not in the City, Luke 10.6, 10.
the Ambassadors of peace must depart, and their peace departs with them.

In Heb. 10. v. 38. the Apostle brings in the Lord protesting against
Apostates, If any man draw back, my saul shall have no pleasure in him. Draw
back from what? The former words run thus, The just shall live by faith, and if
any man draw back, that is, from faith, either from the doctrine of faith, or
from the life of faith, from Gospel Principles, or Gospel Conversation, my
soul shall have no pleasure in him: Non erit rectus in anima mea: He shall not
stand right in my affection, I shall on no terms approve him: yea the words
are a meiosis, there is much more implied then is expressed, My soul shall
loath and abominate such a person. I will not endure the sight of him in the
Congregation. And if this be the case of the Congregation, the Minister may
well say, Jerem. 8.5. Hosea. 11.7.
Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace. But this must be
understood of a people turned back by a perpetual rebellion and de industria,
with an heart bent to backsliding, not through infirmity, but by a design.

Persecution: And Apostates soon turn persecuters, and solus Apostata
persecutor; they usually become the greatest, because they are loath to have
that way to be credited, from which they are revolted. Julian that was the
most notorious Apostate, became the most bitter Persecutor that ever lived in
the Christian Church.

There are two sorts of persecution, which the red Dragon stirs up against
godly Ministers, Oris and plagae, Ishmaels and Esaus persecution,
Tongue-persecution, and Hand-persecution. When men do not only give out hard
speeches, Jude 15.
to reproach the Minister and his Doctrine, but do seek out all advantages to
entrap his person.

Now the Lord had discovered unto Jeremy the treachery of his peoples hearts,
though it were not come to blows, chap. 11. v. 18.19. There is more danger of
the wolf in the lambs skin, then in his own, and where danger is eminent, it is
not only safe, but necessary to avoid it. If the people receive not our
testimony, Acts 22.18. Matthew. 10.23.
Christ would have us to depart; but if they persecute us, Christ advises us to
fly. And in personal persecutions all agree with Augustine that it is lawful
to remove, which in general persecutions they question as unlawful.

Athanasius in his Apology to the Emperor, on this ground justifies his
departure from Alexandria in the persecution of Constantius, 1 Kings 18.4.
and in the persecution of Jezabel, an hundred of the Lords Prophets were hid
by Obadiah in a cave.

You see now the provocations of the people, which may warrantize their
Jeremies to depart from them, and to wish for retiring Cottages in the
wilderness. O that I had the Cottage of a wayfaring-man in the wilderness,
that I might leave my people, and go from them.



I would desire our English Jerusalem to examine herself, whether she be not
parallel to Jeremy's Jerusalem in all these provocations; As,

London prophecy in Sackcloth, under a great contempt and scorn of their
Ministry.

The Gospel tells us of a Devil that was too strong for the Apostles to cast
out: Every lust is a Devil, Matthew. 17.16.
and how many such Devils are there in the hearts of men, which are too strong
for Ministers, too strong for O dinances, too strong for the Apostles
themselves, if they were alive. We may sooner destroy our own lives then some
men's lusts. They will cell you how many Ministers they have outlived, and
their sins are as long lived as themselves.

to turn stones into bread. Matthew. 4.3.
But some less charitable would have their Ministers to live upon stones in
stead of bread.

It is storied of Calvin in Geneva, because he would not give the Sacrament
unto the people in such a superstitious manner as they desired, the people
would give him no maintenance. For the very same cause would many Congregations
in London either storm or starve their Ministers, or bring them unto Luthers
pittance, an Herring a day; and for their aged Ministers, they deal with them,
as men do with their Horses when they are worn out, they turn them into bare
Commons.

London turned back as the streams of Jordan by an horrible backsliding? What
a desperate revolt from the solemn Covenant? What an execrable denial of the
sacred Scriptures? Of the Faith of the Lord that bought them? How is the
beautiful child of Reformation stifeled in the birth, and a monster of
shameful Deformation brought forth in the room of it? O tempora! O mores!

Time was when prayer and repentance were held up in the hands of faith, as
precious means to maintain Communion with Jesus Christ, and now men pray
against their prayers, and repent of their repentings; because some lay too
much weight on duties, others have laid them wholly aside.

Time was when London zeal enkindled against every bracelet and lace of the
Scarlet Whore, and now as if the spirit of London were changed into her spirit
of fornications, we plead for a tolleration of all her sorceries. That which
once entre^ as Iron into our souls, but to hear of, now it is accounted a
sin to speak against it.

Time was when we did look on errors as the smoke of the bottomless pit, now
they are admired as new lights dropped down from heaven. And he is accounted no
body in their Meetings that has not something of them.

Time was when the Lords day was a delight unto us: now it is questioned
whether it be the Lords ordinance or man's.

Time was when we saw a beauty in their feet that brought the glad Tidings of
Peace: Now Ministers are a burden in their places.

Time was when we fled as Doves unto the holes of the Windows, and now the
ways of Sion complain for want of passengers.

Time was, but time will fail me if I should go on to show what shameful
Apostasies are amongst us.

Londons, how is Englands first love Apostatized into persecutions!

May it not be said of our times in England, as Bernard spoke of his times,
whose words are quoted by Hugo Cardinalis in his Postills on John; Good Jesus
(says he) it seems the whole University of Christian people have conspired
against thee, and these are chief persecutors; even so the whole University of
England seems to conspire against Jesus Christ, and some which heretofore were
great professors, are now become bitter persecutors.

Ishmaels persecution, I think never was more against faithful Ministers, then
now i^. Men bend their tongues for lies, and the scorners chair is every where
set up against Moses chair; for the wholesome words they have from us, we
have bitter words from them.

Luther was charged for preaching against the Popedom, to be tuba rebellionis,
a Trumpet of rebellion. And we for preaching against as great a mystery of
iniquity, if not the same, to be Incendiaries of all the troubles that have
been in England, and of this second war: If any thing go amiss with the
people, Aaron must be stoned. Numb. 14.20.


Esaus persecution, rough hands we find every where. And though they fall not
down right to blows, yet there is malice and treachery enough in their hearts
to provoke them. New England they say, is too good a condition for these
roundheaded Ministers, and therefore they resolve, if they can get the day to
cut their throats in Old-England: Behold, says God to Jerusalem: Jerem. 3.5.
Thou have spoken and done as evil things as thou could. If thou could
have spoken or done worse, thou would.

We need not (as Ezekiel in Jerusalem) dig through the wall of this City,
to see the bitterness of some men's spirits, the iniquity of their heels does
sufficiently evidence the treachery of their hearts. They declare their sin
as Sodom, and publish it as Absalom in the face of all Israel, and in the sight
of this Sun.

Too sadly has the occasion presented you Jerusalems parallel in London, and
yet spare me one word farther; for, it would be Londons happiness if this day
we could be brought to give Glory to God in taking shame to our selves. And oh
that London would take up righteous thoughts before God in judging their own
condition, the Kingdom you see, is all in blood at this time, if we would
fetch blood from our hearts, the Lord might be entreated to stop the issues of
blood that are running in the Land. Londons provocations are not only parallel
to Jerusalems, but as Jerusalem justified her younger sister Samaria, so has
London her elder sister Jerusalem.

There are six circumstances, wherein Judahs provocations exceeded Isreal's.

Israel sinned under bad Kings, Jerem. 1.1.
Judah under good. Judah sinned against all the examples of Judgment which God
had given them by Israel. Jere. 3.8.
Judah rebelled against those special warnings, which God sent them by his
Prophets. Hos. 4.15.
Though Israel play the harlot, yet let not Judah sin. Judah made more
profession, then backsliding Israel did, and the more we appear for God,
Jere. 3.4, 5.
the worse we are, if we be not that indeed, which we appear to be. Judah
enjoyed more and better ordinances, then Israel did; and the more means of
Grace we sin against, 2 Chronicles. 13.10, 11.
the more malice is in our sin. Judah had made a solemn Covenant unto God,
in Josias time, and sins against Covenants, 2 Chren. 34.32.
are not only apostasies, but perjuries.
Now see if all these aggravations be not found in Londons provocations.

England with the like, and will not our posterities even curse the loss of
them, which our unnatural divisions have snatched from us. Our fathers had a
prize put into their hands, and they regarded it not.

Londons security, I mean not Isreal's and Judahs in ages past, but Germanies
and Irelands, Kents, and Colchesters present before us. When we see an
under-billet on fire, and the second smoking, will not the top be consumed, if
the fire be not quenched?

London wanted warnings, or Watchmen? Has not the Lord Convened his faithful
Watchmen out of all the parts of England, to warn London? Has not the Lords
voice cried unto the City; Hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it? Mich.
6.9.
We do hear the Word, and dot not feel it, therefore we shall feel the
rod, and shall not hear it.

Londons? Oh London, I am sorry for thy great accounts: may it not be said of
thee, as of Capernaum; Luke 10.15.
And thou London which have been lifted up to Heaven? Certainly no city has
been so high in Gospel-priviledges as thou have been. The Lord grant that thy
Gospel-unkindnesses do not incur Capernaums curse, no misery so great as
that which is provoked by the abuse of Gospel-mercy. Coals taken from between
the Cherubims, are coals of Juniper, the fiercest discoveries of Gods fiery
indignation.

London been eminent in profession above all the parts of the Kingdom? Yea,
are not Londons revolts even now veiled under profession? Is not truth almost
banished under pretense of truth? And Religion disgraced under show of
Religion? Compare Ezekiel. 10.2. with 11.7. Zech. 13.6.
Thus have I been wounded, says Christ, in the house of my friends.

Turks and Infidels sin singly, they profess themselves Christ's enemies,
and they are so, but this is, Duplex, multiplex iniquitas, a complicated
compound of iniquity.

London, did England, did two Nations ever enter into such solemn Covenants?
as have been lately not only published in our Cities, but hung up in our
Churches as inviolable records of our engagements, and as standing Witnesses
against our revolts? And has not London, has not England? have not the two
Nations sinned, not only against, but with their Covenants? Serving our lusts,
and not our God by them?

The Greek word, that signifies Oath or Covenant, (...) ab (...) includo unde,
(...) septum vel ab (...) terminus.
is derived from a word which signifies also an hedge or bound; and we have not
only broken our hedge, our bound, but even laid it flat to the ground, whereby
Gods wrath breaks in every where upon us, and he is enforced to unsheath his
sword again: The avenger of his Covenant.

And now let London lay all these provocations and aggravations together, and
see if there be not cause enough, for their Jeremies to wish for cottages in
the wilderness, that they might leave their people and go from them? Yea,
will London be entreated to see, how many faithful Jeremy's have been provoked
already to leave the City? who are now retired into their cottages to pray for
those to whom their preaching could do no good? And as Solon when Athens was
taken by Pisistratus hung up his Spear and Target at the Citie-gates, with
this Protestation; Oh Athens, I have aided thee both in word and deed; so may
those faithful Ministers say that have left you; Oh London, we have done what
we could to warn thee of thy sins, and of those judgments which are like
to follow them.

Shall I have leave to tell you of above forty Churches in this City, that
are, or were lately empty, and many more from which godly, grave, and Orthodoxe
Ministers have been forced to remove, through want of maintenance, or through
other discouragements?

I would lay before you, but one motive to quicken the bitter sense of this;
Even the mischievous consequence of it. And I will give it you in a Scripture
instance. You shall read in the 2 of Chronicles the 28. ver. 24. That in Ahaz
time in Jerusalem [which is Londons paralel] the doors of the Lords house were
shut, and Altars set up in every corner of the City; And what followed? Why,
gross apostafie in the people, and shortly after utter desolation of the
City. Surely there is no Omen so sad of Londons hastening misery, as their
unkind provocations of the departure of their godly Ministry.

I need not tell you what followed Noah's entering into the Arc, or Lots
departure out of Sodom, or what the Protestants in Queen Mary's days
acknowledged, that those Marian-dayes were the just issues of their disdain of
godly Ministers in King Edwards days, but this remember, that the dust of your
Ministers departure shall rise up as a testimony against you, and where Christ's
Ambassadors of peace are forced to depart, Compare Ezekiel. 9.3. with 1^.9.
their peace departs with them. The glory of God did not long stay on the
City, when once it was departed from the Sanctuary: If the candles are put
out, the shops are all shut up; Interpres what that means Isa. 9.19. If the
Land be darkened, (and it is darkened with a witness when the Sun of
righteousness withdraws his Gospel light) the people shall shortly be for
fuel to the fire of Gods wrath.



And first unto my brother Jeremy, who desires a cottage in the wilderness: I
would desire him heedfully to write after his Copy here, to see that he has
lawful ends, and warrantable grounds to leave his people. I need not repeat
Jeremy's ends, or his peoples provocations again.

Two things only I have in advice from Jeremy in Jerusalem, to Jereremy in
England; which I noted in the analysis of the Text.

leave from God.

love to them.

Jeremy does not let fall these words at Randum, or in passion, but in dolor
of his spirit, as elsewhere he says, he commends his way unto God; Jerem.
20.12.
Unto thee, O Lord, have I opened my cause. If all men's ways are in Gods
dispose, his Ministers are all ways. Sometime Paul is ordered to stay at
Corinth, when he is willing to remove. Sometime to remove from Jerusalem, when
he is willing to stay, always he waits upon the Lords call, to direct all his
ways.

Non omnes possumus esse Caesares, we cannot all be Assembly men. Some must be
Countrymen, all cannot live in the Cities; some must go abroad into the
Villages. All are not appointed to great places, some unto small; some have
their palaces, others their cottages; Wheresoever our lot shall fall, we must
see that we have a divine call to warrant our way, and then if we have little,
we must be contented; because it is our portion: If we have more, we must be
more thankful, because it is above our deservings. Whether we have more or
less, we must be both contented and thankful: Because it is Gods will. Let
our lot fall unto us in a fair ground or a foul, we must both contentedly
and thankfully submit our way unto Gods dispose; only for more peace and
comfort, and for better success of his Ministry, is Jeremy's desire. O that I
had the cottage of a wayfaring-man in the Wilderness, that I might leave my
people, and go from them.

Jeremy would not leave his people without leave from God, so not without love
to them, although he could receive no love from them; for though he did leave
them, yet he will not leave to pray for them, and to pray in tears, and tears
in abundance, and that abundance not yet enough to express his love; but he
wishes for more in the verse before my Text; O that my head were waters, and
mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night for the slain
of the daughter of my people.

Ministers may preach plausibly, but with Jeremy to mourn in searet is the
trial of their sincerity. And for such a people as Jeremy had is a trial
indeed. 2 Cor. 12.15.
Paul spends and is spent (both in praying and in preaching) though the more he
loves, the less he is beloved. How often do we find Moses on his face for
the people of Israel, when they by murmuring and mutuning did spit in his face.
Stephen we see on his knees for his persecutors, pouring out his prayers and
life together.

Can you drink of the Cup that I shall drink of (says our Savior?) We can.
But can you pray also for those that make you drink of it? This we hardly can,
yet this we must, if we will be (...) Disciples indeed. John 8.31.
We must pray for those that persecute us: Father forgive them, for they know
not what they do.

Pray (you say) But how? Why

Peter, Act. 12. And as Samuel for Israel, God forbid that I should cease
praying.

My leanness, my leanness, we is me.

These two intimations we have from those two holy advantages which Jeremy
aimed at in his cottage in the wilderness.

ver. 1. he wishes his eyes a fountain of tears; and in the Text he wishes for
some solitary place to power them out in. It is not enough to pray, but we
should pray in tears, and to pray in tears, we should retire our selves to it
as to our work.

Could I here reach my brethren in their Cottages, I would bespeake from them
this holy improvement of their retiredness, to pray for those whom they have
left, those that are at ease in Sion, that drink their wine in bowls, and
forget Joseph in the stocks. It is an happy leisure wherein we are set on work
for God, and a blessed sequestration from the world, by which we have more
commerce with Heaven.

Jeremy foreseeing Jerusalems misery, wishes himself in the wilderness that
he might not see it; as good old Cato, hearing of Romes overthrow, being blind
and incapable to see it, wished himself dease too, that he might not have
heard it.

The miseries of unkind people as they are better discerned, so they are more
pitied by good Ministers, then by themselves. The Physician sees more into the
danger of the patient, then the patient himself does, and when the patient
desires such things as would kill him, the Physician studies all means to cure
him. The watchmen on the walls, see further then those in the City, and though
the people do rest secure in their sins, yet they that watch for their
souls will not suffer God to be at rest for them. Moses is contending with God
for Isreal's safety, when Israel was dancing before their Idol, senseless both
of their finne and judgment approaching.

My Brethren, I will only say of Jeremy, as Paul of Abel, being dead yet
speaks, and bespeaketh from you, your dearest affections, and tenderest
bowels for the people of God.

O that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might
weep day and night, for the slain of the daughter of my people.

And that I might set my self close to this work, and might not see the
calamity of my people which I do foresee.

O that I had the cottage of a waysaring-man in the Wilderness, that I might
leave my people, and go from them.

London, I shall dispatch; And four counsels I desire to leave with you. And O
that the Lord God of Heaven, the omnipotent arm of divine grace would
effectually set them home this day upon every one of your hearts, and for
Christ his sake I beseech you, for your souls sake, for the safety of this
famous City, of the whole Kingdom, yea of three bleeding dying Kingdoms, I
beseech you, let my counsels be acceptable unto you, if yet the Lord may be
entreated to continue the glory of his Ordinances among you, and to prevent
those judgments which seem to be threatened.



When our enemies were mighty, our dangers threatening, and our helps small,
how big were our promises? our protestations? our declarations for God, and for
his Christ? But as Elisha parlied with his servant concerning that good
Shunamite; She has been careful for us, 2 Kings 4.13, 14.
but what have we done for her? even so, should we put the same question to
our hearts concerning God [as it is very fit we all should] what accounts
could our souls give herein? That God has been careful for us in the day of
our distress, will be, must be, confessed. But what have we done for him, of
all that we have covenanted unto him?

It is very sad to see how that solemn sacred thing is of late made like a
picture with diverse faces to look according to every man's humor and lust that
looks upon it. And on both sides it is used, or rather abused as a stalking
horse by those who under pretense of love unto it, do practice the manifest
violation of it.

Chrysostom was wont to say, that it was not only the duty but the character
of him that was, or would be godly, to be the same in the day of his health and
prosperity, which he did promise to be in the day of his distress and
calamity. Surely our God is the same to us, our sins may change his
providence, but our estates cannot change his love. He is to us a
Covenant-keeping God, and exspects that we should be to him, not only a
Covenant-making, but a Covenant-keeping people.

My good friends, let us not befoole our selves, (for so we do said one of
the wisest among the sons of men) if we think that God will accept promises
without payments, Eccles. 5.4.
Eccles. 5.4. The Preachers counsel is weighty in the 6. ver. of the same
Chapter. Suffer not thy mouth to cause thy flesh to sin, neither say thou
before the Angel it was an error, Wherefore should God be angry at thy voice?
and destroy the works of thy hands?

There is no sin that we read of in holy Writ, against which divine anger
has more terribly threatened, or more severely executed, then against the sin
of Covenant Breaking. I could lay before you the three-yeares-wasting famine of
Judea for Saul's breach of Covenant with the Gibeonites, although but a civil
Covenant, and made for many years before. 2 Samuel 21. Josh. 9.15. Compare Jere.
52.3.13. Ezekiel. 17.13.19.
As also the ruthful desolations of Jerusalem for Zedekiabs treachery in
breaking Covenant with the King of Babylon. But I shall only desire you to
read over and consider well that passage in Jere. 34. from the 15. ver. to the
21. In ver. the 15. the Lord commends the Princes, and the people, that they
had entered into the Covenant: You have done that which was right in my sight
(says God) in making a Covenant with me, in the house that is called by my
Name. But ver. 16. he charges them with the dishonest breach of it, But ye
have turned and polluted my holy Name. See, my Brethren, Covenant Breaking is a
polluting of that sacred dreadful Name, which is most solemnly invocated and
attested in Covenant-making. But how had they broken Covenant? Why, they
proclaimed liberty for Gods people, and had done nothing toward it; therefore
says God ver. 17. I will also proclaim a liberty for you, even a liberty to
the sword, to the pestilence, and to the famine, and I will make you to be
removed into all the Kingdoms of the earth: and ver. 20. I will even give them
into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of them that seek their life,
and their dead bedies shall be for meat unto the fowls of the Heaven, and to
the beasts of the earth. And that you may take special notice who they are,
that are the marks of this direful wrath, the Spirit of God does notably point
them out unto you, ver. 18. They are the men that have transgressed my
Covenant, which have not performed the words of the Covenant which they made
before me, when they did cut the Calfe in twain, and passed between the parts
thereof. This was a ceremony used amongst the Jews in maing Covenants, wherein
they did tacitly imprecate the holy God, even so to cut them in pieces who did
break the Covenant, as they did cut the Calfe, and as they did pass between
the divided pieces, so the Lord to cause his fiery indignation, to pass
between them who divided one from the other in the bond of the holy Covenant.

And now my Brethren, if the most just God be so extremely severe in breach of
Covenants between man and man, how think you will he make his jealousy to
smoke against those that break Covenant with himself in those things which
do most nearly concern his worship, and the glory of his Name.

Methinks I could spend in this subject as much more time as I have already
spent, and need indeed requires it, but that I must hasten. I will only bring
hither those words which our Savior in another sense uses; Mat. 24.18.
Let him which is in the field not turn back to take up his clothes; so say I
to him that is in the City, if you were to loose your clothes from your backs,
do not turn back from the holy Covenant.

form of wholesome words they had received, to see them suck the blood of
Dragons, whom they had so carefully nursed up at the breasts of consolation,
and to have their affections stolen away from them, and from Jesus Christ too,
by those, who never spent a breath toward their spiritual birth.

And as there cannot be a greater heartbreaking unto Ministers, so neither can
Religion receive a deeper wound any way then by the Apostasy of professors,
we are an hissing, not only to Gath and Askelon, to the proud scoffing world,
but even to Judah and Ephraim, to all the reformed Churches of Christendom, to
see how deeply, how suddenly London, England, have corrupted themselves.

In the beginning of this Parliament we admired to see how England was turned
Arminian, and how near it was got of a sudden unto to Rome, we have now more
cause to wonder, how Rome is come into England, and how England is turned
Libertine, Pelagian, Socinian, Antinomian, Antiscriptarian, Antitrinitarian;
yea it has had so many turnings, as that turning unto Christ by repentance and
humiliation, is now turned out of doors, and thrown aside as an old dotage of
legal servitude, we know not whether the tyranny of Bishops, or treachery of
seducers, have done London, England, most hurt: for the one kept from us the
power of godliness, the other has beguiled us even of the form of it.

Shall I tell you (and with reverence I would) that our apostasy from God,
has caused God even to apostatize from us. I speak in the same sense, as God
speaks of himself that he repents and is sorry for what he has done. God was
in a very fair way to have reformed England, he had cast us in, as rich
advantages, as ever any Nation or age was betrusted with. He had awaked the
zeal of all his faithful ones in three Kingdoms; he had contributed the
counsels of diverse reformed Churches; he had broken the strength of all
opposers, and because we have apostatized from our former zeal, God has also
turned back from his; Divine Justice holds proportion with our sin, because we
have said, the time of reformation is not yet come; God has stepped aside from
us, and said, well, if you let go this, you shall never have such a time more.

Those that observe the Story of the Eastern Churches, do allege this as the
great provocation of Gods wrath to bring upon them the blasphemous doctrine of
Mahomet, because they rejected the wholesome truths of the Gospel. When once we
begin to nauseate at old truths, and (as flies about a Candle) to play about
new lights, it is a thousand to one but we singe our wings, if we burn not
our selves, before we get off.

The least backsliding is in attendancy to total and final apostafie, and
when we once look back, we have no more power to turn about again, then
Lots wife, who was instantly made a monument of her own revolt.

I will close this with that of the Apostle, Hebr. 10.25.
Heb. 3.12. Take heed brethren, least there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, to depart from the living God: This evil heart reigns in some,
dwells in the best, it is the mother of all sin, but apostafie is its
primogenite, this begins in contempt of Ordinances; for such is the departing
here, a forsaking of the holy Assemblies, as elsewhere the Apostle does
interpret himself, and this he calls a departing from the living God, because
God in every Ordinance might be enjoyed where there is faith to bring him home:
now this God lives to take vengeance on all those that depart from him,
therefore take heed how ye provoke this living God, by despising his
Ordinances, and discouraging his Ministers, and so departing from him in the
law of his Gospel Worship. This is the second Counsel.

Towers: Let all men study peace, but especially Christians. Christians if
there be any thing of Christ's Spirit in you, lay aside that gall and wormwood,
that bitterness of spirit and heat of contentions that is in the midst of you.
Whatsoever differences there are between you in things disputable, yet let
unity be preserved in things fundamental; nothing makes your Ministers lives
more uncomfortable amongst you, or their Ministry more ineffectuall, nothing so
much disgraces Religion, or obstructs the beautiful birth of reformation, then
the unhappie discords of those who are accounted godly in your Congregations.

I do not plead for Baal, that there should be any agreement with Rome in
those superstitious Ceremonies or corrupt doctrines which are happily exploded
our Assemblies. No; such compliance would prove Englands undoing: as our
Ecclesiastical History well observes, That, that Bulla consensus, agreement
which the Greek Church made with the Church of Rome in their opinions, was an
evil presage of the utter ruin of the Oriental Empire, and of that famous
City of Constantinople, which immediately followed thereupon: But as it is
reported of Polycarpus and Amicetus, howsoever they differed in their opinions
about some things, and could not be reconciled, yet they kept fast the bond of
Christian fellowship in the faith of Jesus. Even so (my Brethren) let us as
many as love Jerusalems peace lay aside our differences in smaller matters, and
study how to preserve our unity in the maine; Follow after the things which
make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another. Romans 14.19. Let us
therefore follow says the Apostle; he had laid the foundation of his
exhortation in two arguments foregoing.



ver. 17, 18.

It is said of Basil the great, that in those differences between Eusebius and
him, he overcame him by courtesy, and humanity. O that we also could strive
in love and humility, to go one before the other, and to overcome our
differences, not by bitter disputes, but by an humble condescension. Methinks
we should not own our selves to be Christ's Disciples, and to have learned
nothing of that prime lesson of his, Matthew. 11.29.
wherein he gives us both his counsel and example; Learn of me, for I am
meek and lowly in heart.

As long as the professors of the true faith in Constantinople (howsoever
differing in points of Discipline) held love and fellowship together in
substantials of doctrine and worship, so long they became a fence unto their
City against the public enemy: But when once they brake asunder in unkindly
divisions, and shortly after lost both truth and worship, both parties became a
spoil to those that hated them.

The like unhappy Story we find of Jerusalem, when those two Christian
Governors Guido and Raimundo, with their parties contended amongst themselves,
they gave occasion to the common adversary to come in, and take from them both,
not only the City, but the Gospel to boot. I believe you do not forget what
lately I delivered unto you upon another subject, That there is a generation of
Canaanites and Perezites amongst us, that do wait for the opportunity of
Abrams and Lots divisions, to break in upon us, and to spoil us of all our
Gospels privileges and liberties. Methinks if any thing would prevail with
us, nothing should more enforce us to agreement then this mischief which is
like to follow our disagreement; we shall both sides become a prey to those
that malign us.

I will here only leave with you those three testamentall lessons which
Bernard left at his death with those that were about him.







I have yet one Counsel more, and I have done.

Love, 4 Counsel.
and cherish, and maintain, your godly Ministers still, though they are
Stars in Christ's right hand, yet they are Lamps in yours, and must have oil
from you to give light unto you. If you disgrace the Throne of Christ's Glory in
a way of looseness, Christ will disgrace it in a way of Justice. If you say in
the pride of your hearts, Jerem. 14.21.
as those wretched Citizens in the Gospel, Luke 19.14.
We will not have this man to rule over us, take heed least the Lord Christ
take you at your words, as he did those Jews, who cried out, His blood be upon
us, and upon our children. Mat. 27.25.
And his blood is upon them, and upon their children to this day. If you say in
scorn, We will not have that Government you call Christ's, Christ may say in
vengeance, Well, you shall not: my Ministers shall no longer trouble you, mine
Ordinances shall be no longer a burden unto you, Mat. 21.43.
I will take care to remove my Kingdom from you, and to bestow it upon a
people that may better prize it, and improve it.

Cambden could not reach his conceit, who boar in his Shield a Savage of
America, with his hand pointing to the Sun, and this Motto; Mibi accessu,
tibi recessu, In access to me, in recesse to thee. I know not whether I may
hit his conceit, but this I am sure, the Sun of righteousness has appeared
unto those Savages of America, with healling in his wings, they are many of
them brought unto civilitie, hopeful to Christianity.

I pray God that Prophecy in Isa. 32. ver. 15. Be not fulfilled between them
and us: The wilderness shall become a fruitful field, and the fruitful field
shall be counted as a forest. It has been once fulfilled between the Jews
and us that were Gentiles; may it never be again accomplished between the
Gentiles and us that are Christians, That their wilderness should become a
fruitful field, and our fruitful field should be counted as a forest.

I have done; England of all parts of the Christian world, and London of all
parts of England, have been famous for their reverence and bounty unto their
Ministers; Shall I say, How is the faithful City, Isa. 1.21.
the faithful Kingdom, become an Harlot; rather I would say, and I have said
all, Let England, let London remember their first love, Revel. 2.5.
and do their first works.

FINIS.

