Father PETERS's Farewell-Sermon.
Published by the POPE's Special Command.
First Epistle of the POPE to the JESVITS, Chap. 84. Ver. 88. Sweet Meat must
have sour Sauce.
MY Text is short, but it is very agreeable to my time; and I could easily
dispense with the shortness of it, if the former Sweetness of our days were
somewhat longer.

The Times I see vary, as the Planets do in their ordinary Motions; and there
is a time for all things, a time to Win, and a time to Lose; a time to Speak,
and a time to be Silent; a time to contrive and act Mischief, and a time to be
called to an Account for those Transactions; and lastly, a time of Sweetness,
and a time of Sowrness, which brings me to the Words of my Text,

Sweet Meat must have sour Sauce. My Text is Compounded of two Ingrediences,
Sweetness and Sowreness; and therefore I shall divide it into Two Parts. In my
First Part, which I shall insist upon, is Sweet Meat; and in my Second Part,
the Sour Sauce.

SWeetness indeed is a great Cordial for dejected Spirits, but Superfluity of
it many times proves Nauseous; I can speak by Experience, and I hope none that
hears me can plead Ignorance, but that we have all freely Enjoyed that
Sweetness in a great measure, which I may modestly say we have no ways
deserved; we have been too fiery and over-zealous in many Points, and have
turned that into a Corrosive, which should have been an healing Medicine.

Ben Johnson, that Famous Poet of his time, has in his Play of Cataline's
Conspiracy, Act the First, Scene the Second, this Speech, which he orders
Cataline to break forth in:

It is decreed, nor shall thy Fate O Rome resist my Vow; though Hills were set
on Hills, and Seas met Seas to guard thee, I would through. I plough up Rocks
steep, as the Alps in dust, and lave the Tythene Waters into Clouds, but I
would reach thy Head, thy Head, proud Cay. The Ills that I have done cannot be
safe, but by attempting greater; and I feel a spirit within me that chides my
sluggish hands, and says they have been innocent too long, etc.

Now I have strove as much as in me lay, to be as Inveterate against the Church
of England, as ever he and his Faction was against Rome, and have some of my
own proud thoughts by me in Manuscript, amongst my loose Papers, which I did
design, had the Times been Sweeter, to have had my old Friend H H. (if he had
not boiled the Pease he wore in his Shoes) to have printed them: I shall only
give you a little Relish of them.

It is decreed, nor shall thy Fate, O England 's Church, resist my Vow: Though
Churches numerous are, and Parishes increase with Heretics, my Malice shall
not cease. I Will plough with Mischief's Heifer, and will contrive to force the
Test and Penal Laws way, that I may reach thy Head, thy Head, Stiff Church.
Then entering into a damnable Contemplation with my self, I proceeded.

The horrid Act I have committed cannot be safe, but by attempting greater; the
Seven great Pillars of the Church must down, and near unto the Lyon's Den they
must be hurried: For I feel a devilish Spirit within me that chides my sluggish
hards, and says, they have been innocent too long, etc.

But now I find my dear Auditors, I went not a little, like the Cobbler, beyond
my Last, but a great deal tho the Stratagem was like the Devil's bait, sweet at
the Beginning, yet it proved crabbed and knotty in the End; but, howsoever,
many times the proof of the Pudding is in the Eating, which brings me now to
the words of my Text, Sweet Meat must have sour Sauce; and so I shall conclude
my First Part.

Now for the Second Part of my Discourse, and the latter part of my Text, which
is, namely, Sour Sauce.

Sour indeed are the Times, and like, for ought I see, to be sowrer,
especially for those of our Superstitious Church, as the ungodly Heretics of
the Church of England nominates us. Black Clouds are gathered together, and our
Sun is set here on this side the Water. Sharp is the Wind and cold is the Air
on this side Purgatory: But this is our comfort still, that the Regions are
warm of; our Father Lucifer, where I make no question but some of us that have
merited may descend, after we have undergone the Persecution of hanging
Geometrically in a Perpendicular Line, by ascending the Ladder Passant, the
better to come at the Rope Pendant: For Sweet Meat must have sour Sauce.

Sour and Sharp things many times are very necessary in several Diseases, and
several Causes, and are used as proper Remedies, as for example, Vinegar will
stanch Bleeding, Salt and Soape takes away a Burning or Scald, Lemonds fetches
spots of Ink out of Linen, and Orenges Physicians do prescribe is
extraordinary good for the Scurvy; and Hang a Dog upon a Crab-Tree and he will
never love Verjuice afterward; So that we may plainly see by Demonstration,
that Sharp and Sour things are very good remedies, if properly applied.

Now Orenges indeed is as proper a Sauce as we can have to our sweet Meat, for
indeed, if I mistake not I think I am my self of an Essex Breed, which is a
very plentiful Country for Calves, and we all know, that the properest Sauce
for Veal is Orenges; but they are not at all agreeable to our Palates,
especially your Bermudas Orenges, for they are very large, and have a Sound too
much of the Belgic Lion in them. And now the Belgic Lion begins to Roar,
which is a very great Prognostication of foul weather, and the Roman Eagle lets
fall her Wings, now she is hindered of her Prey, therefore let us betake our
selves to our heels, and add wings to our Spirits, that we may be ready to fly
away from this Heretical crew of sour Obstacles. He that will deceive a Fox
must rise betimes, and Foxes when they are a sleep have nothing fall into their
mouths; but let us make the best use of those sour times as we can, and all
patiently content our selves with that wholesome saying of the Fox, When we
cannot reach the Grapes, we must say they are not ripe.

And now, for a Word or two of Application; Let us be sweet outwardly, but
sour inwardly: Let the old Leven of Malice still and for ever remain in us,
that at last we may bring it forth in the whole Lump: Let us despise their
Heretical Persecutions, and if we are once caught, die as innocently as our
Predecessors have seemingly done before us, without knowing any thing at all of
the matter of which we are accused; but denying all things, for the great
meritorious Works sake: But lastly, let us all desire, since Orenges are the
properest Sauce for our scurvy Distemper, that we may expire our last Breath
upon that Tree on which they grow, and not on that old Paddington Tree at
Hide-park Corner.

FINIS.

