A SEASONABLE SERMON FOR THESE TROVBLESOME TIMES.

Preached to the Right Worshipful COMPANY of the HABERDASHERS, NOVEMBER. 23.
1641.

In the Parish Church of St. Mary Stainings in LONDON:

BY SAMVEL FAUCET, Pastor there.

Stirring up every one to lay to heart the Public troubles, and to do what
is in his power to remedy them.

ESA. 61. 1. For Zions sake will I not hold my peace.
LONDON, Printed by R. Cotes, for Joh. Sweeting, and are to be sold at his
shop, at the sign of the Angel* in Popeshead-Alley, near Lumbardstreet. 1641.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL THE MASTER, WARDENS, ALDERMEN, ASSISTANTS, And the
rest of the Society of the HABERDASHERS.
THis Sermon (Worthy Sirs) is Dedicated to you, because Preached by your
appointment, and now published, through the importunity of many of you, who
heard it; It was neither ability in the Author, nor choysenesse in the Work,
that caused this Sermon to take so well among so many of you, but the
sutablenesse of the Subject, to the present times, and it may be, the familiar
plainness of the Sermon did work much with some; (Ferrum potest quod Aurum
non potest) Iron may do that which Gold cannot do; A blunt Sermon may, by
Gods blessing, work more upon the hearts of the hearers, than that which is
more acute, and in it self more excellent, as for other reasons, so from the
nature of the thing, because most suitable to the most of hearers; that which
the understanding does not reach, cannot take the affections.

The Author studied not to please, but to profit; he prepared and delivered
this plain Sermon, with a heart bleeding for the present troubles of our
Israel, and breathing after the public peace, and common good, as the spirit
of the whole Sermon shows; and he does confess that no importunity should
have prevailed with him, to have given it this (unthought of) second birth, had
he not been withal pressed unto it, by his own persuasion, that that which was
accepted being heard, may, being published, do good to many who heard it not.
Some little is added in a place or two, which was prepared, but, through want
of time, was omitted in the delivery; What ever it is (Worthy Sirs) it is
yours, if you please to own it, and so is the Author of it yours, who desires
to be reckoned among those who respect and honor you, and pray for you, and
acknowledges himself your debtor, for many favors, and rests

Your Worships ever in the Lord, SAMVEL FAUCET.

A SEASONABLE SERMON FOR THESE TROVBLESOME TIMES.
PSALM 25. 22. Deliver (or redeem) Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.


THE Ministers of God, though they may not be time-servers, yet they may, and
ought to be time-observers, speaking their words in due season; to that purpose
(Right Worshipful, and wellbeloved Fathers and Brethren) ye being by Gods
gracious providence here met, and presenting your selves at this time, as
members of a public Society, and that Society one chief branch of this
great City, and this City a principal part of the common body of this whole
Land, I looking upon you in this your public relation, shall endeavor at
this time to quicken in you public affections, and raise up in you public
spirits, to seek the common good, and lay to heart the common cause, and I
know there is none of you such a stranger in Israel, but (considering the
present state of things, and face of the times) will acknowledge this subject
seasonable, and this Text full and pertinent for my purpose.

Deliver Israel O God, out of all his troubles. In which words I shall
consider; 1. The party whose good and welfare is laid to heart (Israel.) 2.
The means used to procure Isreal's good, and welfare, viz. prayer (deliver
Israel O God.) 3. The mercy craved in behalf of Israel, delirance from
troubles, from many troubles.
Deliver (or redeem) Israel O God, out of all his troubles.

I begin with the first of these, the party whose good and welfare is laid to
heart, (Israel.)

Israel signifies a prevailer with God, a name first given to Jacob, Gen 32 28.
and from him to that whole Nation that sprang of him; sometimes the name does
relate to the Church of Israel, sometimes to the civil state of Israel,
Sometimes to both; and so here in this place, this Text is for substance, the
same with that prayer of David; Psalm 51. 18. Psalm 51. 18.
Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, build thou the walls of Jerusalem,
make up Lord, those sad breaches, that are made both in Church and
Commonwealth; So here in the Text, Lord find a way to ease thy people of their
many pressures, to quiet the many and public troubles, that are amongst us,
Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

The Prophet David having throughout the whole Psalm put up many great
petitions for himself, and his own particular, and personal concernements,
now he ends and closes the Psalm with this zealous petition for the common
cause, as if he had said, Lord, how ever it fares with me, do well to thy
Church and people; how ever my cause speeds, let the common cause prosper;
though I should have all granted that I have asked for my self, yet that would
not satisfy me without it may be well with Israel, the public troubles
trouble me most: therefore deliver not only David, but also Israel O God, out
of all his troubles.

Now this disposition and affection which appears here in this holy man to the
common good, is the same which is, and ought to be, in all true Israelites, in
all the people of God; and that shall be my first Observation from these words,
which I propound thus:

Observe. It is the duty of every one to stand well affected to the common good
of the Church and state wherein he lives.

First, I say, it is the duty of every one, be he high or low, rich or poor,
of what rank and condition soever, Magistrate, Minister, private person, every
one that has any relation to Israel.

Secondly, it is his duty to stand well affected to the common good, that is,
first, in his mind highly to esteem it above all his own private
concernements: secondly, in his will and affections to desire it earnestly, to
rejoice in it heartily, to mourn for the want of it deeply: thirdly, in his
actions to endeavor it zealously, to study it, speak for it, plead for it, to
labor every way possible to promote it. This is to stand well affected.

Thirdly, To the Common good both of Church and State; Israel in my Text
includes both, they are both one and the same Israel, so near allied, that the
same men are the subject of both, though under a diverse notion: the Church and
Civil state of Israel, do reciprocally embrace one another like twins, the
State defends and upholds the Church and Religion, and the Church blesses and
upholds the State, (as the Widow maintained the Prophet, and the Prophet the
Widow) if it go ill with the one, the other cannot thrive; experience shows,
that the ruin of Civil States proves the ruin of Churches, and decay of
Religion, and the ruin of Churches, and decay of Religion, proves the ruin of
Civil states. Revel. 2.
When Christ had removed the Candlestickes from Epbesus, from Smyrna, from
Laodicea, etc. those famous Cities were quickly laid in tho dust: Therefore,
the Doctrine says, That it is the duty of every one to stand well affected to
the common good, both of the Church and State wherein be lives. Religion admits
not of that distinction, between a good man, and a good Citizen: it is
impossible that he should be a good Common-wealthsman, who is not a true friend
unto the Church, nor can he be a good Church man, who is not a true friend to
the Commonwealth: as there is no trusting of that man to be true in his
Religion, who is not true in his Loyalty; so there is no trusting of that man
to be true in his Loyalty, who is not true in his Religion.

Confirmation
These things being thus explicated, I come now to the proof of the point, and
here first it were easy to bring forth variety of examples of godly persons of
all conditions, whose pulses have continually beat toward the common good,
sometimes endeavoring it, sometimes rejoicing in it, sometimes bewailing the
want of it, sometimes praying for it, sometimes preferring it before their own
private concernments, yea, before their own lives; I will instance in two or
three examples instead of all.

Exodus 32. 10.
Look on Moses, a public person indeed, and a man of a public spirit, The
people of Israel having sinned against God, and provoked his wrath against
them, the Lord says to Moses, Let me alone, and I will utterly consume this
people, and thou shall lose nothing by it, for I will make of thee a great
Nation: but how likes Moses this preferment upon these terms sde the verse
following how he takes on, Lord I beseech thee, what ever becomes of me, spare
the people and do them good, God forbid that my honor and greatness should be
raised, out of the common ruin. Such a public spirit also was in Mordicai,
Hest 10. 3.
when he was raised to high honor, all his care was to improve all his
preferment to the common benefit; it is said, that he sought the public good
and welfare of his people. So Hester engaged all she had, and all she was, for
the common good, Remembering that she was raised to honor for that purpose,
that she might do public service. What should I speak of David, how does he
lament and mourn for the overthrow of Israel, even in that battle wherein
Saul, 2. Sam. 1. 17.
and Jonathan were slain, though the Crown came thereby to his own head, the
joy for his own gain and honor was drowned in his grief for the public
loss. The truth is, it has always been the disposition of all the godly,
never to desire to rejoice, but with the joy of Gods people, nor to be glad,
but with Gods inheritance, as the Psalmist speaks, psalm. 106. 5.
but still to stand affected one way or other, as it goes well or ill with the
common cause, and such a public spirit should possess us all, and that for
these reasons.

Reason 1.
First, In respect of God: the people of God must tender Gods honor above all
things, and desire that God may be glorified. Now God is most glorified, and
honored in the world, when his Church and Religion fiourisheth, but the decay
of Gods people, is the decay of Religion, the decay of Gods Worship, an
occasion of triumph to the adversary, and of reproaching and blaspheming,
saying, Where is now their God? Dan. 9. 19.
and therefore holy men, when they beg of God for the common cause, plead
thus, Lord do it for thine own sake, for thy names sake, for thy glory sake.

Psalm. 122. 8.
Secondly, in respect of others, for my Brethren and Companions sake, says the
Psalmist: we are all members of the same body, and members sympathize one with
another, and all with the whole body; they are rotten members that feel no
pain when the body is out of temper, we ought not to mind every one his own
things, P^^l* 2. 4*
but every one the things of others, he is the best man who is most useful and
isntrumental to the common good; the very Heathen could say so, (non nobis
ipsis solum nati sumus, etc.) we are not borne only for our selves, and
(Virbonus est commune bonum) a good man is a common good, the whole
Neighborhood, and Community is the better for him, yea, the whole Kingdom,
the whole world; the better any man is, the more ready he is to promote the
common good.

Psalm. 122. 6.
Thirdly, in respect of our selves, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem, they shall
prosper that love thee: there is no true prospering, but in the prosperity of
Jerusalem, in the public weal; the thriving of one member, when the whole
body pines, as it is in nature monstrous, so it cannot be in time lasting;
What folly and madness is it for a man at Sea, to be decking and trimming up
his own private cabin, and in the mean time take no care of saving the whole
Ship which is in danger? Ier. 45 4, 5.
as the Lord said to Baruch, Behold I am plucking up this whole Land, and
seek thou great things to thy self? seek them not. This is not a time to
have our thoughts altogether taken up about our own private and personal
concernements, when the public cause lies a bleeding. In this behalf there
is great reason, we should have public spirits, and labor all we can the
common good, because every one of our private comforts or discomforts, are
involved in the public weal or woe. Hence is that charge, Jer. 29. 7. Ier.
29. 7.
Seek the peace of the City wherein ye shall dwell, that in the peace thereof
ye may have peace, and therefore Psalm 128. Psalm. 128.
it is promised to a man that fears the Lord, as the very top and Crown of
all his comforts, that he shall see Jerusalem in prosperity, and peace upon
Israel: the blessings promised him before, that his wife should be as a
fruitful Vine upon the walls of his house, and his children like Olive Plants,
round about his table, had been but sad blessings without public peace; the
public flourishing of Church and State, has a great influence upon all our
private affairs, and so has the public woe and wrack.

By this time, I hope ye are all satisfied, That it is every man's duty to stand
well affected to the common good, both of the Church and Civil state wherein
be lives, and by all possible means within his reach, to prefer it before
his own private concernements. Now this Doctrine I shall apply by way, 1. Of
Conviction. 2. Of Reproof. 3. Of Exhortation.


Paul's time, he was indeed a man of peace, and prays in all his Epistles for
all the Churches, Gal. 5. 10. 12.
Peace be unto you, and wishes that they were even cut off that trouble them,
and cause divisions and rents among them; 1 Timothy 2. 2.
and for the Civil state, he every where presses obedience to Kings, and all
in Authority; Act. 24. 5.
yet he is traduced as a state-troubler, and a raiser of sedition among the
people. So Christ himself is accused to be an enemy to Caesar, as if his
Kingdom and Caesar's could not stand together. Jer. 9. 1.
So Jeremie, a man of that public spirit, that he melted himself into tears
for the common cause, yet he is accused to be a conspirator against the State.
Jer. 38. 4.
It was so with David, though he had ventured his life for the common safety,
in that combat with Goliath, yet Saul's flatterers present him to Saul, as a man
disaffected to the weal public. It was so with Elias a man who was indeed
the chariots of Israel, 1 King. 18. 17.
and the horsemen thereof, yet he is charged to his face by Ahab to be the
troubler of Israel.

It seems it is the genius of Religion, to be thus scandalized in all ages,
but the truth is, Religious men are the best Common-wealthsmen, as this
Doctrine has proved, and best friends to the Church and state wherein they
live, the very supporters, and holders up of Kingdoms, they who are, not only
peaceable in the Land, but peacemakers, and peace-procurers from the God of
Peace; and yet, as lewd people beget bastards, and then lay them at other men's
doors, so the incendiaries of the world, who like the Sea, cannot be quiet,
but are enemies unto peace, raise commotions and combustions in states, and
then lay the fault on them who least deserve it. It was so in Hamans time, he
was the great kindle-coale himself, and yet see how he accused the poor
people of the Jews, who lived quietly; Hest. 3 8.
There are a rebellious people amongst us (says he) who will not obey the
Kings Laws, and it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them; No doubt it did
exceedingly grieve Mordecai, and the rest of the Jews, to lie under such an
aspersion, but God found a time and means to clear their innocence, and to
discover the grand troubler, and peace-breaker, as the story shows. And so God
will in his good time find out all Church, and statetroublers, who stand in
the gappe indeed, but in a bad sense, to keep it from closing, and to make the
breach wider.

It was said of some of the Counselors of Aurelian, that by them the good and
honest Emperor, who might know nothing, but what they pleased to inform him,
was even bought and sold; So many good Princes, well inclined by their own
natural dispositions, are often infinitely abused by false suggestions, and
many times learn at last by sad experience, who be their true friends, and who
their enemies; in the mean time, all that are true-hearted Israelites, must
commit their cause to God, and labor not by words only, but by deeds to
convince the slanders of their adversaries. That it is possible for some men to
carry foul hearts under painted habits, and pretend Religion, and intend
rebellion, none will deny; but Religion has no principles of sedition, or
rebellion in it, but all that are taught of God, are always friends to the
public good, that which runs most in their minds, is the welfare of Israel.



First, Those base and unworthy spirits, who, as if they were borne only for
themselves, live only to themselves; make only themselves the center of all
their aims, and actions, have no public thoughts, public endeavors, seek
not at all the public welfare, but the feathering of their own private
nests, is their utmost end: some there are who mind not the public cause at
all, they care not what damage come to the weal public, so they may suck
to themselves thereby some private advantage; nay some care not though whole
Kingdoms be set on fire, so they may warm themselves by the flames thereof.

Secondly, those also are to be reproved, who though they be not actors in the
common hurt, yet are abettors, or at least, not opposers: How many men in place
and authority, have thereby opportunity to stop much evil, and to do much
good for the common cause, if they had hearts, but they have no courage for the
truth as the Prophet speaks: men can appear for themselves, and appear for
their friends, but not for God, or for the public cause; O that men would
believe that neutrality in this case, is all one with opposition, Judge. 5. 23.
Curse ye Meroz, curse the Inhabitants thereof, because they come not forth to
help, silence is not always consent, but when we ought to speak it is; when
God sets a man in place, and gives ability, and offers him opportunity to show
himself in a good cause, then and there for a man to do nothing, is to do
evil, and to make himself guilty of all the hurt that possibly might have
been prevented, if he had done what was in his power to do. This may be
applied to every one whom God has called to any public employment, and given
opportunity unto, to do any public service; if ye do not for the Church,
for the Commonwealth, what ye may do, ye betray it, and what ever hurt the
troublers of Israel do, whom ye have not to your power opposed, will be set
upon your score.

Thirdly, This reproof may yet be brought down lower, even to men of private
condition, we heard that even such ought to have public spirits, and not
mind only their own things, but the public cause.

But how many among us even in these stormy and tumultuous times, when the
whole ship of Church and State, is in danger to be drowned, how many of us like
Jonah, are asleep still? and mind nothing, lay nothing to heart, put to no
hand to help the common cause? Alas, (ye will say) we stand low, what can we
do? I tell you, every one of you, may and ought to do something for the
common cause, as the Master of the ship said to Jonah, Jonah. 1. 6.
what meanest thou, O sleeper? arise, call upon thy God that we perish not. We
are all busy, and is this a time for thee to sleep? do something to help,
if thou can not sit at the stern, nor handle the ropes and tacklings, nor
manage the Oars, yet thou may pray; at least call upon thy God, that we
perish not; What a sad thing is it to consider, that though the dangers of
Church and State, are at this time so great, that the greatest wisdom in the
Kingdom, knows not where to begin to set about the cure, yet how few lay any
thing to heart? How few mourners are there in Jerusalem, for all the
abominations that are committed in the midst thereof? Ezekiel. 9. 4.
How few, how cold, how formal are our Prayers, for a happy success of those
great affairs that are in hand? How little do we in these stirring times,
toward the carrying on of the great work of Beformation? We are ready to call
unto the great Assembly of State, Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, help us for the
Lords sake, help us now by your wisdom, by your courage, by your counsel,
help to settle our Peace, to make up our breaches, to prevent our dangers, or
we are undone; And those Worthies, and Heads of our Tribes, on the other side,
are ready to cry back again to us, do you help too, or we can do nothing;
the work is too heavy for us, we find great rubbes in our way, while we are
laboring the public good: great Mountains which we can neither remove nor
leap over, we are at a stand, help by your strong cries and strivings in
Prayer to God for us, that he would open a way, or we cannot help: the present
dangers are beyond the skill of the wisest Pilots, unless God himself allay
the winds and storms which arise still more and more, unless God help us to
cast overhoord, those Jonasses, which are yet too hard for us, all our rowing
and tugging cannot bring the Ship to land, all will miscarrie when we have
toyled our selves to the utmost.

Beloved, this is the voice of those who sit at the Helm; the voice of our
Parliament-worthies, and yet how many of the people of this Land, yea, of this
City, are still asleep, and will not hear this voice, nor be affected with
the present dangers, nay, how many amongst us are so far from helping our
Parliament-Worthies, in their promoting the common good, that they do what
they can to hinder them, by slighting their persons, depraving their actions,
mis-judging of their intentions, dis-regarding what they propound, what they
order; pulling backward all they can, not affording them a good word for all
their pains and care, and cost, and hazarding daily their very lives for the
public safety, yet how little all this is regarded by many, and how ill
requited, I cannot speak without grief and shame; the Lord lay not this sin
to our charge. Those people are far from promoting the public good, who do
what they can to dis-hearten, and discourage those who are promoting it. That
for reproof.



O that great men in public place, and Noble men would show Noble Spirits,
and with good Nehemiah, Nehem. 2. 4. 5.
improve all their greatness, and interest, at Court for the public good! O
that all the representative body of the Kingdom, would show themselves more
and more, to be men of public aims! we may pray for the public cause, they
can speak for it, plead for it, act for it; Oh that every one of them would
consider what they are entrusted with! Me thinks not one of them should dare
to betray that trust, but rather hazard all in a faithful discharge of it, as
Hester did, Hest. 4. 1^.
If I perish, I perish, it is the cause of God, of Religion, of the whole
Kingdom, it is better to do worthily, and perish for a Kingdom, than
unworthily, and perish with a Kingdom.

And you worthy Citizens, especially who are in any public place, take to you
public spirits; This City is truly said to be the looking-glass for the
whole Kingdom to dress it self by; the whole Kingdom has from time to time
been beholding to you both for your help and for your example; Ye being a
great and very considerable body, may do much; much to discourage the common
enemies, much to encourage our Parliament-Worthies, by your countenance, and
concurrence of your minds and hearts with them, by your assistance, by your
strength, by your purses: Ye have done much already, we bless God for you,
and we bless you in the name of the Lord, and the Lord blesses you, and will
bless you; be not weary of well-doing. Now Ireland calls for your help, the
fire is begun there, and who knows whether it may burn, if it be not timely
quenched? those Romish Ignatians, and antichristian brood, have begun that
fire there, who doubtless are blowing the coals at this time here amongst us
also. Well, God has brought all their mischievous designs upon their own
heads hitherto, and I am confident so he will still; but yet we must do our
duty, every one must bestirre himself, and bring his bucket of water toward
the quenching of this common flame, especially since no man is so mean and
weak, but he may contribute something toward this great work; If he cannot
lend a penny, he may give a Subsidy of Prayers, toward the taking off of
Isreal's troubles; and that is the second General, observed in the Text. We
have considered the party, whose good and welfare is laid to heart, (Israel) I
come now to consider the means used, to procure Isreal's good and welfare, it
is Prayer. Deliver Israel O God. Hence

Though every man cannot help forward the public good, every manner of way,
yet every man may, and ought to do it by Prayer.

A man must endeavor to help Israel out of troubles by the use of all the
lawful means, which God has put into his hands, every way he can, but whether
he can help any other way or no, yet he must Pray, this is an universal,
indispensable duty, charged upon all orders, ranks, and conditions of men.

1. Kings, and Magistrates must command and rule for the common good, but they
must Rule and Pray. 2. Statesmen must consult, and set their heads on work to
study the common good, but they must consult and Pray. 3. Ministers must
Preach, and spend themselves in the common service, but they must Preach, and
Pray. 4. Soldiers must fight, and offer themselves willingly for the defense
of their Country, but they must Fight and Pray. 5. Rich men must Contribute,
and open their purses freely, when the common cause calls for it, but they must
Contribute and Pray. 6. Lastly, He that can do none of these things neither
Command, nor Advise, nor Preach nor Fight, nor Contribute, yet he must Pray,
none are exempted from paying this Subsidy of Prayers, as there is no
impossibility in the thing, it may be done of all, so there is a necessity, it
must be done of all, a double necessity.
Psalm. 1 22. 6.
1. Necessitas praecepti, all are commanded to pray, Pray for the peace of
Jerusalem. 2. Necessitas medii, there is no mean to be used, that can be
successful to help Israel out of troubles, without seeking to God by Prayer,
and that for these three reasons.
Reason 1.
1. All Isreal's troubles come from God, no commotions in States, no combustions
in Church, or Commonwealth, but God has an all-ruling, and all-ordering hand
in them, Amos. 3. 6.
There is no evil in the City, in the Kingdom, which the Lord has not done;
whether it come from enemies abroad, Isa. 10. 5. Hos. 13. 11.
Ashur is the rod of Gods anger, orfrom bad governors at home, God sometimes
Gives a King in his wrath, to be a scourge to a people; or come it from the
rebellions of people, 2. Sam. 12. 11. 1. King. 11. 14. 1 King 12. 15. Judge. 9.
27.
The Lord raised up evil against David, out of his own house; The Lord
stirred up adversaries against Solomon; The Lord rent the Kingdom from
Reboboam: The Lord sent an evil spirit between Abimelech, and the men of
Shechem; The Lord brings people low through oppression, etc. Men and devils
may have their wicked heads and hands, in national troubles, but God has a
just hand in them all, therefore by what means soever, national storms do
rise in a Kingdom, we should look above isntrumental causes, and say with the
Mariners in Jonah 1. 14.
Jonah, Thou Lord have done as it pleased thee.

Israel all his troubles, So God only can remove them, and therefore, it is
necessary to pray with the Psalmist here, Deliver Israel O God: In vain is
Salvation hoped for from the hills Jer. 3. 23.
(and you know great men are called hills and mountains,) In Jehovah our God is
the Salvation of Israel says the Prophet.

If there be a National storm raised, it will not down, until the Lord say
unto it, Peace, and be still; if there be National rents, and divisions in
Church and State, it is the Lord only that can cure these wounds, and make up
these breaches: If a watch be taken asunder, and every part unpinde, it must
be the skill and hand of the maker of it, to set it together again; one
Scripture says, that he that turns the Rivers of waters, turns the hearts
of Kings. Prove. 21. 1. Psalm. 85. 7.
Another Text says, he that stilleth the rage of the Seas, quieteth the fury
of the people. If the sword be unsheathed it is the Lord only, that can
command it up, there is a full place to this purpose, in the Prophesies of
Jeremiah. Jer. 47. 6.
O thou Sword of the Lord; how long will it beer thou be quiet? Put up thy
self into thy scabbard, rest and be still, this is Vox populi, the voice of
the people, but in the next verse follows Vox Dei, the voice of God. How can
it be quiet, seeing the Lord has given it a charge against Askelon, and
against the Sea shore? there has he appointed it. Every judgment comes from
God, with a commission and charge what to do, and how far to go, until we
can prevail with God to call in his Commission, there is no possibility of
staying the judgment; Vain is the help of man: Trust not in Princes, there
is no help in them, nor in Parliaments, there is no help in them neither, all
the consultations and endeavors of the greatest, and wisest, and holiest men
in the world, cannot remove one National trouble from Israel, unless the Lord
put to his hand, and that God will not do, unless we be earnest with him in
Prayer, in that behalf; and that is the third Reason why we should pray for
the removal of Isreal's troubles.

So prayer only can prevail with God to do it; Prayer is that which will
bring all Gods promises into performances: God has made many sweet promises,
but all his promises are made to our prayers, Ezekiel. 36. 37.
Ask, and ye shall have, and says the Lord, I will for this be inquired of
by the house of Israel, to do it for them; Prayer is the key to unlocke all
the Treasury of Heaven, there is not a blesting there, but prayer will fetch it
down; God has in a manner bound himself to Prayer, he who rules the world,
and has the hearts of all men in his hands, suffers himself to be (as it
were) overruled by Prayer; Prayer can knock down enemies; Exodus 17. 11.
When Moses held up his hands Israel prevailed; Prayer can undermine all the
plots of mischievous men, and blast all their designs; It was Prayer that
choked Achitophell, Lord turn the wisdom of Achitophell to foolishness,
says David. It was Prayer that advanced Haman to the gallows; Hester, and
Mordecai, and the Jews fasted, and prayed, and they prayed Haman to death, and
all his plots to shame and ruin. Therefore if we would have our Israel freed
from troubles, we must seek to God in behalf of Israel; Deliver Israel O God.

informed, which is the right way to remedy our present troubles in Church and
State, Isa. 22. 8, 9, 10, 11.
it is to strive with God, and be earnest with him to help and amend all; use
other means we must, but without this, all other means will be inavaileable,
nothing can help Israel, so long as the children of Israel be loud in their
sins, and silent in their prayers: when Christ is asleep in the ship, it is
not the tumbling and tossing of the ship, nor the roaring of the winds and Sea,
nor the noise of the Mariners handling their tacklings, that can awake him, but
only the prayers of the Disciples, Luke 8. 23.
Lord Save us, we perish: And hence we are also informed, who are like to be
the best helpers of Israel at a pinch, the best friends to Church and
Commonwealth, when they are in distress, namely such as have acquaintance
with God, and can prevail in Heaven; the praying generation are the
wonder-workers of the world, the true Chariots of Israel, and horsemen thereof.

Exhortation, if ye desire to be isntrumental to the public good, pray,
pray, pray: your consultations will do no good without prayer; your
Fortifications no good without prayer; your ammunition no good without Prayer;
your contributions no good without you give prayers with them, and send prayers
after them; Prayer must remedy all, and hold up all, and therefore it is
needful we should hold up Prayer; The few Prayers that have been made in the
Land, have prevailed hitherto with God to spare us, that we are yet a Nation; O
let us venture still in this ship, which brings home such returns, let us give
God no rest till he make our Jerusalem the praise of the earth, let us beset
the Throne of Grace, with much earnestness, and much importunity, the season
requires it, and the present state of things calls for it, delay will be
dangerous, ye know if fire be begun in a house, a few buckets of water brought
in time, may quench it, if time be delayed, a thousand times so much water will
do no good; If we will not now for the allaying of Isreal's troubles, part with
prayers, hereafter we may offer to redeem Isreal's safety with tears, and
blood, and yet not prevail. directions. First, Who ever intends to pray for
Israel, as David does in this verse, let him remember to pray for himself
first, as David does in this Psalm, not because a man should prefer his own
private good before the public, that is against the former Doctrine, but
because we can never do Israel good by our prayers, so long as we our selves
are out of Gods favor; God will not hear us for others, until he has heard
us for our selves: therefore Psalm. 51. 18.
David keeps this method, not only in this Psalm, but in the 51. Psalm, he
first begges pardon for his own sins, and makes his own peace with God, and
then in the close of the Psalm, petitioneth for Sion and Jerusalem, the
public cause; The blind man in the Gospel, saw this truth, that God hears
not sinners, that is, impenitent sinners, they who hide their own Gen 4* 4.
soars, shall never prevail to heal others; God had respect first to Abel,
and then to his offering: and the golden Scepter of favor is first held out to
Hester her self, before she is in case to present her petition for her people.
Beloved, this is to be thought on, our prayers will not prevail with God for
making up the public breaches, so long as the private differences between God
and our own Souls remain uncomposed; there is no hope that our prayers will
prevail to help forward the reformation of things amiss in Church and Civil
state, so long as we mind not what is amiss in our own houses, in our own
hearts; if our prayers have not hitherto prevailed for the healing of the
public wounds, and quieting Isreal's troubles, it is worth the considering,
whether we have been persons fit to deal in such a business; I remember what
is spoke of witches, who as some say, use good prayers, away with them, (Si
Magicie, Deus non vult tales, si piae, non per tales) if they be magical
prayers, God will hear no such petitions, if they be holy prayers, yet God
will hear no such petitioners: every one can apply this to the purpose in hand.

Secondly, Take this further direction, who ever would pray aright for Isreal's
deliverance from troubles, must get a Heart affected with, and bleeding for
Isreal's troubles; none are fit to pray for the public cause but they who have
public spirits, and can make the public weal or woe their own; we many
times want words in this case, because we want affections, commonly deep
inward impressions do cause large outward expressions; this has made the
Saints of God beg as earnestly for the common cause, as they could have done
for their own lives.

Thirdly, But if we find our selves to have large affections toward Israel,
and our hearts breathing heavenward in behalf of Israel continually, and yet
we are straightened in our expressions, when we are to present Isreal's case before
God, let us to help our selves herein study the Scriptures, and therein,

1. Take notice of all the promises of God made unto Israel, unto his Church
and people, and turn them into prayers that they may be fulfilled.

2. Take notice of all Gods threatenings against the enemies of his Church, that
Antichrist shall be destroyed, that Babylon shall fall, that God will bring the
plots of wicked men upon their own heads, etc. and turn them into Prayers,
that they may be performed.

3. Take notice of all Gods works of providence, what Gods dealings with his
people have been heretofore for good, and this also will administer matter
unto us of prayer, that God would still be the same. Our Fathers trusted in
thee, and thou did deliver them, Psalm. 22. 4, 5.

4. Especially, (and that comprehends all) to help and guide us in praying for
Israel, let us study the Prayers of the Saints of God, which stand upon record
in the Scriptures, and observe how they have powered out their Souls before God
in behalf of Israel, upon all occasions; We may take out Coppies by them, we
may make use of their words, if they answer our occasions; how ever, it will
help us exceeding much, to observe and make use of their arguments, whereby
they have strove with God, in the behalf of Israel, according as the present
case required.

They use Arguments drawn, First, From something in God.

1. Sometimes they urge Gods Promises: Lord, thou have said, that if evil
befall thy people, and they humble themselves, and pray, and seek thy face,
thou will hear and help, Lord now perform thy promise, So prays Jehosophat,
2 Chronicles. 20. 8, 9, 10. 2 Chronicles. 20. 8.
2. Sometimes they urge Gods power; So prays Hezekiah, 2 King. 19. 15, 16. 2
King. 19. 15.
O Lord our God, thou art a God able to deliver us. 3. Sometimes they urge Gods
mercy and truth; So prays Daniel, Dan. 9. 4. Dan. 9. 4.
O Lord the great God, keeping Covenant and mercy to them that love him. 4.
Sometimes they urge Gods Glory, and Honor; So prays Jeremie, O Lord, though
our iniquities testify against us, yet help us for thy name sake, Jer. 14. 7.
Jer. 14. 7* Psalm. 74. 22.
And so the Psalmist, Arise O Lord, maintain thine own cause, Psalm. 74. 22.
5. Sometimes they urge Gods Offices; O God, to whom vengeance belongs, show
thy self, Psalm. 94. 1. Psalm. 94. 1.
O thou Shepherd of Israel, stir up thy self, and come and help us. Psalm.
80. 1. Psa. 80. 1.
O thou hope of Israel, the Savior of it in time of trouble, why should
thou be as a man astonished, (who knows not whether to go forward or
backward) and as a mighty man that cannot save? 6. Sometimes they urge Gods
former deliverances; Lord, thou have been our help in all generations, Psalm.
90. 1. Psalm. 90. 1.
Our ears have heard our Fathers tell, what thou have done for thy people of
old: Lord thou art as able as ever, as good as ever, as merciful as ever.
Secondly, In their prayers for Israel, the people of God fetch arguments from
the consideration of the party prayed for, Israel.

1. Sometimes from their relation to God; We are thy people, thy heritage,
called by thy name; leave us not, Jer. 14. 9. 2. Sometimes from their
weakness, Amos 7. 5. Amos 7. 5.
O Lord God, cease I beseech thee, by whom shall Jacob arise, for he is small?
3. Sometimes from their dependence upon God; We have no might against this
great multitude, neither know we what to do, but our eyes are toward thee, 2 Chronicles. 20. 12. 2 Chronicles. 20.
So the Psalmist, Some trust in Chariots, and some in Horses, but our trust is
in the name of the Lord our God.
Thirdly, In their prayers for Israel, the people of God urge God with
arguments drawn from the consideration of Isreal's enemies, their multitude,
their power, malice, pride, and cruelty. Arise, O Lord, let not men prevail,
let not their mischievous imaginations prosper, lest they insult; How long
shall the ungodly triumph, and make such proud boasting, Joel. 2. 17.
Wherefore shall the wicked blaspheme thee daily, saying* Where is now their
God? Psalm. 137. 7. Psalm. 94. 8, 4.

If we have hearts to pray for Israel, we may by writing after these Copies,
learn the Art how to do it, in a manner acceptable to God, and comfortable to
our own souls, and advantageous to the common cause, which we intercede for.

And thus I have done also with the second thing observed in the Text, the
mean used to procune Isreal's good and welfare, viz. Prayer. Deliver Israel, O
God. I should now come to the third general of the Text, the mercy prayed for
in behalf of Israel, Deliverance from troubles, from many troubles; and hence
we may observe, that

3. Observe. The Israel of God, Churches, and States, professing true Religion,
may be molested with troubles, with many troubles.

This is no new thing, as were easy to show, as also the reasons of it; but
time will not suffer; I will here only acquaint you with some of the troublers
of Israel, that ye may take heed that none of you be of that number, and that
ye may the better know how to direct your Prayers to God for Isreal's relief. I
pass over here the troublers of Israel from without, and will only touch upon
such as may harbor within Isreal's bosom.

First, Evil Magistrates are troublers of Israel, the Scripture says so, My
Father has troubled Israel, says Jonathan, 1 Samuel 14. 29. Thou art he that
troubles Israel, says Elias to Ahab, 1 King. 18. 18. If the pillars of Church
and Commonweal be out of frame, the foundations out of course, if the great
wheels which move all, Eccle. 3. 16.
go wrong, if Authority discountenance Religion, violate Laws, if injustice
and oppression be in the seat of Judgment, this must needs trouble Israel.
That must needs be a miserable State, where wickedness is got into high
places* and the waters are troubled and mudded at the Fountaine-head, when
there is no help to be got by appeal, but the higher a man goes, the worse it
is, as the Prophet Jeremy Jer. 5. 1. 4.
complains that it was in his time, he could not find a man in Place and
Authority, who executed judgment: a hard case; he found the inferior rank
naught, and he says, I will get me to the great men, and he finds them worst
of all. Jer. 5. 1. 4. 5. Therefore, when ye pray for the relief of Isreal's
troubles, pray that God would make Kings nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing
Mothers Isa. 49. 23.
unto his Church; pray that God would restore our Judges, as at the first, and
our Counselors, as at the beginning; Isa 1. 26* Amos. 5. 24.
pray that judgment may run down as waters, and Righteousness as a mighty
stream, that Justice may be executed, for so long as Agags are spared,
Jonasses not thrown over board, Achans not brought forth and stoned, Israel
must look for troubles.

Secondly, As evil Magistrates, so evil Ministers are troublers of Israel;
Churchmen may be State-troublers, I need not tell you that, the world sees it,
how some men, who say they are in holy Orders, may have a great hand in putting
all things out of Order. I will not enlarge my self in this complaint, it is
in all your mouths; my part is, (as my Text guides me) to put you in mind, to
turn this complaint into a Prayer, that God would purge the Sons of Levi,
that from the Mal. 3. 3. Jer. 23. 15.
Prophets of Jerusalem, profaneness may no longer go forth, over all the
Land; that they who should be studying to save Souls, may not busy themselves
about troubling States and Kingdoms; Pray that God would send forth faithful
Laborers into his Harvest, and provide a burning and shining Light for every
Candlestick of this Land: if the Gospel of Peace were well Preached
throughout the Kingdom, it would be a singular means to settle, and maintain
the Peace of the Gospel.

Thirdly, I must yet further put you in mind of other troublers of Israel, the
Pope and his adherents, all Jesuited papists, and their abetters, are arch
Church-troublers, and State-troublers, and ever were; And so long as these
Canaanites live among us, and hold up their heads, let us never look for
peace; Is it peace Jehu? says Joram: the answer is, What peace? So long as
Idolatry is countenanced in Israel; Have we not found by experience, this
Antichristian and Babylonish sect, to be always enemies unto Peace, and
fomenters of division, between King and people, Kingdom, and Kingdom? What a
sad thing is it to think that this generation of Vipers, which have so often
stung us, should yet be nourished in our bosoms? shall they lodge there till
they eat out our hearts? (Sic notus Ulysses?) Will we believe nothing, until
their knives be at our throats, and their swords in our bowels? pardon my
zeal in this behalf, it is the cause of God, Call. 5. 12.
and the common cause; I would they were cut off that trouble you, says Paul,
and yet he was no uncharitable man; Mercy to them, is cruelty to the whole
Kingdom, it has proved so hitherto: Ye know what a fire this generation of
men have now kindled in Ireland, they are blowing the coals here, and God
knows how soon the flame may break out.

I hear sometimes in this City, some men cry out vehemently against Puritans,
puritans, what monsters they are, and some amongst us say, they had rather side
with Papists than Puritans; I beseech you let me speak freely, I am not yet
learned enough to interpret the meaning of that word Puritan, I know that with
that staff, the profane world beats all that are better than themselves. I
would be loath to countenance the intemperancies and wild courses of a froward
Generation amongst us, who shame the Religion they pretend unto, of whom, more
presently; but yet I would desire that reasonable men would consider, whether
party they had rather trust their throats with, (if it should come to that)
the Papists, or the Puritans; and whether party has been greater plotters
against States and Kingdoms.

Fourthly, I do not yet deny but that there are troublers of Israel on that
other hand also; such as profess a strict way of Religion, yet walk not
according to the Rules of Religion; some despise Authority, contemn Laws,
disturb common Order, run out of rank; Some in these days usurp upon the
Office of the Ministry uncalled, to the great offense of Authority, and
hinderance of the Reformation in hand; Some usurp upon the Office of the
Magistrate, who being private men, take upon them to be public Reformers, not
knowing of what spirit they are, nor considering in what Station God has set
them. Doubtless, many things are amiss in Church and Commonweal, and it
becomes every one to the utmost of his power, to promote the desired
Reformation, but in a right way, and due Order; every one must consider, not
only what is fit to be done, but what is fit for him, or one in his place to
do, lest instead of making up of the breach, 2. Sam. 6. 6.
we prove makers of breaches, as it fell out in the case of Vzzab.

Fifthly, I must also bring into this Catalogue of troublers of Israel, the
Anabaptists, and those other turbulent Sectaries amongst us, who trouble our
people, by buzzing in their ears, that we have no true Ministry, no true
Church, no true Ordinances, but all Antichristian, and upon these grounds
separate from our Congregations, and set up new Churches among themselves:
experience proves that there is an unquiet spirit in many of these, ignorant,
proud, censorious, headstrong, selfe-conceited, selfe-exalting, contrary to
the wisdom that is from above, which is Iam. 1. 17.
First pure, then peaceable, humble, meek, gentle, etc.

1. Cor. 14. 33.
O Pray to God, who is the God of Order, and not of confusion, to set up order
amongst us betimes, lest whilst every man Preaches what he will, and
practices what he will, we break into so many pieces, as will but prepare us
to become all a prey to the common adversary.

Sixthly, I had here concluded, but that me thinks I hear some man bless
himself, and say, I am none of these troublers of Israel, that have yet been
named. I beseech you therefore, give me leave to be plain with you, in naming
one kind of Church, and State troublers more, and then I have done. Every
wicked liver, every unreformed person, every ungodly, unjust, profane,
unclean person, is a troubler of Israel: See the proof, Hos. 4. 1. The Lord
has a controversy with the Land, because of swearing, lying, stealing,
oppressing, committing adultery; because of these the Land mournes. Oh,
consider it, are there none such among you? Thou say thou art no Papist, but
art thou not an Atheist, one that lives as if there were no God in the world?
Thou say, thou art no Schismaticke, but art thou not a Scoffer at Religion,
and a jearer at those who walk in that way which is called holy? Thou thankest
God thou art no troublesome Sectary, but art thou not a profane person like
Esau; a swearer, a drunkard, a fornicatour, a deceiver, one that professest the
Gospel, and art a shame to the Gospel? if thou be, thou art a grand
troubler of Israel, and thou have a hand in pulling down judgments upon the
Land. Beloved, let every one of us look to it, lest while we endeavor to
help Israel by our prayers, and contributions, we hurt and wound Israel by our
lives: There is great variety of thoughts amongst men, about reformation of
government, and reformation of discipline; The Lord send forth his truth and
Light, and show us all our wanderings, and lead us in the good way, in that
behalf; but all sorts agree in this thing, about the necessity of Reformation
in manners; O let us every one mend one, every one sweep before his own
door, every one reform his own house, his own heart, and then, as ye heard
in the second point, we shall be fit to intercede for Israel, and pray with
David here, Deliver Israel, O God, out of all his troubles.

Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

