A WOMAN forbidden to speak IN the Church, The grounds examined, the Mystery
opened, the Truth cleared, and the ignorance both of Priests and Peeple
discovered.

Written by a friend of the Truth, whose name in the flesh is RICHARD
FARNEWORTH.

And Jesus unswering, said unto them, Do ye not therefore err, because ye know
not the Scripture, neither the power of God,

Mark 12.24. For as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ: There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there
is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus,

Gal. 3.27.28. Jesus answered and said, My Doctrine is not mine but his that
sent me: If any man will do his Will, he shall know of the doctrine whether it
be of God, or whether I speak of my self,

John 7.16.17. LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert at the Black Spread Eagle, at
the West End of Paul's. 1654.

A Woman forbidden to speak in the CHURCH.
The Grounds examined, the Mystery opened, the Truth cleared, and the Ignorance
both of Priests and People discovered.
But the Spirit of Truth may declare through the Temple, and dwell in it, which
the world cannot receive,

1 Cor. 6.19. John 14.16, 17.
THe Church is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, as Paul and Silvanus
writ to the Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 1.1. and it is made all of living stones,
elect and precious, 1 Pet. 2 5. and the Saints: their Bodies are made fit
Temples for the Holy Ghost to dwell in, 2 Cor. 6.16. and they are made a fit
Habitation for God through the Spirit, being builded upon the Foundations of
the Prophets and the Apostles of the Lord Jesus, in whom all the Building fitly
framed grows unto an holy Temple in the Lord, Ephesians. 2.20, 21, 22. and in
this Church all are taught of God, as it is written in the Prophets, Isai
54.13, 14. and Ier. 31.33, 34. and like wise in Heb. 8.10, 14. and says Jesus
Christ in John 14. I will pray the Father, and he shall give you mother
Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever, even the Spitit of Truth, whom
the World cannot receive, because it sees him not, neither knows him, but ye
know him for he dwells with you, and shall be in you, Verse. 16, 17. Now
nothing is to speak in this Church which is spiritual, but that which i^
spiritual, even the Holy Ghost, which is invisible and incomprehensible; the
Woman or wisdom of the Flesh is forbidden to speak in the Church, that is of
the things of God, for that which is flesh is flesh, and the natural man he
knows not the things of God, they are foolishness to him, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. ^. 4. and so the carnal
minded man he says that a Woman (or the female kind) ought not to speak in
the Church: now the first birth either in man or w^man has nothing to do to
speak in the Church, (the carnal part) for it knows not the things of God, and
every man by nature is a child of wrath, and he is forbidden to speak with his
carnal wisdom, which he gathe edout of Books and Studyes for that nature is
adulterated from God, and nothing must speak in the Church in God but the Holy
Ghost, and that may speak in the Temple, either in male or female; nothing must
speak in the Church, but the Spirit of Truth, whom the world and carnal minded
ones know not. God is a Spirit, and they that know him, know him to be to and
none know him but they that are spiritual, for says Jesus Christ Except ye be
born again, ye cannot enter into the Kingdom, o^ Heaven, John 3. and that which
is flesh is flesh, and that knows not the thing of God neither in male nor
female, but is adul erated from God, but that which is spirit is spirit, and is
born of God, either in male or female, that knows him and that is permitted
to speak in the Temple, an^ none can call Jesus Lord but by the Holy Ghost, 1
Cor. 12.3. and be manifestation of the Spirit is given to profit withal, Verse
7. and the Spirit of the Lord was made manifest through the female kind^, as
women ^n ^ormer ages, and it was profitable; for Deborah she had the
m^ni^e^^ation of the Spirit of God ruling in her, by which she or the lord in
her did administer justice to the Israe^ite^, which were the Church and People
of God, and she was a Judge am^n^st them and judged Israel Judges 4.4. and she
prophesied to Bara^, that a^ the River Kisho^ the Lord would deliver Sis^ra the
Captain of I^bins Army in^o hi^ h^nd; See the noble acts that the Lord did by
the Prop^etess his servant Deborah, read i^age^ 4, 5 chapters and the Lord
has said, he will pour out his Spirit upon al^ flesh and their sons and
daughtors shall prophecy, Joel 2.2^. ^he does not say that flesh shall prophecy
neither in son^ nor daughters, that is forbidden; Let all Flesh be silent, both
in Sons and Daughters, and let the Spirit speak for that is permitted either in
Son or Daughter: it is the Spirit that Prophesies and fore tells of the things
of God, and the manistacion of the Spirit is given to profit withal, in a
Daughter as well as in a Son, that God may speak where he does dwell in his
Temple. Let all carnal Wisdom in Male as well as in Female keep silence, for
that is not permited to speak, it is adulterated from God, and the natural man
knows not the things of God, and he that is joined to an Harlot is one Body, 1
Cor. 6.16 and that must be judged and cast out by the Spirit of Truth, and
judgment being brought forth into Victory, let the Truth declare it self, but
let all Flesh be silent till the Spirit be poured out either in Son or
Daughter, for all the Wisdom of the world it knows not God, who is a Spirit,
and he chooses the weak things of this world to confound the things which are
mighty, 1 Cor. 1.27.28.29. and the Woman is counted the weaker Vessel, but the
Lord filling that Vessel full of his Wisdom, and ruleing it by his holy Spirit
he dwelling in his Temple, and declaring himself through it by his Son Jesus
Christ, it is for the Praise of the glory of his Grace, that no Flesh might
glory in his sight, for that must be trodden under foot, fleshly Wisdom and
carnal Reason, both in Male and Female, that the Lord may be all in all in the
Creature, making them fit Temples for his holy Spirit to dwell in 1 Cor. 3.16.
that he may speak in his Temple, in the Female as well as the Male.

The Body it is but the Temple, it is the Man-child Christ Jesus, where he is
born up into the understanding that is to declare the Fathers will and that is
permited to speak, the Spirit of Truth which the world cannot receive, John
14.16.17.26. but not carnal wisdom, and fleshly imaginacions, which is out of
Covenant with God, and must be burnt up by the Spirit of Truth, before the
Temple be fitred and prepared for the Masters use, for nothing must speak in
the Churh but the Spirit of the Living God, let all Flesh keep Silence, that is
not permited to speak in any, and Paul he was made a Minister not by the will
of man, but by the will of Cod, who revealed his Son in him, Gal. 1.8. and your
Daughters shall Prophecy, Acts 2.17.18. And the ewas one man which had four
Daugh ers which were Virgins, and they did Prophecy Acts 21.8.9. and he says,
all may Prophecy one by one, that all may learn and all may be comforted, and
the Spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets, 1 Cor. 14.30.31. it is
the Spirit that is to Prophecy, and it is the Spirit that is to speak in the
Church, and where the Spirit is made manifest it is profitable to others, and
none can call Jesus Lord, but by the Holy Ghost, and where he says, Let your
women keep silence in the Church, etc. for says he, it is a shame for Women to
speak in the Church, but he does not say, let the Spirit of God keep silence in
the Temple, but that may declare where it is manifested, either in Male or
Female and then it is the Man Christ that speaks in them; for great is the
Mystery of Godliness, Christ in you the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27. and his sheep
they hear his Voice: If any men has an Ear to hear let him hear what the
Spirit says; for says the Lord by the holy ghost, Let no man deceive you, for
if any man among you, seem to be wise in this world, let him become a Fool that
he may be made wise, for the Wisdom of this World is foolishness with God, for
it is written, he takes the Wise in their own craftiness, and the Lord knows
the thoughts of the wise that they are vain, 1 Cor. 3.18.19.20. man by his
carnal wisdom is sottish in the things of God, that he would compare spiritual
things with carnalthings, because his wisdom and understanding is altogether
carnal, to be carnally minded is Death, Rom 8.6. but the Holy Ghost teaches to
compare spiritual things with spiritual things, because they are spiritually
discerned, and the natural man knows them not, for they are foolishness unto
him, 1 Cor. 2.11.12.13.14.

Now the Scriptures we e not spoke forth by the will of man nor by the carnal
mind, and saln wisdom, if they had the carnal mind could have understood
them, but as they was spoken forth by the Holy Ghost which the carnal mind or
fallen wisdom knows not; theresore the Scriptures are a Mystery to the first
nature in m n, and he reads but does not understand, for the Life of them is
hid from his carnal mind, and so he argues from them carnally; but he can
deceive none now but blind men and Fools like himself, sora wise man's Eyes are
in his Head, his Light is in Christ, and he sees that the Scriptures need not
an Orthodox Key, for Holy men of God as they were moved they spoke them forth
by the holy ghost, 2 Pet. 1.19.20.21 and where that is made manifest again, it
reads them plainly, but till then they read they know not what, as the worldly
Wisemen and Sir Simons do now, that gets pea^king up into an high place, such
as the Pharysies used, who were Enemies to Jesus Christ then* a^ they are now;
and they are called of men Masters as they were, and without Money will they do
nothing: but now the Key of David is found again, and it turns about freely to
unsold the Mystery, that has been hid, and reveals the Mystery both to Sons
and Daughters according to the Premise of the Lord, so that the Woman Iezabel,
that has so long born Rule in the Synagogue of Satan where Simon Magus did
^ule, that sold the Letter for Money will not now be permitted to speak in the
Church but cast out; for the Wisdom of the Flesh must not be suffered to usurp
authority over the Man-child the Spirit of Truth, for he will rule and a^l
DIVINERS will be MAD, Isay 44.24.25. such as ye proud Priests are, that sell
the Letter without the Spirit, and speak Divinacions of their own Brains and
not from the mouth of the Lord, and such must now be ^^opped and not permitted
to speak in the Church, nor of the things of God, by their ca^nal Wisdom which
is foolishness with God, and their studied out Knowledge which is adulterated
from God and leads them a whoring after their own invencions, forsaking the
Fountain of living mercies, to delight in lying-vanities, but now they must
c^m^ under the Law, and be severe^y punished, and their mouths will be stopped
by the T^^^th, for it is written Thou shall not muz^le the mouth of ^he Ox that
treads out the Corn; and will have Mercy and not Sacrifice, go to the School
of Christ, to learn what that means, and then you will know what the Apostle
says in that place of Scripture; when you are com^ through the Fire, to have
your own Works and Wisdom, and studied out Arts bu^ned, 1 Cor. 2 13.14.15.16.
that you may know the same mind ruleing in the Temple that wa in Christ that
nothing may be done through Strife or V^in glory, but in Lowline^^ of m^nde
each one esteeming other better than themsel^es, and being, of one accord, and
one mind, as they were that spoke sorth the Scriptures, Phil. 2.1.2 3.4.5.6 to
the 12. Then will you know what is to be understood concerning the woman's
non-permission, but read on in that place of 1 Cor. 14. and see the following
Verses, where he has been speaking of the woman, and he says in the 36 Verse,
What, says he, came the Word of God out from you, or came it unto you only?
for says he, If any man think himself to be a Prophet, or spiritual, let him
acknowledge that the things that I write unto you are the commands of the Lord;
but if any man be ignorant, let him be ignorant, 1 Cor. 14.36, 37, 38. but he
does exhort to prophecy, and says, forbid it not, but rather covet after it,
and your Daughters they shall prophecy as well as Sons, and the Spirits
manifestation is to profit withal; therefore forbid not to speak with Tongues,
the Tongue of the learned, such as are taught of God, by the Spirit of Truth,
the Holy Ghost which the world cannot receive and that is to speak in the
Temple, and in the Church for else Paul would not have commended Phebe to have
been a Minister or Servant to the Church, Romans 16.1. if he had forbidden the
Spirit of Truth for being declared through women in the Church: but are ye not
yet carnal, and it is carnality which is forbidden to intermingle with with
Spirituality; for Paul writ to the Romans to receive Phebe, which was a Servant
or Minister to the Church at Cenchrea, and not only to receive her, but to
receive her in the Lord, and to assist her in whatsoever business she had need
of, Romans 16.2. and he writ to them also to greet Priscilla and Aquila; and see
what he says more in 3, 4, 5. Verses, and says he, Greet Mary who bestowed
much labor on us, Romans 16.6. and says he, Salute Tryphena and Tryphosa who
labor in the Lord, and salu e Rufus chosen in the Lord and his mother and mine;
and many are called but ^ew chosen, as these, Romans 16.13. Salute Tryplena and
Tryphosa, delicious or delicate, two godly women, and beloved of the Lord, who
labo^red with Pau^ in the Gospel* and Persis a faithful woman, who labored
much in the Lord with Pa^l in the Gospe^, Romans 6.2.
Philologus and Julia, Nereus and his sister, and Olympas and all the Saints
that are with them, Salute one another with an holy ^iss, the C^urches of
Christ salute you, Rom 16.15.16.

And again says Paul to the Brethren Help those women that labored with me in
the Gospel, with Clement also, and with other my fellow laborers, whose names
are in the Book of Life, Phil. 4.1, ^, 3. Here is not Women forbidden to speak
in the Church where the Spirit of Christ was manifest to rule, but they are
saluted with an holy kiss in the Lord, and women-laborers ^n the Gospel, and
they are to be received in the Lord, and to be assisted, etc. But says he,
Mark them which cause divisions and offenses contrary to the Doctrine of
Christ, which ye have learned, and avoid them, for they that are such serve not
our Lord Jesus Christ, but their own belleys, as the Priests of the World do
now in this generation, who by good words and fair speeches deceive the hearts
of the simple, Rom 16, 17, 18. Now such as these that serve themselves and
their belleys* and seeks for great Benefits, and teach for Tithes, Bribes,
Augmentations, Gifts and Rewards, as the Priests do, contrary to the practice
of the Saints, and speaks by their own wisdom, and not from the mouth of the
Lord, they cause divisions and dissentions, and they are to be marked, and to
be cast out, and not to speak in the Church, nor of spiritual things, by their
carnal Reason; therefore take counsel, and hold them not up, the Lord is
against them.

But to Aquila and Priscilla salute me, and to the Church that is in their
house, 1 Cor. 16.19. and let her speak by the Spirit of the Lord the things of
God made manifest unto her, for it she be not permitted to speak in the Church
and the Church be in her house, she must not speak, but go out of her hou e;
but the Spirit of Truth is permitted to speak in any where it is made manifest,
the manifestation of the Spirit being given to profit withal, 1 Cor. 12. and
every good gift, and every perfect gift is from above, and comes down from the
Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning for
of his own will begat he us with the Word of Truth, that we should be a kind
of first fruits of his creatures, James 1.17, 18. that we may be to the praise
of the glory of his grace, who calls u^ out of darkness into his mavelous
light, and makes us sit together with Christ Jesus in heavenly places, Ephesians.
2.^, 5, 6. To him alone be praise, honor, and glory, who is King of kings, and
Lord of lords; therefore let God arise, and let his Enemies be scattered
abroad, for he will make his People a willing People now in the day of his
power, to worship him in spirit, and to serve him both day and eke each hour.
Amen.

Hall^l^^jah to the highest, the Lord God omnipotent reigns* Let all that
love the Lord, bless the Lord, praise him, and magnify him ^or ever.

Richard Farnworth.

FINIS.

