A SPEECH Spoken unto his Excellence the Earl Of WARWICK, BY Capiaine FARRES,
in the behalf of the whole County of ESSEX.

WITH His Excellence his gracious Answer thereunto giving all his Soldiers
general satisfaction not long before they marched forth from London toward
Branford.

As also A true relation of the last Battle at Branford the 12. of November:
betwixt his Maiestyes Army and the Parliaments forces, and how the Cavaleers
swore God damme them the Devil was in their powder.

London printed for Tho. Watson and John Fares. 1642.

Captain FARRES Speech to the Earl of Warwick
MY Lord, I must desire your pardon, if my words deliver too much truth, and
thereby offend: You have withdrawn from you the hearts of the Essex Soldiers,
who came with willing minds to perform Noble service; but the change of their
Captains has also changed their affections; neither will they be commanded by
any other but those worthy Gentlemen in whose wisdom, courage and fidelity
they dare boldly confide. My Lord, that action cannot thrive that is
discouraged at the beginning; and Soldiers do not (like the Moon) decrease
in honor, and afterward shine with full glory. Honor is a tender thing, and
once lost, is lost for ever, and not to be restored. Though I complain unto
your Honor in the name of the rest of the Captains, I do but undergo the
hazard to express their discontent, robbed of that they held so dear, their
places being the reward of their own merit, and sealed unto them by the
constant love of the people. Our Essex Soldiers, my Lord, are all men of able
estates, whose zealous affections to their King and country, has thus led
them forth, to give a clear testimony of love and valor in their perfect
service. Unkindness does wound desert deepest, and deserved honor is the reward
of virtue, that does create and confirm courage, and taken away, a Soldier
becomes a despised thing, Consider therefore my Lord, that a Captain so well
beloved of the people, can suffer no injury without mutinous repining, from
whence does spring the greatest danger of an Army. I am engaged my Lord,
amongst the rest, and must speak the truth before I go to defend it, drawn
thereunto by my friends dishonor and my own, being discarded from those
places which the people in their good affection had designed us. Lastly, my
Lord, if my speech seem to be of a course and rugged thread, an injured
Soldier is far from flattery, and I must tell you, we scorn that our hearts
should give place to any Captains, in being right and true to our King and
country, this honor we cannot lose, living or dying: therefore think it a
high indignity to resign our Captainships.

The Earl of Warwick his answer to Captain Farres Speech.
Captain, your words are so far from displeasing me, that I love your free
Speech, it being comely in a Soldier to deliver his thoughts without disguise
of words, and to utter Truth in a plain and clear manner. If your Essex
Soldiers be offended at the election of other Capta^nes, let them consider
that the present occasion does require men bred in war, and experienced in
those affairs; neither can the other Captains grudge, that the Commonwealth
should receive benefit by their service, since if this war may thrive in the
prosecution thereof, it matters not who have been principal actors therein.
Their love unto their Country deserves highly to be commended, and their
cheerful undertaking to assist this action, does magnify their brave
resolutions. But give me leave to say, that those other Captains nursed at the
breast of War, are grown exceeding quick-sighted in military discipline, and
being long trained up in the School of War, deserve to be ranked in the
chiefest File of Honor. In Holland they have hazzarded their lives, and spent
some blood to gain a perfect knowledge in all warlike Discipline; yet I
prefer them not as men of greater ability, much less loyalty then the other
Captains; but antiquity of service ought to have some pre-eminence. You may
inform the rest of the Captains, whose minds you have delivered, that I
believe them to be men not inferior to those in courage, but as knowing, as
full of Heroic Spirit, as the other Captains, and would do as far in the
defense of their Country as the other; yet since they and the other cannot
serve both in the same places, let them think it no dishonor in point of
war, to suffer the Commonwealth to be served by others as well as
themselves: their free intent is as acceptable as the deed. There has been
always contentions about such matters, but without any disgrace: for I do not
accuse their sufficiency, but think them as worthy in all degrees of valor,
as the other which are elected. Persuade therefore the Soldiers to be well
affected to those Captains: for you and all men ought to prefer the good of
the Commonwealth before private respect, or any particular places in the
War, since all our actions should move to one end, which is the defense of
our King and our Country.

The Soldiers welcome to LONDON.
WElcome as day, when after a long night
Of fearful tempest, land appears in sight
To the glad Mariner, whose ship does bring
Rich freight to shore, and his own land to him.
Such is the joyful passion, or more sweet,
When kindred friends, and dearest lovers meet
After great dangers past, with welcome breath,
To tie loves knot, which the pale hand of death
Was thought to have untied; and now, though late,
Welcome home Soldiers that have escaped wars fate.
The aged persons now cast off all fear,
And have more joy then their weak age can bear,
Stooping beneath it, while their sons do tell
Of Renton battle, and what there befell,
While tides of passion in their besomes rise,
Of all that hear what they behold with eyes.
Great is wars horror, and the bare relation
Does stir the mind to wonder and compassion.
Friends now salute, as if they meant to dye
Within their arms, whose loving company
They wanted long, despairing that they were
Living; for love is full of careful fear.
Frinds are so full of joy, that both while days
And nights are spent in stories to the praise
Of our brave Souddiers, that have done above
The reach of Fancy, and do bind our love
First to their merit, while for service they
Shall have a Kingdoms thanks besides their pay.
ON Saturday the 12 of November, Prince Robert using the advantage of the mist,
which was that morni^g e^treamly thick, brought up his Forces to Brainford,
where (...) was most valiantly opposed by my Lord Roberts Regiment on the
Bridge, who beat them off, and with great resolution maintained the Bridge till
they had spent all their powder and (...), at which time it pleased God that
Colonel Hampden and Colonel Hollis Regiments came in, who very manfully set
upon them, and slew many of them, with the loss of a very few on our side. On
Sunday the 13. of November no feat of war was done, only there came up two
small ships to Branford, who hearing the Cavaliers were there, shot at them,
who were answered again by the Cavaliers. This day also the ^^^ty sent 89.
Carts and VVagous laden with all mauner of provision, unto the Army. There were
taken prisoners also, two of his Majesty's Guard, whereof one was shot in the
leg. Sir Kenhelme Digby was taken as a Spy in viewing the works at Mile-End.
The Cavaliers in their fight on last Saturday, were not afraid to swear, God
damn them, they believed the Devil was in their Powder, their Bullets would
not go half way,

FINIS.

