Pretium 2: ^^.
Ex libris fff: alconar.
1682
Heraclitus 1:
How,er its weill, that whylst Mankind,
Throw faits ffantastick mazes Errs,
He can Imagind pleasures ffind
To Combat against Real ffears.
2d.
ffancies and notiones, we persew
Which never had being but in Thought,
And lyck The Dotting Artist Woo
The Image, we our selves, have Wrought.
3d
Against Experience we Believe.
Argue against Demonstratione;
Pleased jf we can our selves Deceave
and sell our Judgment, by our passione.
4:th.
The hoarie ffooll, who manay Days
Has Strugled with Contin^uall Sorrow
Renews his hopes and Blindlie lays
his Desperate Baitt upon to Morrow
5.th.
To Morrow comes its noon, its night
This Day, lyck all the formers fled
yet on he runs, to seek Delight
To Morrow, till to night, he,s dead.
6:ly.
Our hopes Lyck Toureing ffalcones Aim
at objects in ane Aierie height
Whylst all the pleasure, of the Game
Is a ffa'rr off, To view the fflight.
7.th.
The wortles prey, But only shows
The Joy Consisted, in the Strife
ffor what,er we take, as soon we lose
In Homer's Ridle, and in Life.
8.th.
So whylst in feverish sleep, we Thinck
We Taste what waking we desire,
The Dream is better Than the Drinck
Which only feeds The seickly ffyre.
9.th.
To the Mynds eye, Things will appear
at Distance Throw ane artfull Glass,
Bring but The flattring object 'near
They,r all a Sen^eless gloomie Mass,.
10ly.
Seeing Aright we see our woes
Then what availls it To have Eyes
ffrom Ignorance our Confort flows
The only wreatched are the Wise.
11.ly.
We Wearied should lie down in Death
This Cheatt of Life, can Take no more,
If you Thinck fame, but Stinking Breath
I do Phyllis, but a perjur,d whore.
ffor Th'e few hours of Life Allotted me
Give me Great God, But Bread, and Liberty
I Ask no more, But if more, thou,rt pleased to Give
I Will Thanckfully, That overplus Receave
^^ Beyond This, no more, be freely Sent
I Will Thanck for this, and ever live Content.
Coullie



royal blazon or coat of arms HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE DIEV ET MON DROIT

THE Fathers Legacy: OR COUNSELS TO HIS CHILDREN.

In Three PARTS.

CONTAINING The Whole Duty of MAN, I. To GOD. II. To Himself. III. To Man in
all Conditions.


Useful for Families.

LICENSED.

Roger L'Estrange.

Aug. 13. 1677.

LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun at the West End of S. Paul's. 1678.

THE PREFACE.
HAving, my Children, spent the best years of my Life in the Wars, in the
Service of the King, I thought I should not altogether be negligent of the same
duty, if now in my retirement, I employed the remainder of my days in your
instruction; that so by discharging the office of a good Father, I might
likewise perform the part of a good Subject. That I might not fall short in my
design, perceiving my self already far advanced in Age, and you very Young, I
have put in order some Instructions concerning your education, which I have
reduced to the duties of Man toward God, toward Himself, and toward his
Neighbor; which three things, have so great a relation to the duty of a
Subject toward his Prince, that it is absolutely impossible that one can truly
fear God, be morally good, or honest in the reciprocal offices of a civil Life,
without being in like manner a good Subject.

To facilitate to you the means of obtaining all these good qualities, I make
no doubt, my Children, but that you have need of a Father more wise and
discreet than I am, to guide you by his example in these lovely and delightful
paths. The first delineations of good and evil, begin insensibly to be wrought
in us at home in the Chimney-corner, by the force of that custom which renders
the impression of Domestic manners more powerful, than the resemblance of
Children to their Parents, and even than the seed that does beget them. And
therefore a good Father should brood over his Children (if I dare use the word)
as a Tortoise over her Eggs, by careful watching, (as she) and continual
observing and eying of them until they be informed. This is the end that I
propose, and to look so narrowly to my self whilst we live together, that I
may not, instead of a Director to you, become a Complice in your faults.

But seeing that in this my Age of threescore and three years, every hour, day,
and year, make to me a Climacteric, I thought fit to supply my presence, if
that be wanting unto you, by leaving you some precepts for the conduct of your
lives, in the form of my Will and Testament; to the end that you may receive
them with greater respect, and that after our separation, it may remain as a
living Model, according to which I intended to have bred and informed you. I
leave the distribution of my other Estate amongst you, to the Laws of the
Country which (without presuming to be wiser than they) we cannot violate; but
these which I would willingly dispose of more profitably than I have used them,
I leave in gross to every one of you. Possess them my Children, more usefully
than I have done; for I have only had the Theory without making the application
of them; I have possessed them as a covetous man his riches, without employing
them to use, because my faults have prevented my knowledge, and by the force of
custom, my vices enslaved me to their tyranny before I could discover their
ugliness, for they being incarnate in me before I was aware of their infection,
my reason, notwithstanding all the attempts that it was willing to make, has
never since been able to break the invincible bonds of an evil habit. Look upon
me now then, as upon a blind man, who presents you with a Torch, wherewith he
cannot light himself, or rather as one that goes before his light, and carries
his Torch behind him, if the small Instructions I leave you deserve the name of
Torches.

Though they be presented to you by a friendly hand, which you have no reason
to suspect, yet I crave not from you a blind obedience to my counsels, there
was never any seed so clean but that there still remained in it some Darnel,
nor tree so carefully dressed, that has not produced some corrupt fruit; and
therefore I charge you, that when you have attained to maturity of Judgment,
you let not pass the least article or clause of this Will and Testament,
without due examination, without casting and turning it every way, that you may
see if unawares, and contrary to my intention there may not something have
escaped me, which may be against the honor and reverence that is due to God,
the King, Religion, the Laws, or even civility and good manners, which is a
kind of Policy; if so you do, you may perhaps by the light of your own
knowledge and of mine, discover some mistake which I have made, wherein I do
forthwith submit my self to be cleared; and by a true examination you may
reject the false illusion, that may have occasioned my error; and by the same
trial, if the Instructions which I give you be employed in the conduct of your
life, by the application of them to occasions, and frequent revives your mind
will thereby become so seasoned, that all the acts of honor and virtue will
insensibly prove to you as natural as speaking and hearing.

Though this little Discourse seem only to be addressed to you, my Children, in
particular, yet I confess my intention goes farther, and that being obliged
according to the counsel of the Gospel, to consider all men as my Brethren, and
all young people as my Children, my affection in obedience to that rule
constrains me, and (it may be) to the expense of my reputation, to leave in
common to all young people, and in prey to the first seizer, the only acquist
which I have made during the course of my life; I should be very glad that my
own had in it the greatest share; but if any other whosoever it be, render
himself more worthy of it than they, and become thereby more wise, I shall
still in some measure have satisfied my desire; I lessen nothing of what is
yours, by my design of associating all mankind in this Inheritance; on the
contrary, I endeavor to enlarge your affinity with all men, and to procure you
new Brethren, who may contract with you upon the common stock of this Legacy a
spiritual Brotherhood, of stricter union, and more sure than if flesh and blood
had produced it.

It shall be in this place then, Reader, where I make no difference betwixt thy
Son and mine, that I will begin the first Article of my Testament by this
goodly Lesson, that we ought all to consider Humane Nature as a great Mass, and
total, whereof we all make so many different parts, and that the more each part
is serviceable to its whole, the more it complies with its duty: The
establishment of this first principle, will kill in us the seeds of Pride,
Avarice, Envy, of the Lust of the Eyes and of the Flesh, and of an infinite
number of other Vices, which spring from self-love; and we shall not only find
these accursed Seeds thereby choked in us, but in their place Brotherly Love
and Charity substituted, which is the Basis and Foundation of all Christian
Virtues. When our Savior was told that his Mother and Brethren desired to
speak with him, he pointed to his Disciples, and to all that were about him,
saying, These are my Mother, Brethren and Sisters, to signify to us by that
holy saying, the Brotherhood, Consanguinity, and common alliance that we ought
to have with all men. That inflamed word, which like a flash of fire broke
forth of the mouth of St. Paul, when he said, That he desired to be accursed
for his Brethren, was nothing else but a holy rage, produced by the excess of
Charity, which he believed would be more complete and pleasing to God, if he
chose rather to devote himself for the salvation of his Brethren, than to be
saved alone.

Indeed man is only born for the service of man, he is engaged to this duty by
so many different Societies, that how irregular soever he may be, it is
impossible that he can break all these ties, the same Roof, the same Town, the
same State, the same Government, Civil and Ecclesiastic, the same Language, the
same fashion of Apparel, and an infinite number of Orders and Fraternities, are
so many different Stages of subaltern Societies, by which we mount to that
general union which ought to be amongst men. Nay farther, that this harmony
might not be troubled, Kings have been inspired to call one another Brothers,
to the end that their Subjects might become so likewise, and that the
difference of Language, Clothing, Manners, Government, and sometimes of
Religion, might not be able to unty the knot of this Universal Obligation. Let
us always be ready to do good to one another, he that renders a good office to
his neighbor, attracts no less the good will of him that sees, than of him
that receives it, and by stretching out to him both our arms in his necessity,
we multiply and increase our strength by the mutual assistance to which our
affection obliges him. Since we are all then so many different members of this
great body, which makes up Humane Nature, it is most certain that we cannot be
selfish, nor limit our affection to every one of our selves singly, without
unmanning our selves in some manner, and making a particular divorce from that
common union which we are engaged in with all men.

My Children, our whole is but a part of another whole, which is common and
universal nature; at first glance one would say, that she appears to us in her
works, as the common mother of all things, but he that will trace her steps,
and examine her in her progress, shall find that instead of Mother, she is but
the Nurse and Matron that receives them, and that their Being depends only upon
the existence of God, from whom we and all things else have their Being.

Beside, that in every particular thing there is an inherent appetite to
preserve its individual Being; Experience likewise teaches us, that there is
in it an inclination for the continuance of its kind, whose seed would
notwithstanding remain barren and ineffectual, without the concourse and
assistance of God. Otherwise if Nature determined her self to the production of
the different kinds of Beings which fill the Universe, and that her power did
not loll and slumber in suspense, until the spirit of God gave order and
distinction to its operations, it must necessarily follow that there should be
two principal causes of one and the same thing. I know not whether I explain my
self well enough or not, or that I presume I do so; yet I think that in you and
my self, Dear Children, I discover some sensible beam of this truth: Is it not
true that we can call no action purely and properly our own, unless we had
before an intention to do it? A Painter will not make a Picture, nor a Carver
an Image, without having first framed the design of it in his mind; and this I
think is without contradiction. Why is it then, that when ye were cast into the
mould, neither your Mother nor I did the least think of you, and that that
blind appetite of Nature had not at that time any other aim in us but its own
satisfaction. I think the case is so with all other living Creatures as with
man, and with the seeds of all things else contained in the Universe; do not
you think that the suspension of our Will in that Act, is to us a secret
Advertisement, that God thought fit to reserve to himself alone, the care and
overseeing of a production, whereof he gives us the power, for the preservation
of our kind, without the intention? to teach all and every one of us, that he
keeps the Prerogative of Paternity to himself, to the end that the first and
chief Homage of our being, should be directed toward him; and that we may
consider, that in the Fabric of the thing it self, wherein we think to have the
greatest share, we are but the Tools and Instruments of his Omnipotence.

Since then, my dearest Children, the first Sonship of you and me, comes from
God, it is just that the first beam of our knowledge should guide us to the
Adoration of him who is our common Father; and that my Will and Testament
should begin with that: Wherefore I shall divide it into three Parts:

In the First, I shall treat of the Dury of Man toward God. In the Second, Of
his Duty toward himself. And in the Third, Of the Relative Duty of Man toward
Man, according to the diversity of States and Conditions.
THE Fathers Legacy: OR FAITHFUL COUNSELS OF A Good Father TO HIS CHILDREN and
FRIENDS.
The First Part. Which treats of the Duty of Man toward God.
CHAP. I. A Child ought to begin his adoration toward God by Speech; God is
the Principle of all things, and his Being is incomprehensible.
AS the Voice is the first sign of Life, which the Body coming into the World
gives, and the Light the first Object that is presented to it, so is Speech
the first indication of the Life of the Soul, and God who is the Father of
Light, the first Object that should be presented to it; and as the Eye receives
the Light, without knowing the nature of it, the Soul should likewise be
disposed to the Worship of God, and by love to unite it self to him, without
searching or curious diving into his Essence.

And forasmuch, my dearest Children, that all the functions of your Soul are
not as yet in your power, and that when you come first into this World, it is
not the Mistress of your heart to make an obligation thereof to God, your
speech must supply that defect, and be the first Sacrifice that is offered up
unto him: trouble not your selves then, if the sense of the Prayer which your
Mother or I make, you daily repeat, be at present as unknown to you, as is the
nature of him to whom it is addressed; only follow us, our Faith gives life to
your imperfect fambling, and assure your selves that there is no incense more
acceptable to God; than this first sacrifice of your lips, the first fruits of
them are due to him, in expectation that your intention will accompany them, by
the knowledge of the obligation that you have to adore him, let us see if we
can attain to that.

My Child, if I ask you who is your Father, you will immediately answer that it
is I, and if I ask you who is my Father, you will tell me that it is another
Father, and my Fathers Father still another; so that that progress would ascend
infinitely from Father to Father, if it did not stop, and end in a common
Father of all mankind.

The case is so with all created beings, that have a common original with your
self; for if they had made themselves the desire of preservation, which is
inseparable from, and rooted in the creature, would never leave them.

So that there would never have happened any change, nature would have always
continued one and the same, and never would have entertained her self by a
succession of vicissitudes, as she has done. We must hold it then for certain,
that there is a fixed and permanent being, which is the common principle of all
others, beyond which there is no progress; and which by consequence ought to be
the outmost limit of our Inquisition, and Nature her self tells us so.

That Divine Form of Prayer which God was pleased to dictate to us from the
mouth of his own Son, confirms the same; when he tells us that he is our
Father, he would have us to understand that he is yours, mine, and every man's
else; and that so we are all Brethren, and therefore as Brethren obliged to
love one another, and to reverence him as the common Father of us all. And when
he tells us afterward that his habitation is in Heaven, it should instruct us
that our curiosity should rest satisfied in knowing that he is our Father,
without attempting to enquire farther into his Essence.

The vast passage that is between us and the Heavens, their solidity and
infinite spaces which divide them from one another, are so many different
intervals of our common distance and separation; and though their motion with
that of the Sun, Moon, and other Planets, which are fastened to them, have not
as yet discovered to us but nine Spheres, yet have we credentials to assure us
that their number is not as great or it may be greater than that of the Stars.
To measure immensity, all the extent of our Imagination makes not so much as a
small point in respect of its greatness.

My Son, you cannot know a man one hundred paces off, and would you know the
Majesty of God at so great a distance? That cannot be. Be contented to know
that he is your Father, that the double arch of Crystal which covers the upper
and under face of all the Earth is his dwelling place, and that this Divine
Palace can no more be measured than its Inhabitant.

You see the Heavens in all their appearances, and are not yet able to
comprehend of what Matter they are composed, the Existence of God discovers it
self unto you in all his Creatures, when notwithstanding you cannot conceive
his Essence. Heaven hides it from you, and the same light which opens to you
the gate of its concavity, shuts that of its convexity; with this difference,
that this Heavenly vault appears to our eyes fixed, and nevertheless it moves;
and God in all the works of Nature seems in endless motion, and notwithstanding
it is he alone that is in repose. And as it is impossible for you to conceive a
thing in motion, without an immovable point from which the motion proceeds, so
no more can you apprehend the progress and regress which you see in all created
beings, without arriving insensibly at the immovable point, from whence it
has its rise, which is the same God that is your Father.

It was not without reason that we were forbidden to make to our selves any
graven Image of any thing that is above in the Heavens, to worship them; for
this prohibition regards as much him that frames to himself a model of them in
his mind, as him that graves them with an Instrument. We cannot know them but
as they present themselves to our Imagination, and our Imagination being but a
vain Image of our Fancy, can no sooner be shaped in our mind, but that our
self-love makes it its Idol.

So that, my Child, busy not thy self in the search of the number of the
Heavens, what distance there is betwixt them, and what is their greatness in
respect of the Earth, it is too vast a speculation, and more spongy than the
brain that entertains it, the supputation which by Algebra you may make thereof
(the very name of which makes me afraid) will fill your mind with so many
Fractions, that possibly it may crack your wit.

All the rovings that are in vogue upon this subject, are but the idle
skippings of curious Wits, that would transgress the limits prescribed to the
capacity of Man, and so we see that such persons are but of very little use in
Civil Society. Nature has stretched a Veil of two eyelids over your eyes to
teach you, that the beams of your knowledge should dart downwards and reflect
upon your self alone. She has levelled your sight with the Horizon, to point
out unto you that your curiosity should stop upon the confines of Heaven. Your
eye can no more than your mind look up above you, without the oversetting of
your head and brain.

If you will follow my advice, in the contemplation of Heaven, look upon it
with silence and reverence, as the house of God. Consider the Sun (according to
the modern opinion) as a fixed point, or rather as the Center of that great
wheel of the Universe, by which is derived to it that fountain of Light which
does illuminate, and fruitful Spirit which enlivens the same. The great Creator
of all things knowing that our weakness could not bear the sight of his
Majesty, that he might not altogether conceal himself from us, was pleased
perhaps to open a point in the Heavens, through which a small thread only of
his glory and light (which is the sun) might descend, which is nothing else but
a material stamp and visible draught of that invisible power which governs and
cherishes this great Universe. That Divine chink appears to you but small in
respect of the Heavens, yet you must know that though the whole Celestial
Canopy did shine with the same brightness, hardly would it be a glimpse of
light, if compared to that living Luminary from whence that Divine fire
proceeds. However such as it is, there is nothing created that does with more
splendor and pomp, present to our understanding a more perfect notion of the
Omnipotence of God, than the fruitful and indefatigable virtue of the Sun,
which stirs up nature to action, and rouses all seminal causes from idleness.

Can any thing represent to us a more lively image of his grace, the presence
or absence of which gives day or night to our souls? And what can make us
better understand the uniformity of his goodness toward all his Creatures,
than the regular course of the Sun, who keeps so equal a balance between the
two opposite Poles, that there is not so much as one living Creature, one
Plant, or one corner of the Earth, which enjoys a minutes time more of his
Light than another.

He dispenses it with so much exactness, that to render every where the day
equal to the night, in those places where there is inequality, he successively
compensates long nights by long days, before that he accomplish his entire
Revolution.

By this Analogy of the properties of the Sun with the Attributes of God, I
pretend not (contrary to his prohibition) to have engraven his Image, he
himself has cut it out, and made this chink in the Heavens, through which that
scantling of his Omnipotence comes down to us. He communicates himself to us
that way, as in jealousy to let us know that he is, but not what he is.
Propose not then to your self to eye him at nearer distance: The highest effort
that your Soul can make toward his Perfection, is not so much as a spark of
his Glory. Nothing that is yours can be attributed to him, without a diminution
of his greatness.

My Child, if you would come near and see him, there is no other way for it,
but to stand off and humble your self as much as possibly you can, you exalt
your self by falling low. O strange wonder! by these two extremities, that is,
by the highest notion that we conceive of God, and the lowest sense of our own
unworthiness, we may by stepping backwards return toward, and reunite our
selves with this Divine principle.

CHAP. II. In what manner God is to be Worshipped. Of Christian Religion, and
that one cannot be a good Subject without being a good Christian. That no
innovations ought to be made in Religion. Of the excellence of Faith above
Reason.
LET us rest satisfied then, seeing that Nature and God himself tells us that
he is our Father, to render him the respect and obedience of a Son: and since
that it has pleased him to hide himself in the high and unsearchable places of
Heaven, let us be contented according to his appointment to sanctify his holy
Name. Admire in that, my Son, the goodness of God that descends to you, seeing
that you cannot mount up to him.

This first cause being infinite, inconceivable, and unlimited, perceiving that
it was not in your power to support your self in the troublesome floods of so
many thousand wild and shapeless notions which you must forge to represent him
to your self, and that you were incapable of a Religion purely intellectual and
mental, has been pleased to limit man's worship of God by the adoration of the
name only that designs him to our capacity, and not as he is in himself, to the
end that our Devotion might have a fixed and determinate object. For in effect
it is Man an earthly and material Creature, who believes and prays, and who by
consequent has need that the divine Majesty should reveal himself to him by
such means as might bear some proportion with his condition: and therefore it
has pleased him to communicate to us the invisible grace of his Sacraments
under visible signs, to appoint us a verbal Prayer, and to suffer the external
Ceremonies that are used in the Church to accompany our Adoration. This is not
all, he has taken to himself flesh like yours, and become man, that he might
at the same time be your Savior, and the guide to your Salvation.

Son, this is the foundation of the Christian Catholic and Apostolic
doctrine, wherein I advise you not only to live and dye, but absolutely command
you, if you desire to have Gods blessing and mine. This is the Religion of your
Fathers in the very first Ages of the Church; let your Religion, as your blood,
be one with theirs: I it is the most ancient, the old and stately Fabrics,
where the exercise of it is continued to this day, may confirm you in that.

A small number of Separatists, who like misled sheep have forsaken the flock,
are but the dross of the whole. Lastly, it is the public Religion of the
State, which you cannot renounce without becoming guilty of Faction and
Sedition, or suspected of it toward the King. Indeed, if Obedience which is due
to the King be but a dependency on Religion, which rallies together our wills
in the service of God, it is most just that we should enter with him, and he
with us, into the Society of this common Obligation.

The true Christian Religion has continued longer than any Government or
Policy whatsoever now extant, and more powerfully asserted the rights and
privileges of Civil Magistracy than any other, and would you now put the truth
of it to Arbitration? Know, my Son, that you can never be a good Christian, if
you be not a good Subject; and that there is nothing that more convinces
Fanatics of error and falsehood, than their rebellion against the King: the
true doctrine expressly commands us to obey him, and to submit to the Laws and
Magistrates. You cannot, (as has been heretofore done) trample on their
Authority, under what pretext soever, but that you dash in pieces one of the
Tables of the Law against the other.

Be steadfast then in the Religion of your Forefathers and of the State;
withdraw not your self from it, though there may be some depravation in the
manners of those that are the Ministers of it, yea even some abuses in its
Government, that corruption is but a peccant humor in some part of the body,
which is inconsiderable in respect of the whole, and may be cured or evacuated
by Repentance. As to our abuses, if any there be, look upon them as a distemper
of our fear, or of our love of God, which has its being but in the superfice
of our Faith, like blisters and warts that break out on our skin without
cutting or exulcerating the flesh.

The most dangerous hurts in the body of man are those which make the greatest
solution of its continuity, and the deepest wound. The scandal most to be
feared in the Church of God, is when Schism and Heresy divide and cut into two
or more Factions its unity, which like the garment of our Savior should be
without a seam.

Before that the lips of such wounds be joined again and consolidated into a
cicatrice, men commit and suffer so many strange evils, that were they but
foreseen by those that cause them, I doubt not but that their zeal, whatever it
might be, would easily comply with the received opinions.

Then would the external peace of the Church drop internal peace into the
Consciences of the faithful, the vapors of their contention would turn their
brains no more, and instead of the divisions that are amongst us, we should see
men's minds reconciled and ferment together by the heat of charity, and the
labor of those who write and read Controversies, changed into works and
treatises of Piety and Mortification, which is a far more innocent and
Christian subject than the other.

It seems to me to have been great presumption in our Fanatics, to endeavor
the subjecting of the public received customs of the Church, to the censure
and correction of a private sufficiency, and of their own authority, and
without a call to enter into the inheritance of our salvation, whereof we and
our Fathers have been in possession before them. Every innovation in the matter
of Religion, though it were good, is at present very dangerous in respect of
the times, when nothing can be changed without hazarding very much.

The tempests that for many years have tossed the Church of God, are not as yet
wholly appeased, and shall we furnish matter of a new storm; and at this time,
when all Europe is in Arms, and that the mind of man was never more curious of
novelty than it is at present?

It is, in my mind, much safer and more conscientious to conform to the
received opinions when they are peaceable, than dangerously to admit of any
new. Hardly can there be any Covenant made in Ecclesiastical Policy, but that
immediately after it degenerates into some civil faction, from whence all
public disorders gather strength and vigor.

Once therefore, my Child, I counsel you to be a little reserved, when there
comes any question to be handled in the Church, which may seem to you to carry
the stamp of novelty. Let never your determination in such occurrences prevent
the sentence of our common Mother the Church, continue in the peaceable
submission of a tractable and respectful Son, and beware by a private
enterprise to usurp the sacred authority which resides in the persons of those
whom God has appointed for the conduct of Christians. In a word, believe for a
certain truth that the unity of the Church should be as inviolable as its
verity, and that they who make a rupture amongst its members, ought to be
considered as the greatest enemies thereof.

Our Religion consists chiefly in two heads, to wit, the Commandments of the
Law, and the Faith of the Gospel. We cannot fully satisfy these two, but that
our soul which is likewise composed of two parts, to wit, our Will and our
Reason, must render as great obedience to the Commands of the Law, what
resistance and difficulty soever our Wills may make; as submission to the Faith
of the Gospel, what repugnancy soever our Reason may have against it.

Otherwise if we believe only what may have some conformity with our reason,
and no more; we do greater honor to the truth that reflects from matter, than
to him who is the author of matter and truth it self. Indeed, Belief has some
preeminence above Knowledge, because in knowledge the understanding is only
enlightened by the information of the senses, which is material and subject to
mistakes: but in Faith our soul draws its notions from the spirit of God alone,
which is so noble an agent, that I know not but that I may be so bold as to
say, that though there might be some error in the direction of my Faith, yet
that my intention could not be rectified by the excellence of the object it
self of my Faith, which is God.

It is most certainly true, that the more incredible the mysteries of our Faith
seem to be, the more reverence we pay to God in not doubting of them. Behold
the obscurity which you find in it, as a fair night wherein you have the light
of the Gospel to direct you, and the Apostles, Martyrs and Saints for guiding
Stars, in whose steps you tread even at present. In a word, take it from me, my
Son, that your reason is much more certainly your Daughter according to the
spirit, than Isaac the Son of Abraham according to the flesh, and that as often
as you make a sacrifice to God of it by faith, so often you present to him the
same oblation which drew down so many blessings upon that divine Patriarch,

God who is a nature altogether distinct from ours, deals with us by means
contrary to our measures, and which are altogether inconceivable to us. When he
applied clay, which is a matter apt to put out the eyes, to restore the blind
man's sight, it was to teach us that we can never well enjoy the light of the
soul, but by putting out the light of the body. For it is not enough to know by
the light of Nature that there is a God, it must likewise agree with our Faith,
upon the ways whereby he communicates himself to us, and the ways how we ought
to serve him.

The employment of our Reason is only to wait upon our Faith as a discreet
Handmaid, which is not yet so much a slave to it, but that it may examine the
Law of God according to humane prudence, but not the Faith, to the end that the
beauty of his commands and their necessity in the conjunctures of civil
society, may instruct us to reverence and fear him that gives us them. Can we
have a better warranty of our belief than Jesus Christ himself, who teaches us
to love God above all, our neighbor as our self, and even to do good to him
that hates and persecutes us?

CHAP. III. Of Libertinism and Miscreancy.
I Wonder not, my Child, that those who will not submit to any of these things,
have the boldness now adays to disown and neglect him that by his Commandments
has enjoined them. The number of such has of late so increased, that it seems
at present to be the mark of the Beast, not to be one of them; they are called
the Wits or Virtuosi, as if none had understanding but they, or as if it were a
weakness of judgment not to be of their opinion. This evil is the more
dangerous, that the mind infected with this poison, flatters it self with some
false conceit of Liberty, and God Almighty knows what liberty: to renounce God,
the common Faith, the Laws of the Land and the Prince, which are the only
blessings that keep us in Peace, to put us under the power and private
Government of our most irreconcilable enemy, which is our selves.

The slack execution of Laws concerning a matter of that importance, seems to
me indeed wonderful, and so much the more, that whosoever makes an open rupture
with God, is incapable of any other accommodation, and is from thenceforward
convicted of being a bad Statesman and a bad Subject. Observe, my Son, the
consequences of that, the King is not my Master, nor I the Master of my
Servant, nor a proprietor of his Estate, but by virtue of the strength and
support which the Laws receive from Religion, it is from that alone that the
public union and security does depend.

A soul infected with some insolent opinion, may well evaporate and send up
toward Heaven stinking steams, but nature will sooner be annihilated, than
that it should be so wholly corrupted, that the divine character can be
entirely and without reversion blotted out of the conscience of man: Let us not
be ashamed to own our guest, there is nothing upon us or within us but avouches
it; and though our tongue would deny, yet our heart upon the least surprise
convinces us of it. Strange kind of vanity! to desire that men should think us
more wicked than it is possible for us to be.

I have seen one of the chief pillars of this foolish opinion appear abroad
openly with applause, and publish his impiety in the head City of the kingdom,
with as much confidence as if he had been some new Messiah. And more than this,
which is very prodigious, I saw him after two years imprisonment escape out of
the hands of the Judges who should have condemned him, acquitted for want of
evidence, of an impiety that had as many witnesses as he acquaintants: whether
it was that the envy of his accusers saved him, or that perhaps no body durst
evidence or give sentence against a crime which they saw publicly connived at;
or that it was judged that Atheism being rather a sin of the lips and fancy,
than of the heart, deserved no other punishment but its own folly.

In effect, the original of Miscreancy proceeds but from a foolish presumption
that will not abide in the beaten road of common opinions. It is most certain,
there are three kinds of spirits, and that those of the lower rank are spirits
of livery and attendance, which receive things according to use and custom,
without farther examination. Those of the second order, who are our pretended
Wits, go a little farther, they truly consider the effects of second causes,
their motions and regular changes, but they consider them only separately and
divided from the whole, and not being able to rise higher, they are forced to
rest there, and leave to them the dominion of the Universe: but the
transcendent spirits of the higher sphere, prying more narrowly into things,
and rallying together separate and divided causes, discover the connection and
agreement that is amongst them, and by seeing all the different parts conspire
to compose that universal harmony, they advance to the knowledge of a sovereign
cause and principle, by whose providence all things are governed; so that I
think Libertinism makes Vanity its false Idol, and he that makes profession of
it, carries rather the stamp of an Ignorant and Blockhead, than of a Wit: and
so much the more that he puts out his own eyes, and robs himself of his
greatest light, which is the knowledge of God.

CHAP. IV. Concerning Superstition.
SON, As it is dangerous to abolish the sentiment of a Deity by Atheism and
Miscreancy, so is it likewise no less dangerous to forge a false image of God
by superstition, the denying of God lessens not his greatness, when
superstition on the other hand according to its timorousness ascribes to him an
infinite number of bad qualities, and by consequence the wrong is less, to be
in doubt of his being, than to do him injury. Atheism does not totally suppress
reason and the actions of sense, it roots not out natural affections, nor the
care of our reputation, as Superstition does; and though Religion be the chief
agent in all the Moral Virtues, yet are they not so inconsistent with the
negation of God, as they are with Superstition.

Superstition is a base and cowardly vice, to which the common people,
children, women and old folks, who are all weak persons, are most subject. It
is afraid of every thing; what is past, what is present, and what is to come,
keep it in a continual quaking, for fear of the vengeance of God. it is rash
and inconsiderate in its zeal, witness the rage of the wars occasioned by
Religion; and so ingenious to do it self mischief, that it makes him who should
be the instrument of its safety, the executioner of its punishment, and the
place of its refuge and protection, its scaffold. In a word, Superstition is
the passion of a soul dull in the works of Charity, peevish, distrustful,
scrupulous, which profanes Religion, by placing all the duty of it in antic
faces and external grimaces, as if the true worship of God were but foppish
juggling, or a spiritual tatling.

Be nevertheless well advised, my Child, how you shun that imperfection, and
take heed that in forsaking of it, you fall not into another inconvenience no
less dangerous, by committing some irreverence against the forms and ceremonies
of ancient use, which make a part of your Religion, lest (as it happens often
in the bodies of men) you purge not what is sound with the corrupted humors.

CHAP. V. How we are to use our Will and Reason in the Service of God.
MY Son, Man comes into the world like a new Artist, with his rule and
compass, which is his reason and will: but that he may have the pleasure to be
in some sort the master of his trade, God who is his chief Architect, has left
the care of ordering of both to himself. To order aright a compass, we must
keep one leg of it fast, and in making of its sweep bring the other round to
the same point where it began.

For the adjusting of our reason, God ought to be the fixed point, and our life
the moveable part thereof, which makes its whole course round that unmovable
point. To know the justness of a Rule, you must first draw a straight line from
one point to another, and afterward another straight line of equal distance
from, and of the same length with the former; with these conditions you may
assure your self your Rule is true. My Child, if you would regulate aright your
will, and make a good application of it in all the actions of life, let the
first line that enters into its composition, be your love toward God, and the
second your love to your neighbor.

Let this last be always measured by the former, and in due distance from it;
for if you neglect the present necessity of your neighbor to betake your self
to Meditation or Prayer, when you think you draw near to God, you falsify your
rule and take wrong measures: and therefore the life of Jesus Christ which is
the pattern of a Christians, is almost all taken up in the services of his
neighbor. He visits, instructs, comforts, feeds, cures him, compassionates his
infirmities, and what is most remarkable, it seems that lest he should abandon
him, he prays but seldom to God his Father; and when he prays to him, we never
find in all the Scripture, that his Prayer regarded himself alone, but at the
approach and in the agonies of his passion, to teach us that the hour of death
breaks the society of man with man, and that in this occasion which decides the
salvation of every one in particular, we have all enough to do in our own
business.

The most pleasing sacrifice that you can offer to God, is to render the
service of your neighbor parallel to his own: and when in the Lords Prayer he
makes you so often repeat the words [Us] and [Ours,] take it for a lesson to
make no difference betwixt your own and neighbors concerns: He that told you,
that when two or three of you shall be gathered together in my name, I will be
in the midst of you, promises not to you the same blessing when you shall be
alone, and therefore to obtain it, join to your own the interest of your
neighbor in your prayer.

This is a strange mystery, that at the last day he is not to accuse you of the
taking of his name in vain, nor of the breach of his Commandments, he will only
then tell you, When I was naked, you clothed me not, when I was hungry, you
fed me not, when I was afflicted, you comforted me not, and so forth. And what
is the reason of that? because that last line, to wit, the love of our
neighbor being that which should bear proportion to the first, which is the
love of God, all the actions which depend on thy Will, will avail thee nothing
to salvation without it.

The Lord requires but of you the seventh part of your life for the
sanctification of his name, nor all that neither, if the necessity of your
neighbor crave your help. So we see that the most assiduous in the former, are
such whom the weakness of age, sex, or some profession of an idle and unactive
life, has rendered lazy and unfit for the offices of reciprocal charity which
men owe to one another.

CHAP. VI. Concerning Prayer. Of Private and Public Prayers.
COnsider well how you pray in private, forasmuch as it is an action which
requires of us a cleansing and purging of the spirit, and a frame of soul more
pure and disengaged from the body than any other whatsoever. So we see that
when our Savior went about to pray, he ascended to the Mount, that he might
withdraw from the commerce of men. In a word, when a man prays, he speaks to
God; and if he be impenitent, and still polluted with some foul desire, he
calls his Judge to be the witness of his crime: wherefore I advise you that a
short examination of conscience do always go before your Prayer. If it be
frequent, let it be short, and like a spark that rises from an inflamed heart,
let it mount to heaven with silence and reverence, and not with thunder and
noise like the lightning that falls down from thence.

Prayer is our union with God, whether we adore him, or beg any thing from him,
if it be long, our weakness suffers it not to be without distraction, and from
the very minute that your attention stragles and wanders from him, against his
own Commandment, you take his name in vain. Your inferior would even take it
ill, if that whilst you were a speaking to him, your thoughts were taken up
elsewhere, the rays of our minds are less able to endure the contemplation of
God by a fixed union in prayer, than our eyes steadfastly to behold the Sun, the
aspect of both must only be had by sallies and glances; and therefore the form
of Prayer which has been left to us from the mouth of our Savior himself in
the Lords Prayer, is divided into seven distinct petitions, which are so many
stops and pauses denoting to us the impotency of our soul to unite it self with
him any other way than by ejaculation.

Beside this prayer which was given us for a pattern, Jesus Christ did the
same, when his own concern lay at stake, saying, Father, if it be possible that
this cup may pass from me; and another time, Lord, if I must drink it, let thy
will be done: and a little after, Pardon them, God, for they know not what they
do; and before he yielded up the ghost, Into thy hands I commit my spirit. All
these things are so many different rests of the humanity of the Son of God, as
if he had wanted breath to continue his prayer.

I intend not in this brevity to comprehend the public prayers of the Church,
the use of which I reverence, as being of divine institution, and whereof the
consort make one harmony of our voice and wills in the presence of God; they
are like so many sparks which breath out of the common fire of the inflamed
hearts of the faithful.

It is almost impossible to consider the majesty of Churches, the public
places of Assembly, the decent ceremonies which are there performed, the sound
of Bells, the consort of our voices with Organs, and to see that the rallying
of all these things together makes but an unison betwixt us and nature in the
worship of God, without being convinced in our own consciences, that their
institution is Divine.

Assure your self, my Son, that all these things are so many different
rivulets, which flow from the Catholic and Apostolic Faith, and that you
ought to reverence them as you do their fountain.

If this content not yet your devotion, and that you would make a longer prayer
both publicly and privately, wherein there may be no distraction; let the
beginning, progress, and end of all the actions of your life have always a
respect to God, and you shall be incessantly in Prayer. Every servant that is
diligent in his masters business, desires tacitly his masters favor or his
reward. Consider what will become of you, if your actions, how good soever they
may be, respect any thing besides God. Your compassion for the miseries of
another, which is the bud of Charity, will be no more but a natural imbecility
of your soul that cannot see him suffer; the mutual duties which pass betwixt
men without that respect, are no way profitable to salvation. If you give that
you may receive, or do one good turn to attract another, it is no more Charity,
but traffic. In fine, all moral virtues are changed into dead works, if they
be not quickened by the love of God.

CHAP. VII. Concerning the Lords Prayer.
ABove all things I recommend to you that your most ordinary Prayer be the
Lords Prayer: I leave to your discretion all others that are of humane
institution, but this I would have you often repeat. It is a short instruction
to man, which marks so precisely the duty and acknowledgment which he owes to
God, and the need that he has of him, that besides what it does prescribe, he
can say nothing to God, nor beg any thing of him but what is superfluous.
Although this Prayer be very simple in appearance, yet it speaks so fully the
plenitude of its author, that (if you examine it narrowly) it contains not so
much as one word, which is not beyond the reach of humane understanding.

Consider those two first words, [Our Father.] Wherefore [Our] and not [My,]
sure you pray alone, but to inform you that your care should not be confined to
your self alone, and that he being our common Father, we are all his Children?
Wherefore [Father] but to make you understand by the relation that there is
betwixt Son and Father, and Father and Son, that acknowledging him to be your
Father, you oblige your self to him by a filial obedience and submit to his
paternal protection? The word [Father] is a name of good will and tenderness,
which Jesus Christ himself always used when he spoke to God, until he was upon
the Cross, but in that place he calls God only Lord, which is a name of
authority and jurisdiction, inasmuch that the name of [Father] would on this
hard occasion have been too tender, and that he would make appear, that it was
only the humanity of the Son of God which then suffered.

He tells you that he is in Heaven, to the end that you may seek him there, and
that you give your self no trouble to know him otherwise but by Faith, and
because his infinite Being is incomprehensible, lest that you should propose to
your self an uncertain and undeterminate object of Adoration, he has been
pleased to condescend to your capacity, and to be worshipped by a name whereby
we signify what he is, not as he is in himself, but according as we are able
to conceive him.

Having taught you that your first homage and acknowledgment is due to him, he
would have you next think of your own salvation, and above all things pray for
his Kingdom, that you may anticipate the enjoyment of it even in this world; he
shows you that your Will should so fully agree with his, that you have always
the same love and hatred as he has: for indeed you cannot renounce your own
Will, to accommodate and submit your self to the Will of God, but that you must
be carried by the same inclination of your mover, and jointly reign with him.

Next to the resignation of your Will, God would have you be contented here
below with that food which you may most easily command, to wit, bread; lest
that anxious solicitude for other things may divert you from your duty; he
would likewise have your provision stinted to one day, to comfort you in this
your exile, and to give you to understand by this small Viaticum, that your
abode in this place is short and uncertain; and to the end also that if you
have more than enough, you give a share and communicate to those that are in
want. Consider that you receive them into partnership, when you say, Give us
this day our daily bread, which is a petition that you make in common with
others, if he grant you more than is sufficient for one day, you cannot reserve
it to your self alone, without robbing the indigent and poor.

My Son, what follows, if you take not good heed to it, is rather a snare laid
for you, than a prayer. Here let your prayer end, if you be a rigid creditor,
or entertain any hatred or malice against your neighbor; if you desire to have
grace, show favor: for when you say, Forgive us our trespasses, as we forgive
them that trespass against us; if you harbor vengeance or malice in your mind,
you pronounce against your self the sentence of condemnation. God will still
less pardon you if you mock and laugh at the imperfections of another, for such
as have them are neither indebted nor accountable to you.

O good God! lead us never into temptation, that is to say, leave us never to
our selves in the least, for we can never be abandoned to our own conduct for
how little time soever, but that we are exposed to thousands of temptations.
Deliver us from that, if thou please, good Lord, and from all evil, whether
active, which is sin that kills the soul, or passive, which is pain, unless it
be thy merciful will to furnish us with grace to support it to thy glory.

It has been my custom these forty years, to subjoin the 142. Psalm to the
Lords Prayer, it makes appear the inability of man to justify himself in the
sight of God; man's blindness in the discovery of his secrets, the faintings and
dryness of the soul without Gods help, and the need that it has of his
conduct. I repeat it most commonly every day, until I come to the verse, Thou
shall bring forth my soul out of tribulation: I stop there and never say the
rest. A King, such as David, may invoke the wrath of God against his enemies,
as being the enemies of his state, a private man cannot do it with a good
conscience, without the permission of the Church.

For conclusion of this first part, having told you, my Children, that God
cannot be conceived, it is to tell you that he cannot be expressed; so that it
is impossible that I who have so little knowledge in facred learning, can have
handled the Duty of Man toward God, without falling into some mistake.
Theology is a sacred Virgin, so rich in its natural and proper graces, that it
is hard for a man who has not been initiated in its mysteries, to touch it
without hurting the purity thereof, and leaving on it some mark of his
imperfection. If by ignorance or inadvertency any word or thought have escaped
me which is not conform to the sacred Canons of the Church, I forthwith disown
it, and heartily submit my opinions as well as my faith, to the censure of
those who are sent by God to be the Judges thereof.

THE Fathers Legacy: OR FAITHFUL COUNSELS OF A GOOD FATHER TO HIS CHILDREN and
FRIENDS.
The Second Part; Which treats of the Duty of Man toward Himself.
CHAP. I. Of the difference that there is betwixt the procreation of Man, and
the other productions of Nature; and the reason thereof.
MY Child, in the first part of this my Will and Testament, where I have
treated of your duty toward God, I have showed you that the knowledge of him
must go before your adoration, which is your duty toward him. In this second
part, where I propose to speak of your duty toward your self, I intend to
observe the same order, judging it most convenient that you should know what
you are, before you be instructed of your duty toward your self; to accomplish
my design, I think it necessary to trace nature step by step, and to eye her
always as the forerunner of my enterprise.

When I consider her in the first elements of our life, I find nothing but
incontinence, fainting, griping pains, and a flood of impurities which
accompany your tears. It seems that in the other productions of Nature there is
somewhat more happy, and especially in the procreation of Birds and Plants.
Birds bear not as we do their young in their womb, they lay and hatch their
eggs in the loveliest season of the year, with so much tranquillity and repose,
that many times the same hand that robs the nest of their young, does likewise
seize the old: Their harmony and consort during that time sufficiently proves
that their birth is fortunate in respect of ours. Plants likewise seem to renew
their life when they begin to bud, instead of corrupt blood or unsavory water,
a sweet dew does moisten and cherish their fruit. It is not (like us) wrapped
in an impure coat, its own flowers encompass it, which in blowing perfume the
air, and the very leaves, which are as their afterbirth, serve them for
clothing and ornament until they are stripped and left naked by the winter.

This advantage, my Son, which Plants seem to have above you, has only been
granted them for your sake; the chief end of the production of their fruit, is
that they are for your use, and prudent nature who designs them for your
sustenance, presents them to you in that manner, lest otherwise you might loath
and reject them, do not therefore envy them.

Now if the production and birth of some living creatures seem less painful
than your own, and that as soon as they are brought forth, they find clothing
at hand and their table covered, for both which you must labor with the sweat
of your brows, yet are they neither your brethren nor your elders, they come
into the world as into their native country, and their own inheritance, without
pretending to any other; and therefore it is just that they should be received
as the children of the family: But what hurt is done to you, who are a
stranger, and come hither as a pilgrim, to demand of you custom and tole for
your passage? The goodness of God who has placed your inheritance elsewhere,
thought fit to deprive you at first of the allurements of this life, that so he
might separate from it your affection. Think with your self, that your
preposterous dropping into the world with your head down and feet upwards, is
only to teach you that none come in this posture into the natural place of
their abode, and that here you must not expect yours.

Since then, my Son, you are only as a passenger in this life, it is your chief
duty to plain the way to that whither you aspire, and to seek out in this
painful passage the most proper means to attain to it, every thing that is
superfluous, is but a hindrance to a traveller; it is enough for him to live
and to have what is necessary for his journey: and because the first desire
which discovers it self in man as soon as he is born, is that of living; and
the second, of having every thing that he sees. In treating of the Duty of Man
toward himself, I shall begin with the measures that he ought to observe in
the moderation of those two first appetites.

CHAP. II. Concerning the moderation of the first appetite of man, which is
that of living, where Gluttony is handled.
IT is most certain, that the first appetite of nature which is discovered in
us when we come into the world, is the desire of living, which consists in
eating and drinking: Infancy and old age are moderate enough in this desire, it
is only young age that abuses it, and which only upon that account stands in
need of counsel and direction. And forasmuch that in this middle age the
natural senses are in their force and vigor, and especially the taste, it is
very hard to retain them in so regular a mean, but that the soul does often
become complice with the body in that excess.

The exercises of body, heat of blood, and exemple are such violent counselors
for the belly, that reason which is but then imperfect cannot resist. In defect
of that, the best advice, my Son, that I can give you in such occasions, is
that you let the inconveniences of gluttony be your first instruction, if you
have overloaded yourself with meat, for a lesson of moderation consider the
indisposition and heaviness of your body, your loathing and disgusting the bad
digestion of your stomach, and the vapors that arise from the crudities
thereof, which bemist and darken your mind.

If you have drunk too much, consider your eyes, mouth words, reelings, the
obstructions of your spirit, and how many hideous and shapeless dreams and
fancies, the vapors of wine does lodge in your brain, until that sleep and
perhaps your own excrements have buried you, then will you find all these
things to be so many different documents of sobriety; and because the body is
never drowned in wine without the shipwreck of the mind, you will fasting
perceive better the ugliness of that vice in the debauches of other men, than
in your own: follow it step by step from the beginning to the end thereof, make
the application in your self, and call to mind the giddiness, loathing and
indigestion which the like will occasion in you; and having done so, you must
be well hardened in your sin, if shame do not reclaim you.

Mistrust that liquor which imprints the malignity of its juice on the wood
that drinks it, though it be much harder than your flesh; the stock of the vine
is only knobby and crooked, to inform you that the use of wine if you glut your
self therewith as it does, may cause in you the same effects, shaking and
reeling, fambling and stuttering of the tongue, catarrhs and the gout, are the
tempests of its vapors. Consider this, the fuller your stomach and the larger
your belly is, the narrower will the reach of your wit be, the more
disburthened of flesh the body is, it is the more healthful, active, vigorous
and obedient to the commands of the soul. If nature deny, let your diet procure
you this constitution, begin it betimes; for if the too great quantity of
victuals have once stretched your soft and pliable guts, they will give you no
rest afterward until they be filled.

Though Children must be allowed sufficiency of food, yet they must not be so
far indulged as to let them carve for themselves, and far less to provoke their
appetite, or to solicit them to eat against their stomach; we must believe
that nature which works freely in that age, during the cessation of the mouth,
is elsewhere better employed in consuming of some hurtful excrement.

Besides this swinish intemperance of the Mouth, whereof I have been speaking,
which is never satisfied without being glutted, there is still another more
ingenious and artificious, and that is the luxury of the Table, it is dainty
and full of ostentation, and so excessive now adays in its preparations, that
the sight alone and steam of dishes, is enough to satisfy the appetite without
touching of them; the palate stands in suspense at the diversity of joints and
dishes that are presented to it, not knowing on which to resolve. This luxury
makes indeed but few drunkards, because the eyes only are there for the most
part fed, but it often begets poverty, a more dangerous evil, and for an
addition of misery, the derision of him that thereby ruins himself.

My Son, though my table give you twice a day a lesson of sobriety, yet you may
spend at Court some part of your life as I have done, and bring from thence no
more than I, but a more dainty and delicate palate: Wherefore if Fortune call
you into the public, which is my wish, I advise you to regulate betimes your
diet according to your condition, make use of such things as may not always be
in your power, with that moderation, that you may be able to dispense with them
without trouble; abstain from excess in them, and from too much care in hunting
after them: my meaning is also, that if you should come to want them, you might
let them go without grief or anxiety; by doing so, you will in this part
satisfy what you owe to your self, which is the thing that I proposed to my
self to teach you.

CHAP. III. Concerning the moderation of the second appetite of man, which is
the desire of having; where Avarice and the true use of riches, are discoursed
of.
AS the desire of nourishment is the first appetite of man, the desire of
having is the second inclination of nature, which is almost born with him, and
keeps him always company. We see it in Children, who have no sooner the use of
their Arms, but that they give some sign by hand or eyes, that they have a mind
to all that they see: Whatever we give them, they carry it immediately to the
mouth, all their actions then tending only to nourishment.

These two first appetites, which are in a manner twins, are so rooted in man,
that they seem to be incarnate with him, both of them have their birth in us
before the soul has knowledge; wherefore the more dark and obscure they are,
the more they stand in need of light and conduct, and the more natural they are
to us, the more ought our care and circumspection be, that they plant not in us
bad principles. Moderation of diet gives health to the body, and purity to the
soul; moderation of the desire of having, gives peace and tranquillity to both;
their contraries producing contrary effects. Since it is so, my Son, you are
obliged to purchase to your self a good, the enjoyment or loss of which, will
cause the happiness or misery of your life. I have already shown you the
inconveniences of intemperance in diet, I come now to those which the
immoderate desire of having may occasion.

A wise Politician of the times by allusion calls Riches the baggage of virtue,
as if he would thereby signify to us that they are no less cumbersome than
necessary. For my part, I should rather say that the want of riches is the
greatest encumbrance that virtue can meet with; if they be heavy in respect of
the great care that is required in purchasing, spending, and preserving of
them; yet I think it still more burdensome to possess so little wealth, that
one cannot but with much difficulty supply the necessities of life.

He that is taken up in progging for an ordinary livelihood, can hardly lay up
any great store of virtue; so we see in the Lords Prayer, that the petition of
our daily bread goes before that of the forgiveness of sin, and the not leading
us into temptation, which is the bridling of our passions, wherein all moral
virtue consists. To say the truth, there may be hurt both in the one and other,
but the want of riches is far more incommodious, than their excess cumbersome;
and our Language does properly call them goods, because without them we can
enjoy no worldly good.

Let us not think it a blind appetite that a Child has a desire for every thing
that it sees, it is a prescience of nature, that informs it that all things are
made for its use, and when it wears off all that it has, it is by another
foreknowledge that all goods being common, they ought to pass from hand to
hand, and successively escape our affection. It is only he that would have
every thing, and keep all that acts against nature, whose blindness is so
great, that he cannot learn by the vanity of his labor, that his covetousness
is a leaky vessel which cannot be filled.

Observe, my Son, the punishment of his sin, he desires to hold all fast, and
lets all slip, goods which are not goods, but in the using of them, lose their
name and property in his hands, he robs himself by depriving society of them,
to spare them he renounces all the pleasures of sense, for whose sake men
desire their possession, and the custody of an avaricious man's treasure is so
slavish, that one cannot tell which is the jailer or prisoner, his treasure or
himself. The substance of a rich man is a wall raised in his imagination, said
the wise man, and consequently being but imaginary, not very sure; the
reputation of his wealth is an outcry that sets out his estate, only to expose
it to the first seizer, and he is so wretched that lest he should not be robbed,
he becomes a prey to himself rather than fail.

Look to it, my Son, if on these terms you desire to have and keep all;
consider how many advantages which may be in your power, you must renounce for
the view of one, which is impossible to be acquired, inasmuch as by filling
your self with riches, your thirst will increase with your dropsy. I conjure
you then to be wise in this desire; the Poetical fictions, which were
heretofore the ancient Theology, regulate the march of the god of riches
according to the place from whence he sets out. If Jupiter who is the god of
heaven send him, he comes but slowly, like riches that are lawfully and
honestly acquired. If he be sent by Pluto, who is the god of hell, he comes
running in diligence, to teach us, that nothing but vexation, injustice,
oppression of the weak, and a base and abject prostitution of ones self, can
get riches hastily and in great abundance.

To win gold, the earth must be dug and hollowed, the metal drawn from
thence, separated from other matter, purified from its dross, melted, refined,
broken, and beaten a thousand ways before that it can be made into a mass; the
hardness of skin, the blackness and sweat which the body contracts in that base
exercise, sufficiently represents to us the contagion and impurity of that
metal. I assure you, my Child, you must suffer more pain and sordid drudgeries
than all these, to gather great riches, and when you have got them, it is to no
purpose. Gold in the ingot is but a mass of ostentation and show, if it be not
put to use, how much do you think must it still endure from the file, hammer,
sheers and wheel, before it can be made current money?

Great Possessions without being employed, like gold in a mass, serve only for
a show, and to make that, how many mouths are to be fed, how many orders
dispatched, how many accounts to be revised, and how much care and
circumspection must be had, to which a moderate desire is not at all subject?
To conclude, the distribution of riches (without the stamp of Charity, which is
the coin of the Prince that bestows them on us) cannot be lawfully performed,
no more than the passing of coined gold, if it want the impression of the
Sovereign.

So that a rich man is accountable for all he possesses; if he make ill use of
it, he is punishable as well for having hid, as for having inconsiderately
scattered his treasure. Poverty which men propose to avoid, is the chastisement
of the covetous as well as the prodigal; the one suffers it already by his
sparing, the other is in a fair way to it by his profusion, his train, the
luxury of his table, rich movables, stately houses: In a word, his
magnificence and splendor are the attendants of his funeral pomp.

Be moderate then in the desire of having, and judicious in the managing of
riches; if I leave you but little, I hope your own industry and the goodness of
God will supply what you want: behave your self with honor in the profession
which your birth obliges you to follow; soon or late you will therein find the
end of your life, or a supply of what is necessary to maintain it. Above all
things touch not the goods of another, and especially of the poor, for the rich
defends his own, but the other is more exposed to prey; take never any
advantages of the necessities of the poor.

I enjoy the house where we live by a decree of Court, having asked leave of
the owner to bid for it, and when I saw that the Creditor left him nothing, my
year and days possession being expired, I freely presented him with a gratuity
of the tenth part of my purchase, to the end that he might not leave his
inheritance empty-handed. God and the ancient possessour are my witnesses, that
he might have still been the master of it, if he had had no other impediment
but from me. More than this, I paid that respect to the next in kin, not to
bid for the purchase without his consent, and all this without either
acquaintance, particular friendship or relation to either of them: They are
still alive, let them and my own conscience give me the lie, if I speak any
thing but what is true.

I propose to you, my Son, this domestic example, to the end that you may
never make a violent entry into another man's inheritance, and that you regard
more the poor man that is undefended, than the rich; though the Laws abandon
him to you, which allow us many things that charity forbids, yet abate a little
of their rigor for your soul and conscience sake: consult but that, and put
your self in the place of the poor, and your own sense will teach you how you
ought to treat him. In the Scripture, he that said to the debtor that was not
able to pay, Render what you ow me, was as rigorously punished, as if he had
exacted what was not his due. Draw from that divine fountain this fair lesson,
that your desire should not only be moderate in matters which belong not to
you, but likewise so much even in things that are your own, that you may be
able to renounce them without regret when they destroy charity.

When I would have you thus indulgent to others, I mean not that you your self
should be miserable, seeing it is just that your pity begin at home, your
charity regards your self more directly than your neighbor; but if you have
more than what you stand in need of, lay it out freely and cheerfully for the
necessities of others.

Lay not up before hand the revenues of many years, a years rent ought to
suffice you, but neglect not that neither, experience tells you that the
present lives by the last years crop, and that the gain of yesterday feeds to
day the workman; the providence of God would be offended, if yours were
negligent; neither would I have you imagine that you owe all your subsistence
to your self; old wine grows sour, and the vermin consume old corn, you will
labor in vain for a new harvest, if God be not pleased to give the season.

Join your assistance with his in the getting of goods, and use them as you
ought, spoil not their name by a bad usage; and since riches are called means,
let them be so to you, I pray, for the satisfaction of your own, and the
necessities of your neighbor.

CHAP. IV. Of the Will of a Child, that it is a rude and indigested reasoning
of the Soul, and how it ought to be guided with moderation.
I Come now, my Children, to treat of your Will, which I discover not in you,
but after the two first appetites, whereof I have discoursed before: for albeit
every action presuppose the will of him that does it, yet that of a Child
appears so troubled and obscure in the desire of feeding it self, and of having
all that it sees, that I ascribe it rather to a blind impulse of nature, than a
voluntary inclination. The Will is a motion of the Soul made with deliberation;
and, I think, there is not any in these two first appetites.

I perceived not, my Son, that you had a will, but in the first resistance that
you made to mine; I consider it in that age as an essay that you resolved to
make to put your self in liberty, and to enter into the first possession of
your self, to which nature was your adviser; the first man as yet innocent, and
newly formed by the hand of God, did the same; that same appetite wrought in
him (as in you) before his fall.

It is strange, when a Child begins to go, he will have no more the help of
another; when his will begins to dawn, he is unwilling any more to be guided;
as if the desire of acting in liberty were more violent in us, than of our own
security: this appetite being common to all Children, proceeds from nothing
else but a principle of nature, which proposes to man to be as well single and
individual in the functions of body and soul, as he is in the composition of
his person.

When Philip conducts the steps and wills of his Children Armand, Hardowin, and
Charles, it is not one single going nor single Will, it is compounded of
Philips and theirs, and then there is a dissolution of the individual beings of
Armand and Hardowin in what concerns their Wills; so it is no wonder that they
make resistance in obeying him, it is occasioned by an advice of nature that
would act by its own measures, and which imprints in every one of us a desire
of entering as soon as possibly we can into the possession of our selves.

In effect, the headstrongness of a Child is only a rude and gross reasoning of
a soul as yet imperfect, which would betimes enjoy its rights.

My Son, learn to order your will by the fault of the first man; the crafty
Serpent that would deceive you as it did him, is the false object of an
apparent good, and the Woman that tempts you, is the concupiscence and lust of
the eye and flesh, the seat whereof is not far from the place from whence the
first Woman was taken, nor its persuasion less pressing to make you sin, than
hers was: when that accursed counselor comes out of us, we are asleep as Adam
was; for if we had our eyes open we should presently see the deceitfulness of
its counsel.

You are naked in this world without the sense of your nakedness, as he was in
the delightful Garden, but so soon as you resist the will of God and follow
your own, your eyes begin to be opened, your curiosity to know all things, your
avarice which cannot be satisfied, your unlimited ambition, your restless
lusting that skips from one desire to another, discover to you a nakedness
which you did not see before, you lose all to grasp at all.

You can never be happy, my Child, but only by the moderation of your Will. I
require not of you a total renunciation of it, that internal mortification
belongs only to Saints, nor that all things should be indifferent to you, which
is an extravagance of Pyrrhonism; for indeed they are not all so; nor that you
should subject your self to the Stoical severity of these two wild words,
Sustine, Abstine, which have too large an extent. Abstain only from all things
that are unjust, and from desiring that which is not in your power. Support all
the Calamities which you cannot honestly shun, and draw upon your self no new
ones, and your Will shall be such as I would have it.

God gives you not the Senses, of Seeing, Hearing, Smelling, Tasting, nor of
Touching, in vain; nor likewise what is most pleasant and sweet in nature for
their satisfaction: If you abuse either of these blessings, by excess, or a
disdainful contempt of using of them, you are both ways injurious to him that
makes you the Present. If your Table were covered with good Dishes, and your
Guest would taste of nothing but coarse bread, and flat drink, he would
certainly offend you. In this manner do we treat the universal Purveyor of the
World, when we disdain to make use of those excellent things which he has
prepared for us. The Senses make the first trial of the goodness of God toward
men, be content to moderate the excess of them, without stifling the vigor of
their sensation.

I am not the least in doubt, but that there is a more perfect way than this of
going to God; but that belongs only to those transcendent souls, who would
anticipate the enjoyment of him in the middle of their course. As for us, my
Children, who are but of ordinary endowments, let us rest satisfied with the
middle and more easy way of advancing toward him. It is enough for us to meet
him at the end of our career, provided that in the course of our life, we
always did behold him as our last end.

As I would not have you disdainfully and superstitiously refuse the pleasures
which Nature does liberally present you with; so neither is it my meaning that
you should be low and base in bearing of her cross dispensations; the same hand
presents you with good and evil, receive it therefore with the same temper and
countenance.

The Plague that visits you with sickness, and your friends with infirmities
and death; War which beside the confusion that fire and sword does occasion,
comes attended with enmities, quarrels, suits of Law and Famine, which is as
much as a total deprivation of all that is necessary for your subsistence, are
rather the portion and lot of Humanity, than the rods of Gods indignation. He
punishes you with no others, but what your own hands have made; that is, your
ingratitude toward him, the injury done to your neighbor, the hatred and
violence that you use against him, your envy, injustice, avarice, and in a
word, your debauchery and looseness; avoid these, and acknowledge no other evils.

Consider rather the Plague, War and Famine, as three great floodgates, which
are now and then opened to drain the world, when the plenty of its productions
cannot otherwise by the ordinary course be evacuated. So that, my Son, if you
find your self carried away by any of these terrents, or by any other stream
that flows from thence, follow the current without complaining; reverence, and
submit to the immutable decree of Providence; murmur not, nor strive against
the stream, nor wonder at the proceedings of destiny; but know that it is (as
well as your self) obliged to follow it is order, and to run in the channel that
is appointed for it.

When any cross accident befalls you, it is appointed by God, it comes not upon
you at random by a fortuitous inconstancy of chances which hit by guess. There
is such a necessary coherence and concatenation between causes, that like waves
they push one another forward, though we cannot know the original cause of
their impulse, when nevertheless there is one; seeing the smallest effect that
can happen, has its cause. The more immediate may come into our knowledge by
reason of the nearness that it has to its effect: but to trace the progress
from one to another upwards in order, to the fountain head, would be, my Child,
a curious and succesless enterprise.

Be content then to submit your self to what God is pleased to appoint you, and
to be assured that he who has thought you worthy of his creating, will
likewise vouchsafe you his conduct and preservation. the good and had accidents
of your life, carry the character of his Providence, though to you invisible,
as the lowest and basest creatures, the stamp of his omnipotence; and so much
the more wonderfully, that his immensity is contracted in that small draught
and representation.

Thus it is that I would have you apply these two words, Abstine, Sustine, by
patient supporting of the evils that befall you, as having their quarters with
you allotted by the hand of God; those bad guests are enough for you though you
admit of no others: So that you may abstain from what is unlawful and
superfluous, without depriving your self of what is allowed and permitted:
However I should willingly advise you to entertain a very moderate desire even
for the things which are in your power, and not prohibited.

Felicity consists not in more or less, but in the harmony that is between your
desire and enjoyment; it matters you not though both be in small Volume,
provided they be of equal extent. How little soever you have, if you be
therewith satisfied, you are as full as if you desired much, and had it, and in
as great repose. My Child, if you have at hand a small River that may quench
your thirst, search not farther off for a greater which can do no more.

And forasmuch as it is impossible that your Will, whose object is vast,
undetermined, and almost infinite, can be totally regulated according to my
directions, make use of this rule upon all occasions. When you have no body to
consult with about what you are to do, but your self and your own Will, let the
side to which it inclines you most, be always most suspected; but above all,
let not your Judgment be swayed by the preoccupation of your senses, whose
counsel many times goes hand in hand in the same crime with your lust.

CHAP. V. From whence springs the Error of our Will, and concerning Veracity
and Lying.
THE mistakes of our Will, which tends naturally to good, proceed only from our
inability of knowing it. The turbulent passions of Youth, and the prejudice of
an evil habit, do so jumble and confound the notions of real and apparent good,
that reason that comes after, and is formed in us during that tempest, is not
then capable to make the distinction of them: to make that aright, we had need
of the knowledge of good and evil, which is the fruit of the forbidden tree.

It is most certain, that the real nature of things which present themselves to
us, is so hidden, that for want of knowledge of it, our soul is often mistaken
in their choice. When it was asked of the Sun of God, What is truth? He made no
answer, as if he would have by his silence given us to understand, that man was
not capable of that knowledge. Truth, as far as I am able to conceive it, is a
conformity of the tongue with the thought, from which results an action which
ought likewise to be conformed to both.

The union of these three things, my Son, is to you so necessary, that if there
be any disagreement amongst them, you efface in your self the Trinity of your
Creator, who would have you made according to his own Image. The Divine word
resembles the power that produces it, as the action which flows from the same.
If you would be framed according to this divine pattern, your words must agree
with your thoughts, and at the very instant your actions will receive the same
delineation.

It may be said, that Man is naturally inclined to good, and never sets himself
to do evil, without some repugnancy in his soul. When he proposes to himself
the doing of any action, the reflection that he makes thereon, is an internal
speech which advises him to the execution of it if good, and endeavors to
divert him therefrom if it be bad. If it be good, his consent agreeing with his
judgment, he performs it publicly, and never conceals it: But if it be bad,
acting then contrary to his internal speech, which is the council of his
Conscience, he is ashamed of his action, does it secretly, and when it is done,
either disguises it or disowns it.

For example, if you meet any one that is going to Church, to visit the sick,
or to comfort one that is in affliction, and if you ask him whither he is
going, he will freely tell you; his thought and expression will be conform to
his action: but if he be going to any place of debauchery, or to commit theft,
murder or adultery, you shall never hear him discover his design, he will put
it in execution under the protection of some by-place, or dark night, as if he
were ashamed to be the complice of an action wherein he can hardly agree with
himself.

So that, my Son, you see that there can never be a perfect concordance betwixt
our thought and free consent, which is an internal speech, but in the design of
a good action. This harmony, which renders a man faithful to himself, and
inwardly true, frames him after the image of God, as on the other hand the
discord of our conscience with our will, makes a lie and a liar, which is the
spawn of the devil.

It is strange! there is nothing that wounds so much the honor of a Gentleman,
as to give him the lie, although he reproach himself often with it, without
thinking that he does so. Child, every time that he cheats, that he foists in
one thing for another, that he dissembles, flatters himself or others in their
imperfections, or that there is the least disagreement between his words and
thoughts, so often is he a liar.

There is nothing that vexes us so much, nor raises more our blood, than the
presence of one that has deceived us. The trouble and displeasure which we
have frequently with our selves, proceeds, it may be, only from this, that our
seducer is always with us. Your Conscience knows it, if it call to you from
within and tell you that you are an Impostor, be not angry if a voice reproach
you so from without, bear the censure and shame patiently, or otherwise strive
to amend.

My dearest Children, Sons and Daughters, if ye desire that I should be
satisfied with you, I charge you above all things that ye be true, and though
the eldest of you be not as yet seven years old complete, ye are already
capable of the veracity that I desire in you; at present it consists only in a
Yea and a Nay, conform to your knowledge: it is far more easy for you to form
a real notion of a thing that is, than a false image of what has no being;
truth may be expressed without art and study, but a lie has need of both.

The Gentry of our Nation has better understood the ugliness of his Vice than
any other Country whatsoever, judging a lie to be the greatest and most
insupportable affront, not to be repaired but by blood. True Nobility having
its rise from virtue, one cannot give a Gentleman a lie, and not forthwith
reproach him that he degenerates, and that he thereby forfeits his quality. A
liar to satisfy his vanity, or to please the person whom he flatters, cozens,
or fears, is guilty of felony against God who sees all things, in whose
presence he speaks a falsehood. It is very certain that we ought justly to
resent that reproach, provided we have truth on our side; but if we tell a lie
indeed, we boldly maintain to God, Man, and our own Conscience, a falsity which
it internally disowns. Think therefore, my Son, that you cannot sufficiently
abhor a crime which plunges you in the abyss of this confusion.

Though some of our actions be indifferent, yet (with the good leave of our
Casuists) there is not any the least lie that can be so, though even it were
officious. For by that, the faithfulness of commerce betwixt God and man, and
betwixt man and man, is broken. Your tongue is the instrument of your soul,
which is the thing alone that you have still in your own power.

Make use of it, my Friends, according to the intent of nature that bestows it
on you, in expressing your thoughts with sincerity, until that a more ripe and
advanced age may render you fit for the other functions of life, which are
Studies and Exercises.

CHAP. VI. Studies and Exercises ought to be jointly performed.
AS the Body and Soul, my Children, are formed and bred both together, so
likewise after the same method should we endeavor to accomplish and perfect
them in company. And therefore it is my opinion (though the common practice be
contrary) that ye follow your Exercises and Studies at one and the same time;
to the end that by an alternate progress and regress from your studies to your
exercises, and from your exercises to your studies, you may with more profit
and less tediousness perform your course, than when you are forced with one
breath to run the career of either.

Nature gives us this lesson in all her productions; when she forms a flower,
its stalk, bud, blossom, color and smell, advance jointly with so equal a
pace, that it is her last stroke alone which finisheth all its parts.

My Child, the body and the soul are two twins whereof you are composed; if you
neglect the one, to take care only of the other, you are the stepfather of that
which you forsake, they crave both your care at one and the same time: when by
exercises you have rendered your body healthful, well disposed and nimble, it is
all in vain, your business is but half done, without the concourse of the good
qualities of the soul, to wit, of sciences and virtues which depend on study.

The fable of the Poets tells us, that the Tutor of Achilles was half-man and
half-horse, to hint to us that Studies and Exercises should be learnt jointly:
it calls him likewise the Son of Esculapius the God of Medicine, because the
indisposition of body, and sicknesses, are the obstacles and hindrances in the
progress of an accomplished life. Occasion is bald, and Fortune inconstant,
they are both to be taught by a cunning catch, or not at all, and therefore a
moment of time lost by sickness may snatch them out of our hands.

CHAP. VII. Of Exercises. Of Riding, Dancing, Fencing: and of the agility of
Body and Hand.
APply your selves then, my Children, to those exercises which render the body
healthful, strong and nimble, and at the same time neglect not your Studies;
but ye must pass from the one to the other so regularly, that the change may
seem rather the divertisement of your work, than the alteration of employment.

Amongst Exercises, Running, Wrestling and Jumping, preserve a good disposition
of body, and are of great use for the Wars: but having often observed the most
part of those who have excelled in these three, become gouty, and grow old
before their time; Armand, my eldest Son, I advise you not to use them, you
have too hot and boiling a temper to keep moderation in such exercises, you are
so excessive in every thing you do, that I am afraid lest by spending and
dissipating much of your spirits in bodily action, you may have no more left
for the functions of the soul: if their restlesness, which never allows you
repose; relent not a little, as you grow in age, the fountain of them being
unable to supply their activity, it may be that I may have the grief to survive
you according to the course of Nature, although I be six and fifty years older
than you. Take heed to it, my Son, and refrain those violent exercises, or be
very moderate in them. As to your Brothers, whose natural constitution is more
temperate than yours, I allow them all that I forbid you.

I am rather of the mind that you learn to ride the great Horse well. By this
exercise a man fashions the carriage of the body, and at the same time the
Horse is managed. In it a man is taught how to sit, carry his body, hold his
legs, his foot, and his hand, either for the bridle or switch, to make the
Horse obey whatever he is bid do. And in all these things, there must be a
great deal of patience, whereof your restless temper has much need.

Be satisfied to acquire a competent skill in this exercise, without applying
your self to it over much; to excel in it one must know the nature and
particular temper of every horse, and it is to be feared that by too much
familiarity with them, as they may retain somewhat of the man, so by the same
reason we may contract a little of the beast.

Slight not Dancing, which is a motion of the body that adjusts it self with
measure to the rising, mean, or falling of the voice or instrument that is
played on. There is no man of what condition soever, nor any nation whether of
the new or old world, that loves not Dancing. Disturb not that universal
consent by a singular and private repugnancy; our new Reformers who condemn it,
show as little reason in this as in the rest, for leaving the common cadence.
By Dancing you will acquire a graceful carriage, provided you subject not your
self too much to the rule of Art. A master teaches you your steps, but the air,
port and liberty of body must come from your self: As there is something rude
and barbarous in slighting this exercise, there is likewise somewhat too soft
and effeminate in striving to excel in it.

A woman is to know no more of this, than what is consistent with modesty, nor
a man more than the decorum of his condition will admit of, lest that otherwise
he may transfer unto his feet the care that he ought to have of his head.
Dancing is to be learned, to satisfy with some order the impulses of blood and
spirits which move and stir in a young body: but as soon as ever they are
settled and a calm in our veins and arteries, we must bid adieu to the Ball.

There is yet another exercise which you cannot be without, and that is the
handling of the Sword. You carry it not as an ornament, it is rather
cumbersome; nor for the security of your person, since you live under the
protection of the Laws. The Gentry carry it, as being the instrument of their
profession, which is to be always ready for the service of the Prince. You are
covered with no other arms but this, which is rather an offensive than
defensive weapon, to instruct you that you are more obliged to shed the blood
of your Princes enemies, than to preserve your own. You carry it in time of War
for the service of the State, and in time of Peace to distinguish you from the
common people, and that they may also respect you as being armed for their
defense. If you make use of it against them, unless it be on your own defense,
you profane it, and deserve to have it taken from you, as having defiled it
with base or with innocent blood.

Learn to use it for the maintaining of your honor, for though you live under
the protection of Laws, yet the same Laws, if one transgress them by doing you
an injury, should have in vain allowed you to carry it on the side of your
heart, if it was their meaning to deprive you of the liberty of drawing it to
repel an injury. The lawful ground of using it, is a blow with the fist,
threatening, injurious contempt, accusing one of a dishonorable crime, the
upbraiding of one with a shameful imperfection, and the lie: But I still
understand it with this condition, that if you be accused of a vice whereof you
are guilty, or receive the lie for a thing which is indeed false, that both
these reproaches be to you rather an occasion of amendment than revenge: in
this rencounter bend your force against your self.

When you are obliged to take Sword in hand, make use of that which hangs by
your side, a long Tuck is only for Hectors or Robbers. If you exercise your
self with the foil, (though it be in the Fencing School it self, or at home in
your house) let it be with doors shut, and your particular friends: take not up
the Fluret in all sorts of places, that is, the vanity of a Fencing-master. Be
not too vehement nor too frequent in that exercise; and above all things when
you are upon a Journey, beware that foils may never be seen to make a part of
your equipage, as I have often seen at Court: let the master of that equipage
pardon me, if he please; but he gives me ground to suspect that he stood in
greater need of a breast plate. My Son, be a little more liberal of your flesh,
and venture your body, rather than such precaution should give occasion to make
you suspected of fear, or that you have in your head some design of a combat.

As concerning Hunting, which is permitted to great men and to the Gentry, I
dare not advise you that pastime, because it contains in it some hidden poison;
for though it render a man active, vigilant and laborious, yet there is a
certain venom mingled with that exercise which bewitches and brutifies him that
is too much addicted to it. If it appear to be chaste, virtuous and innocent,
like the Goddess who is the Patroness thereof, yet its effect is barren, and
brings forth no more than she. He that pursues it as passionately as that
famous hunter of Antiquity, exposes himself to the same misfortune; that having
hunted much, finds at last the idol of his pleasure to be a very naked thing,
grows brutish, and becomes himself at last like the beast that he hunts, a prey
to his own dogs.

Hunting is of great use in time of Peace, forasmuch as it keeps the Gentry in
breath, and affords an innocent diversion to spirits that are impatient of
repose. In time of War it is quite contrary, for it applies to private pleasure
the service which is due to the Prince and public. Observe, my Son, in fine,
that excepting great Cyrus, there was never any great hunter a great Conqueror.

To conclude, my Children, what I have to say concerning your Exercises, I give
you this advice more, that you never meddle with any but such as may conduce to
you health, or become your quality, even though you might excel in others.
Renounce all sorts of dangerous leaps, juggling tricks, and slights of hand; let
Juglers and Gypsies enjoy their own trade.

All these things are like the works of -- where there is much dexterity, but
very little usefulness. None but the rabble are taken or concern themselves
with them; nevertheless I condemn them not as superfluous, since it is not
altogether unprofitable in the Government that fools should divert fools.
Neither do I fobid you to see some time all the Bartholomew-fair Shows, I
rather advise you to it, and to reason from thence, that seeing the body and
mind of man is capable of a great many idle subtilties which seem impossible,
if he excel not likewise in things that are necessary, it is only for want of
pains and good application.

CHAP. VIII. That the first knowledge of Man should be that of himself. That he
ought to know the apartments of the place of his abode, which is the World and
Arithmetic.
NOW as concerning your Studies, I think that man ought to be to himself the
first subject of his enquiry, and that he cannot handsomely desire to be knowing
abroad, and ignorant at home. Indeed if we desire to pry into the knowledge of
things that are without us, how low soever they may be, we shall find these
that are below, equally unknown to us as those that are above us.

We shall as little understand the nature of Hyssop, as of the Cedar; or of an
Head-worm, which is but an excrement of our skin, as of an Angel, which is a
middle Being betwixt God and Man. This first enquiry into our selves, ought to
be so natural, that I cannot enough wonder that men have so much esteemed that
famous Inscription on the Temple of Apollo in Delphos, Nosce te ipsum, Know thy
self; seeing that there is no man, how weak soever, that puts not often to
himself this question, (What am I?)

So that Man might be better defined, an enquiring Creature, than a rational
Creature. If he were naturally rational, all his actions would spring from a
wise consultation of mind, which is that we call Reason: but in respect that
the inclination of his Will is oftener hurried by an external impulse of sense,
that dwells only on shows and appearances, than by an internal trial and
examination of mind, which makes the difference between real, and apparent,
good; let all antiquity pardon me if it please, that I agree not with in it
this, that Man is a Rational Creature. He may become so, but that he can be so
without study, and exerting acts of Reason, is what I cannot conceive. Reason
is rather a quality proper to Man, than essential to him alone. Let us call the
understanding of an Elephant, Horse or Dog, what we please, it is not without
reflection, which is a kind of reasoning, no more than our own.

If these three Creatures had not had some spark of our understanding, we could
never have become so familiar together, nor have been employed respectively (as
we are) in the service of one another. I do notwithstanding confess, that their
understanding is far short of ours, and so obscure, that it is not to be
discovered but upon a near view; which gives us ground, that we may not own
them as our brethren, to call it rather an Instinct, than Reasoning.

Probably there are none but Man capable of Reason, but that he is always
rational, is against experience: The essential difference which agrees with him
alone, and distinguishes him from all other Creatures in the world, is to be
Enquiring. As there is none but he that doubts, it belongs only to him also to
desire to know. Every Man, young or old, good or wicked, poor or rich, ignorant
or learned; in a word, of what condition soever he be, is hourly and
continually an enquirer.

My Son, before you came into the world, you remained nine months shut up in a
Den, living only the life of a Vegetable: but so soon as you became capable of
the Sensitive, you your self put your senses in the possession of their rights,
by breaking the prison of the Womb.

Child, render to your Soul the same good Office; its Functions for some time
lie stupefied under the imperfection of matter to which it is coupled: As soon
as you finding make the least effort, to get out; be not wanting to its
assistance. At first your knowledge will be muddy and confused, like the
knowledge of those who are stunned by a great fall. After your fall into this
world with your head downward, and your lying benumbed nine months in the womb
of your Mother, and as many years in the darkness of Infancy; when you begin to
come out of that primitive Syncope, put to your self that question, as they
when they come out of their trance, What am I? or, Where am I?

Assist the first informations of your Soul by the ministry of your Senses.
When you see here at home, that my Dogs serve to watch and guard my House, my
Horses to carry me, my Oxen to labor my ground, my Sheep and Poultry to feed
and cloth me, what can you think, but that he for whose use all these things
are made, has some preeminence above them? By this you see that Man (which you
are) is the most perfect Creature which you know.

Consider in this place, my Son, the wonderful Economy of the Creator of the
world, who to prevent all emulation and envy, amongst the infinite number of
his Creatures, has not thought fit, that any one being, should know another
better than it self. Plants are satisfied with the Vegetative Soul, the
Sensitive being unknown to them. Insects having no other notion of perfection
but of what belongs to themselves, are without doubt destituted of the
knowledge of what they want, as other Creatures bear without repining the
knowledge which we have, whereof they have no Idea.

Upon the same ground we may say, that there is not so much as one man who does
envy the nature of Angels, of the excellence of which we conceive no notion,
but under the image of a form unknown; nor that there is so much as one man
that in all respects and relations would make a total and entire change with
another; because that neither of the two wishes can be made without desiring
the annihilation of our Kind, or individual Being, to which Nature cannot
consent. This progress mounts from Kind to Kind, and from Creature to Creature,
up to God, to the end that every thing should so much the more closely be knit
to him, that it is pleasantly deceived by this flattering illusion, that it is
it self alone which is the favorite of the Almighty.

Son, having discovered what you are, let us now see where you are. If you rest
satisfied to know nothing here below more accomplished than Man, you have
matter of humiliation, in respect that the place of his abode, is the common
habitation of all sorts of Creatures, and the lowest Story of the world.

But such-as it is, since it is appointed to him for his residence, and he to
have the use of it, he cannot be ignorant of its parts and apartments, without
slighting the Architect that bestows on him the Possession of the same. And
therefore I would have you, before all things, learn Cosmography: A Map and a
Sphere will furnish you with a draught of the Heavens and the Earth in a small
compass. And since there is not a corner of the world which has not been
discovered by men, within these hundred or sixscore years past, there is not a
part thereof which you may not every day review in your mind, and go so far,
till there remain no farther to be gone.

The knowledge of the Ancients comes short of ours in this point. In the first
place they knew nothing at all of the New World, which is greater than the Old,
and of the Old they have allowed but two parts to be habitable, the other three
they judged desert, by reason of cold, or the excess of heat; which, in my
opinion, was no very good way of Philosophising, to render Nature idle, and
unactive in so great an extent of Countries.

It had been much more probable to have believed, (as it has been since found
out) that Nature, which makes nothing in vain, had accommodated the
constitution of Man to the temper of the Climate where he was to live: That
under the Poles she had condensed his skin, (which is the effect of cold) and
so rendered his Pores less transpirable, that he might suffer less inconvenience
from cold; and that even for an additional supply, she had made cold Countries
fruitful in Furs. And as to hot Countries, where day and night are alike in
length, and where the Returns and Vicissitudes of Seasons are almost
imperceptible, there was great appearance, that the course of Man's life should
have been there more uniform and healthful, and consequently, that in such
Climates Inhabitants should not be wanting.

And indeed there is no part of the world, discovered, where men live longer,
and in better health, than under the torrid Zone. It is there alone, where men
feel but little of the Curse of Original sin; the Earth, without being
labored, yielding to them of its own accord all that is necessary for Food and
Raiment.

My Son, exercise your Studies in this Science, which is of great use; provided
you make the right application of it. By considering the small extent of the
Earth and Water, which make up but one single Globe, and which is no more than
a Point in respect of Heaven, you may make a reflection on the vastness of the
Universe, which will raise your thoughts to a Metaphysical contemplation of the
immensity of God, who is the Author of it; as on the contrary, the small Globe
which you possess of this Point of Earth, in regard of the whole, will teach
you a Lesson of Christian and Moral Humility, by making you understand the
smallness of your portion.

It is likewise very necessary for the understanding of Natural and Civil
History, in respect that the general division of the world by Limits, and the
latitude of the several Parts, and the subdivision thereof into Principalities,
according to the Confines, Rivers, chief Cities, Manners and Government of
every several State, are so many Retreats and different Stations, where the
Memory, which is naturally fluid, fixes and rests, and where it takes breath
again to form to it self an order and method, without which it can never but
confusedly dispose of its Magazine and Store.

Having got some knowledge of the place of your abode, and where you live,
which is the Earth, seeing the course of your life is made up of hours, days,
nights, weeks, months, and years, the unequal measures of which depend on the
revolutions of the Sun, and the diverse faces and appearances of the Moon; I
would advise you to study the particular Theory of both these Luminaries:
Further than that, inform your self but little of what else is above you.

Leave to the Curious the Reveries that go current in the world concerning the
extent of the Heavens, the matter whereof they are composed, their number,
motion, and the influences of Celestial Bodies on ours; all which things have
given Being to a Science; the vanity of which appears in this, that a good
Astronomer, or Astrologer, seldom makes a good Statesman. The wonders of Heaven
are not manifest to Man, but when he looks down upon the Earth: The light and
power which emanates from that Divine source, being unperceptible to the eye
and mind of Man, but by the reflection which we see thereof here below amongst
our selves.

Arithmetic is absolutely necessary for the practice of Geography, and for
that part of the Sphere, which I would have you know: Learn it at the same time
you learn the others, even to its Fractions; leave the rest, which are the
broken and figurative numbers to such as desire to excel in Algebra, which is a
Science too subtle and abstracted for the commerce of humane society.

And for as much as we all have naturally an original Arithmetic, which is
formed in us by the sight of the plurality of several individuals which present
themselves to us to be considered without confusion, and that Cosmography is
rendered palpable and sensible to the eye, by the Anatomy which is made on the
Globe of the parts of the World, I propose them to you as the first Elements of
your knowledge; for your instruction in which, I follow Nature as much as I
can, as my chief guide.

CHAP. IX. That History informs Man of the transactions of the World, and that
it is necessary to know it.
IN pursuance of this order, it is not enough for you, my Child, to know who
you are, nor what is the place of your abode; you must also have some knowledge
of that which passes in this place; for that purpose, Nature has thought fit
that Memory should be first of the three faculties of the Soul which manifests
it self in Man, that it might be the guardian of his first informations; to it
History does properly belong; which is divided into two Heads, the one is
Natural, which is a general collection of the particular works of Nature; and
the other Civil, which is another collection of all the particular acts of Men.

So that the true subject matter of History taken in its source and principles,
is only individuals and particular things, from which the Memory draws its
first knowledges. My Son, exercise your self in both: But I would have you lay
Chronology and Cosmography, which are two dependances on natural History, as
the basis and foundation of Civil: They will acquaint your memory with the
circumstances of Time and Place, without which it is impossible that it can
retain any thing in order.

Natural History regards the actions of Nature, and the Civil, the actions of
Men; from the one is drawn a Natural and Physical Reason, and from the other a
Politic Judgment: And seeing that you are to live with men, it is my opinion,
that you apply your self first to this last Study, and reserve the other for
your retreat, and for the latter season of your life.

Though History be of much worth, as being the guardian of the reputation of
illustrious men, and of notable examples which have happened before our times,
yet I find it, and particularly our modern History so defective, that instead
of presenting to us a true relation of things as they are, or have been, it is
only the Gazet of them, where there is nothing more faithfully recorded than
the trifles, and the matters of small consequence.

In effect, when a man would make it his business to trace backward the time
past, which now is no more: To examine the motions of time, which was not as
yet our own: To expose to view the natural inclinations of those with whom we
have had no converse or correspondence: To give sentence upon the suspense and
irresolution of a Council to which we have not been called, to dive into the
secret of a Prince whose confident one has not been, and to draw such a
Picture of these and all other things which have been unknown to us, as may
satisfy the Spectator, and him that is on the Stage, is a thing altogether
impossible.

Notwithstanding of this, my Child, I would have you read History with all its
imperfections; for though it be defective in its Circumstances, it is solid in
the bulk, in that it lays open public actions, brings back the image of past
ages, and turns toward us the inside of men and affairs, to submit them to our
Judgment. Memoirs, Letters, public Records, Chronicles, Lives, particular
Relations, Annals, and Journals, are so many different Storehouses, from whence
are taken the examples which seve for a groundwork to Humane Prudence. All
these things are a connection of what is past with the present; whereof the
issue and success of the one, is a direction to the other.

Above all, apply your self to the reading of the Lives of illustrious men, and
propose to your self some one for your imitation. The Lives of particular men,
which have some single person for subject; in the texture of which there is a
mixture of great matters with small, of slight things with matters of weight,
and of private actions with public concerns, discover is man a Wart as well as
an Ulcer, and may furnish to one a Model of Life, provided that there be some
proportion in quality and condition between the Original and the Copy. A Prince
must make choice of a Prince for his example, and a Subject of a Subject,
otherwise their measures will either be too short, or too long.

As to those great Lives, which seem to be beyond imitation, to admire them we
must look upon them at distance as upon Colosses, lest that seeing them near at
hand, we may perceive them to be nothing but a cast piece, or tempered Mortar;
and so we see that they never suffer themselves to be known of any in
particular, but by the means of their own prepossessed Domestics.

I wish we had in writing the Particulars of the Lives of the Duke of Weimar,
and of the Mareschals of Guebriant, and Gassion. The first is a brave Pattern
for a Prince stripped of his Dominions, and the two other for a Gentleman who
designs to raise his Family; though the last two have not been on the fairest
place of the Stage as the former, yet they have been as conspicuous. The course
of these three Lives, which have had no other end but Virtue to raise them to
what they were, is an illustrious carreer which would present a lovely
spectacle. I speak nothing of the Living; for besides that they may still fall
into escapes, their modesty, it may be, or their self-love might be offended at
my Judgment.

The Life of the Chevalier Wayard, is, in my opinion, one of the most lovely
Lives which I have ever read, and the true pattern to a Gentleman: This was the
Chevalier without fear, and without reproach, and who was so equally valiant
and good, that one cannot tell in which of these two Virtues he has most
excelled. My Son, I will have his Life to be the first History that you read,
and the first that you give me an account of; strive to imitate him as much as
you can; you cannot but write well after so fair a Copy. If you cannot reach
his valor, which is without example; be faithful to your Prince, and courteous
as he was.

CHAP. X. Of fabulous History, and of Romance.
BEside the true, there is also a fabulous History, which is that of Romance;
the reading of which I do not forbid you. A Romance is nothing but a History
made at pleasure, wherein the mind of Man gives full reins to his imagination,
to form to it self an image of perfection, to which the power of Man cannot
attain, which is a certain mark of the immortality of the Soul, when it appears
more perfect in its notions, than it can be in action. Indeed, the most pompous
things, the most accomplished order, and the least expected variety, is that
which pleases us most.

True History represents to us only things as they are, with all their faults;
their events depend more on Fortune than Reason, and the narration becomes very
often tedious, because it gives account of no extraordinary success; when on
the contrary every thing in a Romance is great, there Virtues and Vices are
extreme, and always recorded according to the measure of merit. A thousand rare
and unforeseen Adventures there, surprise the Reader, and keep him always in
breath, in expectation of some other novelty which may prove still more
wonderful. In fine, the Soul elevates it self by this reading, and it comes
often to pass, the being instructed by the excellent qualities of some
imaginary Hero, it retains in effect some real impression of them; or some
horror of Vice, from the borrowed shape of the villainous.

I believe, this was the reason, why Alexander the great allotted that rich
Cabinet of Darius for the Books of Homer, whether that he had a mind by that
action to make some acknowledgment to him who had assisted to his breeding, by
the example of the imaginary Hero's of his Iliads; or that he thought it just
to give a share of the booty of his Conquests to him that had shaped him his
first design in the Expedition of Troy. It is almost impossible to read a good
Romance without feeling in our selves an aversion from vice, or our desires
touched with the emulation of the brave actions which we read therein.

It is certainly true, that the morality which made the first impression on my
hear, was that which I read in the Amades, where I found vice always punished,
virtue rewarded, the promise inviolable, and valor in the highest pitch that
it can rise to: And therefore I cannot forbid you the reading thereof. But for
my Daughters, if they will take my word, they should refrain the reading of all
Romances, and this above all others, forfear they may learn what is not fit for
them to know. In my opinion, the most dangerous Romance of all, is Astrea,
which by the variety of many amorous Histories, woven all in the same strain,
secretly kindles in young hearts that natural and sweet passion, which has its
train laid in the spirits and blood; and though there be it that work, discreet
and wise Counsels to prevent the taking fire, yet that hot and fiery Age, which
is more capable of burning than Reason, will not at all hear them: So that I
think that Book only fit to be read at an after season, when these wanton
flames are extinguished.

Such Romances as begin with the birth of their Hero's, the progress of whose
lives interwoven with pretty Adventures being traced in order to the end, are
those wherein I find greatest instruction. I look upon them as on a perfect
body, whereof at one only glace we see all the beauties placed in their order.

As to such Romances which begin with some Adventure of the Life of their Hero,
which serves for the groundwork of the whole invention, being too subtle,
they affect me less than the others; because their gracefulness appears only in
confusion, and the mind is always obliged to be upon the scout to rally
together the scattered pieces which make up the History, as if the Author
intended to go snips with his Hero, in the attention of his Reader for the
finding out of his order and method.

The ancient Philosophers have represented to us Heroical Virtues in efforts
and duties, which surpass the force of Man, that they might give him an aim,
and advance them to the outmost confines of the power of Nature. Romances have
done the same more ingeniously than Philosophers, in that they have proposed
them to us in a subject endowed with them; and by consequence they take better
with our imagination under that last shape, which is in some manner material,
than under the former, which is merely natural.

It is most certain, that the Idea of these brave, though feigned
Presentations, is able to instill into great Souls such a Principle of
emulation, that it is probable that some part of the extraordinary actions
which have been performed in the Wars, have drawn from this Principle the
boldness of their execution.

It may not without reason, be thought strange, that I have handled seriously
so frivolous a matter, and that I have made it an Article of my Will and
Testament. Romances, may Son, are an infirmity of the times; it has been mine,
and it may be perhaps thine; though the subject be vain, yet it cannot miss of
a good effect, if one can but soberly and judiciously peruse it.

CHAP. XI. Of the different ends of Studies, according to the diversity of
Spirits. That it is very necessary that Kings should be learned.
HItherto, my Children, by the reading of History to which I advise you, and
Romances which I forbid you not, I have only set a task to your memory and
imagination, which are the two weakest faculties of the Soul. It remains now
that I should entertain you with what may be useful to the forming of your
Judgment, which are your other Studies, in the use whereof every one proposes
to himself a different end.

Some there are who content themselves with a slight tincture of learning, and
especially with some skill in the Poets, (which they call Humanity) and are
well satisfied with their pains, if they can but gain some esteem in the
private conversation of those they meet. No Learning can be called Humanity,
unless it be good; nor good, unless applied to a more solid use than the
laziness of an unactive life.

Beside, what perfection soever one may acquire it that kind of knowledge being
but superficial; instead of real esteem, it produces but ordinarily a vain
echo of fame, which answers no longer than the conversation lasts.

There are others who employ all their Studies about the quaintness and
elegancy of diction, whether in speech or writing, and never heed the weight of
Reasons which the matter whereof they treat does require. Words, which should
represent to us the real notion of things, notwithstanding of what ornament and
dress they may have, are no more but air and illusion, if the strength of
reason give them not solidity, and a body. Beware of that gingling harmony, as
of a snare which you lay, or is laid for you to catch the Judgment by the ear.

Whether you speak of write, covet no other diction but what is most proper and
significant to express the notions of your mind. The diversity of faces
proceeds only from the diversity of spirits, and the difference of style from
the difference of temper and humor.

A dull man will be slow and heavy, a crafty man will have cunning fetches, a
babbler will be diffused and tedious, a hudling shuffler confused, a deceiver
ambiguous, it is the only frank and honest man that will be clear and near in
his words. Let your style then, in speaking or writing, have no other end but
to represent in the most genuine manner you can, the real image of the notions
of your mind. if so you do, besides that you will accustom your self to be
candid and true, by setting your self out by word and writing to be what you
are, you will without Art and Study insensibly become eloquent.

There are others who study, that they may fit and accommodate to business what
they have learnt, and that is the science of the Law and Government; for
although those men who are mere Statesmen, have some sufficiency in the
dispatch of business, and the Judgment exact enough in ordinary matters,
nevertheless, when any question of State of great importance, comes to be
discussed, as a League or Alliance betwixt two Crowns, a Rupture or Treaty of
Peace betwixt them, it is most certain, that those who have studied, having by
the means of learning acquired a more universal knowledge, do penetrate
further, and are more judicious in such affairs, than such who have only the
ordinary Job-trot of State. However, before they be called to that, it is
absolutely necessary that experience have rectified the precepts of the School,
and the Court their use and application: the circumstances which do usually
attend great affairs, not permitting that one can judge of them merely by the
rules of art. Learning perfects nature, and experience learning; the former
makes the Scholar, and the latter the Master.

And forasmuch as the more weighty affairs concern great men directly, and the
meaner only reflection, I think there are none so much obliged to be learned
and knowing, as Kings, witness the glorious success of our arms and counsels,
which partly proceeds from that lovely knowledge of letters, wherewith our
Princes of the Blood; our chief Ministers, and Generals, are endued.

Upon this subject, the Queen at present shows us in the education of the King,
an extraordinary trace of prudence, having contrary to ancient custom removed
from his Majesty, all young persons, to the end that the government and wise
erudition of those eminent and discreet men, to whom the care and oversight of
his breeding has been committed, being disburthened of that encumbrance, might
be more free in the direction of his manners. Good and evil insinuate
themselves into man only by the eye and ear.

These two gates being well guarded in the conduct of the Prince, and nothing
childish appearing before him, but what may be useful to give him some good
instruction, we shall see his judgment by little and little rectified before
the ordinary season, and his prudence as his majority anticipate that of his
Subject. Experience has often taught us, that it is a dangerous piece of
policy to withhold from young Princes any of the knowledges which they are
capable to receive; soon or late their mind as their body comes out of
pupillage: if then they are sensible that all the notion which they ought to
have, have been sincerely wrought in them, their sense is turned into
gratitude; and on the contrary, into indignation, if they perceive that there
has been any design to stifle and offuscate their knowledge.

In effect arms and letters are so linked together, that the Goddess of the one
is the Goddess of the other: so that there was never any great Conqueror but
who has been learned, witness Cyrus, Alexander, Caesar, and Charlemain,
because that of necessity the actions of the mind, which proceed from knowledge,
must go before the actions of the heart, which consist only in execution; and
that clemency toward the subdued, a yoke more easy than their former, and new
and better Laws, which are the effects of science, are wont to be the most
victorious arms of a Conqueror.

The Progress of a rude and ignorant man, let him be never so stout, goes not
far, witness the Butcheries of Sylla and Marius, which had Rome alone for their
stage; or if it goes far, it is but like a whirlwind driven by a giddy and
irregular impulse, which breaks and scatters it self in its course, and by its
dissipation leaves no other mark of it self, but a stench of sulphur and nitre,
and the desolation of the places where it has past, witness the irruption of
the Goths into Italy. Not only all great Conquerors have been learned but we
may also observe from time to time, that the most learned ages have been the
most warlike: let France be an instance, which was never more learned, nor more
victorious than it is at present. May it not be, that as the vigor of body and
mind are for most part of the same age: so also in the politic body, the glory
of arms and of letters should always have the same season.

How excellent soever notwithstanding Letters are, yet they teach not of
themselves their right use and employment. We may say of them in general, that
they are an instrument for every kind of work, and that Prudence to make use of
them is a science above them all, which is only acquired by a long and
judicious experience in the application of them. And therefore it is that we
see in a great many men of learning, who, not knowing how to employ their
talent, are very ignorant in the actions of life and society; for though the
reading of History may make a man provident and foreseeing, of Poets pleasing
and agreeable, the Mathematics ingenious, Rhetoric eloquent, Logic subtle,
Natural Philosophy speculative, and Ethics and Politics sociable: All these
faculties nevertheless are but stupid and useless, if they be not employed with
judgment; the right and lawful application of them depends more on an original
faculty and economy that is born with us, than on the light which themselves
afford.

CHAP. XII. Of Christian Morality, which consists only in Charity.
THe only study which seems to me to have its force, merit, and use in it self,
is that of Christian Morality, that consists solely in the exercise of Charity,
which comprehends in it the love of God, and of our Neighbor. Child, if your
will propose to it self never to do any thing contrary to these two points,
your virtue, without much art, will be complete. The Morality of the ancient
Philosophers was almost all in words, and so contentious and jangling, that
they would never agree among themselves about the chief good, which is the
object of the will: they have divided and subdivided virtue into so many parts,
that its beauty is no more discernable, by reason of the many wounds and cuts
that have been given it. Let us banish from our mind that multiplicity of
virtues; there is but only one that is to say, Charity, which is the love of
God and our Neighbor; all the rest spring from this Fountain.

It is very considerable, that the ancient Morality has conceived virtue under
a name singular, and that it would not find a word proper enough to express it
in its full extent. For want of that it has been forced to divide it into four
principal heads, and again to subdivide the four principal by a subaltern
division, which instead of one has produced us a swarm of virtues: that
perhaps has been the reason that for want of a notion that reunites the
essence of all that is called Virtue, under one single Idea, the inclination of
ancient Ages has not been so rapid toward the love of it, in respect that
they never considered it but in the particulars, and by a beam reflected only
from some good action.

For example, if a man was patient and void of fear, they called that
Fortitude; if his manners were well regulated, Temperance; if he was equitable,
Justice; and if the conduct of his life was judicious and discreet, that they
called Prudence.

In effect virtue is quite another thing, it is name is singular, in respect
that its true essence proceeding from a simple and single being, bears the
stamp of the unity of its principle. To speak properly, there is no virtue but
in God, man's is but a stream derived from that fountain. Every action of God,
in what we can conceive of it, is only love toward his creatures, and man
being made after his Image, cannot preserve that divine resemblance, unless his
actions have the same end.

So that, my Children, there is no other virtue but that which shapes us after
that divine pattern, and which unites us with him by a common bond of love,
which is Charity: without it, that which we commonly call Virtue, is but the
image and picture thereof. Ancient morality could not (as the Christian has)
find a proper name for it, because it knew not the true source from whence it
springs.

Without that the love of our Neighbor is but mere good will, or rather a
weakness of spirit, that cannot see our like suffer without compassion; as I
have observed before, it is but a dead work, if the love of God quicken it not.
Fortitude, which fears nothing, and suffers patiently pain, and all the cross
and troublesome accidents of life, is a faculty whose acts are savage and
contrary to the tenderness of man; nevertheless it becomes a pleasant and easy
virtue, so soon as the love of God has persuaded us that all these things are
sent by him, and that there is nothing terrible, nor insupportable in nature
but Sin, which destroys that love.

Temperance is a barren virtue, and insipid in its moderation, if it be not
seasoned by the love of God: It is altogether likewise impossible that Justice
can find the center of its equipoise, nor that Prudence can be sufficiently
disinteressed in its conduct, if they receive not a just temper from the same
principle. So that it seems the moral virtues of the Ancients have but only
been simple dispositions to good, and that they deserve not the name of Virtue,
unless Charity stamp them with that character: they all consist in a determined
mediocrity; Charity on the contrary never appears excellent but in overflowing,
as the History of Martyrs sufficiently testifies: it seems to our eyes a piece
of humane folly, because the union that it makes betwixt God and man, is
altogether impossible by ordinary means.

The wise Politicians of past times have, in my opinion, a more clear and
distinct knowledge of this than the ancient Philosophers; they have had some
shadow of the notion which we have of Christian Charity, in reducing virtue to
the duty of the love of ones Country and Religion. As concerning Religion,
though their object was wrong, yet their intention was good, and conform to
ours. And as to the love of their Country, though it respected only their
fellow-Citizens, yet it carried some impression of our Charity, and was only
defective in its extent.

Children, the Ten Commandments of the Law are all reduced to this, that we
love God above all things, and our Neighbor as our self. I Will tell you once
more, that the practice of this Commandment is called Charity, which is a
virtue which alone comprehends all Christian morality, and which far surpasses
the morality of the Schools. In the first place there never was any Philosophy,
Sect, nor Religion, that has had greater regard to the public good, and less
to private interest, that God by the means of This demonstrates to us, that God
by the means of that virtue would imprint in man, as he has in all nature, a
more violent appetite to preserve the whole, than any one part thereof; and
make known to us, that that Law of nature to which all created beings do obey,
and the Law of Christianity which alone conspires in this desire, have been
presented to us by the same hand. When that Law commands us to love our
enemies, and to do good to those that persecute us: forasmuch as they who hate
and persecute us, are many in number, and that we are alone to suffer their
hatred, and bear with their imperfections; it would have our private interest
give place to the concerns of the greater number of mankind, who are our
persecutors, and that we should pray that God would pardon them.

If we have the patience to examine the Christian Doctrine in its original,
though its Author be only known to us by faith, yet so great is the conformity
of its principles with nature, that the Divinity of the Author must visibly
discover it self to us. There is nothing more consonant to nature, than to
acknowledge a first principle, acknowledging him, to adore and worship him, to
unite our selves with him by love, because we depend on him, to admit of no
other Deity but him; not to profane and abuse the majesty of his Name, to
give him a part of the time which he has made, that we may rest as he did, and
contemplate with him the wonders of his works.

Now as to what concerns our selves: it is consonant to nature that man should
be a measure to man. If you desire that your Son should honor you, honor your
Father: if you be afraid that one kill you, defile your Marriage Bed, bear
false witness against you, rob you, or design you the least injury, nature
condemns you, and your own conscience pronounces the sentence, if your heart
and hands preserve not the same innocence for another that you desire for your
self: Tooth for tooth, and eye for eye, is a rude and rigorous Law.

If any one become cruel, must I be so also? it is far more humane to be
indulgent to him; when he deprives me of an eye, he acts against nature, and I
according to it, when I leave him both his. God has indeed showed an act of
goodness which is above nature, in becoming man, but being incarnate, he has
done according to nature, in devoting himself for the salvation of all mankind:
the part should naturally consent to its own annihilation for the preservation
of the whole.

My dearest Children, it is my advice that ye search for no other morality in
your studies, but the practice of this virtue. The Scripture calls it the bond
of perfection, because without it all other virtues are defective; by the means
of this alone (provided it be the fixed point and center, about which your
thoughts, words, and deeds turn, and that ye, have a constant and unshaken
resolution, to eye no other end but what it proposes) you will find your
selves insensibly and without study possessed of all virtues: By doing so you
will form and fashion your souls after the manner and progress of Nature rather
than Art; since the works of Art receive their perfection by degrees one part
after another.

A Lapidary with one stroke cuts not all the points and faces of a Diamond,
whilst he is about the first the rest remain rough and rude: but when Nature
casts any of it is productions into the mould, as a plant or flower, all its
parts have at the same instant an uniform progress. If you study to acquire
virtues by habit, and successively one after another, you will find that when
you labor for Fortitude, you will advance but flowly toward Prudence. When
the Soul exercises the habit of one virtue, it grows negligent in the practice
of another; whereas on the other hand, when we once propose to our selves to
act nothing contrary to the love of God, or the love of our Neighbor, by means
of that predisposition, our mind will be ready of it self to perform the acts
of whatsoever virtue that end enjoins us, as if it were natural to it. But
forasmuch as we cannot but with difficulty attain to that perfection, let us
now consider what are the vices that may be able to hinder it.

CHAP. XIII. Of the vices that spring from Self-love, which is contrary to the
love of God, and of our Neighbor. And in the first place of Pride.
AS the love of God and our Neighbor is he foundation of all virtues; so is
self-love the source of many imperfections, whereof Pride is the first: That
was the sin of the first men, and the first of Angels; the one having had the
presumption to equal the knowledge of God, and the other his power. If the Man
and the Angel newly created by the hand of God, have not had strength to
withstand the internal worm of self-love, how can you defend your self from it,
who are but the excrement of the clay of Adam, and art always beset by the same
Angel, whose self-love set him upon his rebellion. This example ought to humble
you, my Child, and nevertheless it is from this old leaven that the height of
your swelling proceeds.

The happiness of the first man, and the excellence of the chief of the Angels
before their fall, show us that pride is a haughty plant, which grows not but
in the best ground. If you be fortunate, and esteemed of amongst men, be the
more upon your guard, and suffer not that what is good in you, produce with it
that weed which is able to choke it.

The wise man considers a poor man that is proud, as a thing contrary to
nature: we may see the same of a Dunce, and man of no merit, seeing that vanity
springs from confidence, and that there is nothing so suspicious, and so
distrustful of it self as an ignorant: notwithstanding we see sometimes the
ignorant proud, and the poor arrogant. As for the ignorant, it may be it is,
because that man being naturally progressive, the Dunce may have the same
desire to force himself forward as well as the wise, and that perceiving the
stock of his sufficiency to be but small, he would enlarge it by his opinion.

As concerning him who is indigent, and yet arrogant and proud in his power, he
must still feel some strength and vigor in his soul, and some resource that
bears him up in spite of his heavy burden, without that inward support the
pride of every unfortunate man would be but small. To say the truth, boldness
without fortune and merit, is but an Embrio that never comes to perfection, or
if it do, it pines away like an Infant, that has neither Mother nor breast to
feed it.

How imperfect soever that appetite in man to raise himself above what he is,
be, yet I can see nothing that makes me so distinctly conceive the coherence,
that we have with the Creator of the Universe, as the vain efforts which are
discovered in all things created, to put themselves as forward as they can
toward the perfection of their principle; and though there be a certain term
that limits their greatest extent, yet when they attain to that, the design of
rising higher, turns to a desire of preservation: and seeing they cannot do
that but for a short time, they leave in their seed or slips the bud of the
eternity with they have had from God.

I return to Pride, which is so much the more dangerous, that it attacks the
noblest part of man. Avarice is wholly earthly; Love has its seat in the
liver; Anger and hatred in the bilious humors: but Presumption lodges it self
in that part of the brain which it finds emptiest, and that is the Imagination,
which nevertheless it would but very little infect, if men would have patience
to consider the matter whereof this phantome is composed: for indeed whereof is
it that man can be proud? Is it of his birth? in sight of the majesty,
highness, and nobility of his blood, he is still the Son of a man, and perhaps
of a very imperfect creature: Is it of his beauty? that is but an effect of the
harmony of the qualities of his first conformation, the agreement of which has
made the lovely conjunction of the parts whereof he is composed, to which he
has contributed nothing of his own, but rude and shapeless matter.

I cannot be for his riches, for if he want the least thing, and if his desire
be not entirely satisfied, from that very instant he is poor. And less still
for his Places and Offices. Dignities rather confound and jumble together men
of worth, with persons of no merit, than distinguish them. And so it is a kind
of disgrace for a Man of Honor, to be put in the balance with the Villain. Can
it be for his learning? learning indeed, which fills the brain with a confusion
of different and indigested notions, which it heaps one upon another, may well
occasion a tumor; but knowledge which examins all things, and which lets
nothing pass for true, without considering it in all its appearance, is humble,
and letting us see our weakness and imperfection in every thing, discovers to
us the vanities and emptiness of our presumption.

Vanity, Child, is formed very often of the scum of young blood; moderate
therefore betimes the vapors of yours. Fruits that burst before they be ripe
are never good to eat. Experience likewise teaches us that trees which are
graffed near the ground, bear better and fairer fruit than those that are
graffed upon the top of the stocks, there branches only spreading above,
according to the depth of their roots under ground; which is a lesson of nature
to teach us, that our virtues have only their worth and excellence from the
lowness of our humiliation.

The sole of your feet which touches the ground, is the only part which bears
and supports your body; your soul can less stand upright, and produce any good
action, if your humility be not a stay and foundation to it. The humility which
I desire of you is not to kiss the earth, nor the feet of the poor, that
defiles the mouth, and cleanses not much the soul; nor that you should esteem
every man above your self: order requires that you should keep your rank. It is
in this sense that I would have you humble, to wit, if there be any thing that
is good in you, that you acknowledge it to be the gift of God alone, and that
there is nothing your own but your faults and vices.

CHAP. XIV. Of sensual Love.
THe second imperfection which seems to me to sprout from Self-love, is our
Sensual Love, which we name (most improperly) Love; seeing the word Love is
proper only to God alone. Love in its essence is nothing else but a most
perfect union of the thing that loves with the thing loved, which union cannot
be naturally and in order, but betwixt the effect and its cause, and the
Creature and its Creator: If you break that union with your original to make it
more strict elsewhere, it is a spurious and unlawful union which you contract.

So that, My Child, when your love forsakes God to reflect upon your self, that
vain complacency is the Mother of your pride. If it likewise quite him to make
an unlawful reflection upon another, your affection which is then sensual,
deserves no more from thenceforth the name of Love. In fine we may say of that
passion, that it takes to it self its name, according to the different
respects, or the predominancy of the two parts that compose us. If the soul be
hurried away by the body, it is Incontinence, if she be the mistress, and have
the command, it is Love.

It is a wonder very strange, that the heathenish Theology, that is, the
Poetical fictions, and the doctrine of the Gospel, can so well agree about the
things which are attributed to love, that notwithstanding of the contrariety
that there is betwixt sensual and divine love, it seems that to attract on us
the divine love, we must hate all the same qualities which are ascribed to the
sensual.

The Fable represents to us sensual love under the shape of a Child, naked and
blind, with wings to his shoulders, a Bow in one hand, and a Torch in the
other: A Child, because that passion suits well with none but young folks, and
that infancy is a sign of the want of judgment: Naked, because it strips to the
shirt those that are addicted to it, and never procures any good: Blind,
because it puts out the eye of conduct, and that it is impossible to spy the
imperfections of the thing that is loved: With wings at his back, because it is
unconstant and fugitive: A Bow in one hand and a Torch in the other, to
signify to us that Incontinence is nothing but fire and sword.

All these conditions are also necessary to procure divine Love. The mouth of
our Savior has told us, that to come to him we must become like little
children, his example does likewise instruct us that we must be naked, even to
the casting off and denying of our own will; and his doctrine teaches us, that
we ought blindly to captivate our minds to the obedience of faith, that the
wings of hope should bear us up, and that the fire of charity should never be
quenched in us.

My Child, the Fable would have Love to be blind, to give you to understand
that his arms will never single you out of the crowd so as to wound you, if you
your self run not upon the point of them. Stand a little off, and make use of
the Torch of that blind Boy, to let you see his inconsiderateness in his
infancy, his shame in his nakedness, and the wrong aims that he takes in his
blindness. Though the present age furnishes us with examples enough in this
kind, yet to spare the honor of the living, let us make use of the most
ancient of all, which is that of Paris.

Consider this Judge of three Goddesses, who for a flower already plucked,
renounces the plenty of all things, and the glory of Arms and Sciences, of
which he had the choice; nor was the Mistress that was offered to him, either a
Virgin, to show us that virginity ought not to be the prey of a foul desire.
Observe, how that to commit that unlucky rape, it behoved him to violate the
most sacred right of antiquity, which was that of Hospitality; and that during
a ten years Siege, whereof he was the cause; he never appeared for the defense
of his Country, nor in the Counsel, nor in Arms, but once, when he was
overcome. Judge by this, that where that passion rules, faith cease, and
strength and prudence lose their action, as if they were bound by some secret
charm.

We must be blinder yet than that false Deity, to call it, as we commonly do,
good Fortune, to accomplish a desire that is foul in its design, disloyal in
its addresses, painful in its pursuit, dangerous in its execution, and whose
end is often accompanied with ruin, distaste, and shame. That passion has so
much the more need of counsel, that it has its nest and seat in the blood, and
that it begins to kindle in the season when that is most boiling. So we see it
is the most ordinary subject of the Stage, which are established in the
Government, as much for the instruction as the divertisement of the Spectators.

It is not my intention, my Child, here to put you out of conceit with Ladies,
nor that you should avoid them as a Quicksand which threatens you with
inevitable shipwreck; that counsel would be too rude and barbarous: instead of
taking you off from them, (seeing the soul is capable of love, before the body
be of debauchery) I should rather advise you to betake your self betimes to
some fair and lovely person, that is wise, discreet, and somewhat more mature
than you, and that you should endeavor by all means, and do all you can to
gain her esteem. To deserve that you must have a good grace, be discreet,
dextrous, knowing, valiant, and sociable. Do not you think that the desire to
become agreeable to a wise and beautiful Mistress, should not be a most
faithful Counselor for the acquiring of all these good qualities? so long as
to please her, you shall exercise your self in these things, the season of
debauchery will insensibly pass away, and the person whom you have served,
considering you then as the work of her own hands, will love you accordingly.
Then will you be sensible that the union of two lovely souls together, which is
contracted by virtue, without the assistance of the body, has somewhat in it
far more sweet and pleasing, than if it had been more gross and material. The
grace of love never well preserve their natural sincerity, but by the first two
senses, which are Seeing the Hearing; the last, which I dare not name, corrupts
the fruit of it, if the Law which allows it, do not preserve its purity.

It is not that I would have you serve the Mistress that I am speaking of, with
a purpose to marry her, your measures would be too near for a design which
ought to be at greater distance: but it is most certain that he, who as yet
being very young, could place his first affection on some wise female
Counselor, who finding her self obliged by the first fruits of our heart,
should give us to understand that all our pains and courtship is but labor in
vain, and that we can have no share in her esteem, unless we deserve it by
virtue. I confess to you, my Son, that in such a case, if the imperfection of
the stuff we are made of can admit of any amendment, such advice would prove
more useful to us to make men of honor, than any other whatsoever.

I say nothing to you of that brutish appetite, whose impetuosity comes from
the lees of the blood, it deserves neither directly nor indirectly the name of
Love. That you may have in horror that filthithiness, consider only the places
of that infamous prostitution; what their slavery is, what is the nature of the
evils that are there contracted, what stench and symptoms they have, how
difficult the cure is, and how obstinate the contagion; and I am assured, that
having in your mind a lively impression of that visible Hell, you will need no
other documents to guard you from it.

CHAP. XV. Of Hatred.
HAtred is a bad sprout, that springs from self-love: for though virtuous
persons have a natural aversion from the wicked, yet is it much more violent
toward one who has wounded the love that we have for our selves, than to a
public Enemy; and is raised in us for the evil that men wish, or do to us. If
the disorder that a wicked person causes in us, did only terminate in a care
to guard our selves from him, as from a hurtful creature, the wound that we
receive would never rankle, which is of the nature of those hurts whereof the
consent with other parts affected is more dangerous than the wound it self.
Indeed hatred is only a malignant vapor which without intermission makes a
circulation from the heart to the imagination, and from the imagination to the
heart, and which disquiets us day and night, so long as he that is the cause of
it is in quiet. Since it is so, we must kill, if it be possible, that internal
worm of the soul, and not give our enemy the joy to beget it in us, and far
less the satisfaction to see it gnaw and torment us.

We can have but three kinds of enemies, they are either more powerful than we,
or our equals, or inferiors. If one greater than your self hate you, and you
slight his hatred, your contempt, being in a manner the annihilation of his
action, you get the better of him, and put him under you. If he be your equal,
you must employ in that occasion your prudence, for where forces are equal, the
most vigilant and skilful commonly carry the day. Stand upon your guard, and
skilfully avoid such things as may stir up your own or his hatred: but if he be
your inferior, make use of your strength to disarm him, that is to say, to
take from him all means whereby he may hurt you. Pluck out only the Serpents
teeth, and leave him so.

Child, when one offers you any cause of hatred, I should be glad that your
resentment did terminate in a horror of the injustice that is done to you,
without reaching the person from whence it comes. He deserves pity more than
you, for he breaks the bands of nature, which oblige man to be humane toward
man; do not you likewise break them, by hating of him, otherwise you will add
to the evil active of the injury that is done to you, the evil passive of thy
hatred, which will be evil upon evil. A dog is satisfied to bite the stone that
is thrown at him, without fleeing at him that threw it, suffer not a dog to be
more humane than you.

The biting of hatred is like the stinging of a Scorpion, to cure which it must
be crushed like the Scorpion upon the wound that it has made. In a word carry
not about with you that enemy in your bosom, forget the injury, or despise it,
or if it require some more violent remedy, hasten to execute what your honor
may advise you, for your satisfaction, to the end that you may with all
possible expedition diflodge from your heart so troublesome a guest.

There is but one only case where hatred seems to be allowed, and that is when
some wicked and disloyal person hates you, and that you have evident proofs of
his hatred and malice: in that case it is very hard to separate the sinner from
his sin, and not to hate both.

CHAP. XVI. Of Anger.
THere is still another enemy that lodges in the heart of man, which is not so
lasting as hatred, and is notwithstanding more dangerous than it, by reason of
it is violence, and that is, Anger. Children, it is my own fault, it will be
yours, it is the vice of all ages, sexes, and conditions, without any
exception. There is no difference amongst us but only of more and less: all the
other imperfections of the soul, have a certain particular object, without
which the sinfulness of their action cease.

Avarice has riches for it is leaven; hatred, an injury received; envy,
impatience at another prosperity; gluttony, the satisfaction of the belly and
palate: Without that bait the poison of all these vices would have no more force
than the vennom of a benumbed Serpent. It is not so with anger, all things from
the greatest to the least are fuel to it is fire. A broken glass, a false
report, a careless look, the suspicion of a slight, an unlucky chance at play
-- which are but trifles, will cause as great a tumult in the brain of a
choleric person, as all the greatest storms of humane life.

I cannot conceive from whence so unconsiderate a vehemence as that of anger
can proceed, unless it be that the subject that causes it, makes a reciprocal
reverberation from the memory to the imagination, and from the imagination to
the memory, without ever penetrating unto the reasonable part of the soul, and
that by this collision our fire is kindled; for if the vanity of the matter
that transports us out of our selves: could undergo the trial of reason, the
name of God who beholds our follies, would not be blasphemed; our hair, at
least mine, would still have remained on the head; no palpitation of heart,
suffocation of lungs, inflammation of eyes, froth on the mouth, stuttering of
the tongue, nor any frantic and convulsive motion in all the parts of body and
soul, would be excited in us. All these things are so many symptoms of choler
and so many enemies which still wage war against me, of the victory of which,
provided that ye had a share in it, my children, I protest to you, that I
should have more joy to see us all erect a trophy in our souls, than of all
other conquests which we can possibly obtain.

To say the truth, my friends, as concerning my self there is no hopes of
amendment: my faults being as old as my self, and making but one and the same
substance with me, it is impossible now to remove them and leave the person
that supports them. So that I cannot engage with you in this conflict, nor
assist you, but like those who sound the charge and never enter the battle.
This enemy notwithstanding is not invincible, provided that he be fought on the
frontiers, and resisted at it is first tumultuary charge before that it seize
us: then we shall perceive that it is of the nature of sprights, whose first
aspect is terrible; and that in effect it has neither body nor sinews no more
than they, when one has courage to abide it.

This is a sign of it is weakness, that women, children, old people, and the
sick who are all infirm persons, are most subject to that passion. A man of
courage is never overtaken with it, unless by his carelessness, and therefore to
overcome him, it must always surprise him o the weakest side: The covetous man
by losses, or decay of trade and gain the ambitious by a repulse, the vain man
by a slight, the voluptuous by the deprivation of his pleasures, and so of
others.

The nature of anger, me thinks, has been rarely well expressed, by calling it
an impotency of the soul; for from whence could have proceeded the scourging of
the sea, the threatenings against Mount Athos, the challenging of Neptune, the
displacing of the gods from their ranks, the cessation of their sacrifices, the
denying of them, the rending and tearing of household furniture, clothes, and of
his own flesh, but from an extreme impotency of a weak soul? And in so much
that men laugh at all these follies, instead of having of them in horror, that
indulgence does so maintain them, that there have been known a hundred
braggadocios of anger, who are indeed milder than they seem to be, introduced
into the good will of great men by the very means which ought to have banished
them from it.

Though my temper be more sanguin than choleric, yet ill luck at play, and
impatience in my fortune, has occasioned in me such troublesome fits in the
paroxysm of that fever, that if you cut not off from yours, and especially,
you my eldest son, who are the most boiling of all the rest, these two breasts
of wormwood, I mean Play, and the same Impatience that I have had, I am very
much afraid that after my example that malady do not make in my family a part
of mine inheritance.

There is nothing that better discovers to us the ugliness of that vice, than
to see a man in that agitation, suffer in some sort an entire annihilation of
what he was before, by the change that it is wrought upon him. He cannot be
known by the indications and marks of his mind, the first lineaments of it are
gone, rage has effaced them; and yet less by the form of his countenance, the
convulsions which he suffers, not permitting him to retain so much as one trait
of his ordinary feature.

It has been perhaps the prudence of nature, that this vice being more prompt
and active than the rest, it should not be able (as they) to hide it is
deformity and sinfulness in the depth of matter, and that by appearing
outwardly, it should let us see in the representation of it is ugliness, the
image of other vices it is brethren, whose venom is more hid, to work in us
thereby a general aversion from all. Would to God that we could behold our
selves with a wholesome look in a glass, whilst our spirit is boiling, and that
the real external and internal picture of our tempest could be conveyed from
our sight to our Judgment without confusion of the appearances; to cure that
evil there needed no other medicine without doubt but our own view.

Consider I pray you, my Child, in the person of a choleric man, what Kind of
monster it is that tosses him within, whereof you only see the shadow and
phantome in his countenance. Judge by the smoke, and soot which appear
outwardly, what fire must be in his heart, and by the convulsive motions which
his body endures, what kind of tyrant it is that has seized his soul. They
abuse you who tell you that it is a short rage; it is violence supplies it is
duration, it is of the nature of Giants, who (as the fable says) being
children at night become men by next morning.

Other vices insinuate themselves secretly by stealth, as if they were ashamed
to be seen, but this makes it is irruption into the heart like a tempest of
fire, from which break forth many sparks, whereof some fly to the eyes, others
to the cheeks, the tongue, lips, lung, joints, leaving not one part of the body
to the government of it is own spirits. Yea the mouth of him that suffers it,
like that of a criminal, utters many words against his will being forced from
him by the violence of the rack that he feels, and which are quite forgotten so
soon as the storm is over.

But if all these things be not sufficient to give you instruction, learn at
least from the experience that I have had of it, that there is no vice in man
so quick in it is conception, so ugly in it is action, so liable to repentance,
nor whose fruit is so bitter as of this. To conclude it is a kind of Epilepsie
fouler than the falling sickness, in that it is both active and passive. Hereby
judge, my friends, of the beauty of meekness which is it is contrary, and how
pleasing a thing it is to God, to men, and more still to ones self; to possess
the body and soul in patience with all sort of traquillity and ease.

CHAP. XVII. Of Revenge.
REvenge is the fruit that anger and hatred propose to themselves, which God
has not reserved to himself as the most dainty bit: but rather to pluck out of
our hearts these two wild stocks, whose fruit is more dangerous still than it is
stem. Take but from anger and hatred the pleasure of revenge, and you disarm
them both. Experience teaches us that wounds are cured by the powder of
sympathy; but Nature permits not that the ointment of antipathy should produce
the same effect. Experience likewise shows us that our own blood which congeals
in the mouth of a wound that we have received, is a more sovereign balsam for
the cure thereof, than the shedding of the blood of another.

This is properly the effect of Revenge, it scratches an ulcer that pains us,
and that produces a greater inflammation; and at length a gangrene, a
Piemontane Captain who was under my guard almost six weeks in Savoy, confessed
to me that he alone of threescore and three of his family remained alive and
escaped being murdered, and that the family that was the enemy of his, which
with women, children and servants consisted of fifty six souls, was totally
extinguished.

All things rightly considered, I know no remedy so treacherous to it is
intention, as the remedy of Revenge, whether we propose to our selves thereby
to ease the hurt that we have received, or to punish the wicked doer; for we
neither do the one nor other. I heal not my wound when I make a deeper in the
body of mine enemy, and by revenging my self on the wicked doer, I not only
provoke him rather than correct him, but I become wicked my self, by taking to
me the power and authority which only belongs to the Law. I do worse yet, for
in doing of him injury by revenging my self, I justify what he has done, and
afford him new matter of a counter Revenge. An injury done violates only the
Law, an injury returned does insolently rob it of it is authority.

When we revenge our selves by engaging with our enemy, we make him our equal;
but by pardoning of him, he loses that and becomes our inferior, a pardon
carrying somewhat that is royal, and the character of Master? the wise man,
when he tells us that it is honorable to forget past offenses, teaches us our
duty on this occasion. The evil that is past is gone, let the troublesome
remembrance thereof sink unto the same abyss.

A wicked man in doing evil follows his trade; if you be a good man, it will be
yours to do him good, there is not a more piercing thrust than a good turn, it
reaches even to the heart, perhaps it may touch the heart of your enemy; at
least you will make appear in doing him good, that he is so much the more
wicked, that you are good; which is no slight Revenge. To tell you the truth,
my children, the theory of these counsels is far more lovely than the practice
of them easy: God preserve us all from an injury that deserves a just
resentment, for fear lest so slippery a step may not discover the weakness of
our strength, on that occasion.

CHAP. XVIII. Of Fear.
REvenge never gives us but in the blade the fruit which it proposes for our
satisfaction. Fear does yet worse, it gives us such a shake by seizing on us
that it makes the leaf, flower, and fruit, that it promises, fall. It seems
that it only looks to our security, and nevertheless from the very minute that
it is formed in our mind, trouble arises with it: we may with reason call it
the usurer of our misfortunes; for in stead of some one or other which only
threatens us, it calls together all those that apprehension can conceive; and
is so forward in it is diligence, that it often turns an imaginary evil into a
real torment. If even the best fruits gathered before their maturity be sour,
what can be the foretast of an evil which is not as yet come to it is season.

Fear is an art of prolonging misery, which joins the past with the present;
(witness the surprise of one of Alexanders Lieutenants at the sole sight of his
statue) and with greater pomp the future with the present, in so much that
present evils come upon us but one and one, and that the future present
themselves always to our imagination in gross. In this rencounter let us not
suffer fortune who will save us from some of them, and perhaps from all, to be
kinder to us, than we are to our selves.

As that apprehension of the future, which does not as yet exist, is but a
bastard sprout of humane prudence, so the impression that it makes on us is not
so sudden, nor so unconsiderate, as that of a present fear. This last takes no
counsel, it so binds up in us all the functions of body and soul, that we
remain without action, or if we retain any, it is only to throw us into a
greater precipice than that which we would avoid; this is directly opposed to
fortitude, and so much the more shameful in a Gentleman, that valor ought to
be his most essential quality.

Child, Fright at a present danger, is dishonorable; and the fear of a future
will disturb you: take heart, I pray you, against both, if it be prudence to
discover a future evil, it is none to forestal it: let not the dint of fortune
which threatens you, strike at a distance, lest you be so much the more
weakened, when you come to grapple with it. The fear, which is not only allowed,
but absolutely commanded, is the fear of God, which is the beginning of wisdom;
And I pray the Lord to bestow it on you.

CHAP. XIX. Of Envy.
ENvy is yet a more troublesome Guest to the soul, which I advise you never to
harbor in your heart. Hatred upon a just resenting of a received injury, may
enter it by force; Envy can never be admitted, unless invited: but when it is
once entertained, it is the only vice which dallies not, and is never
reconciled to virtue, till after death. Grant not to that lean and meagre
Guest, which feeds only on Vipers, the same lodging which God has reserved in
you for himself. Detracting from the honor of another is a shameful
fomentation for a mind affected with that distemper. If by diminishing of it
you could piece up your own, there might be something to be said, but on the
contrary you thereby lose what little you may have.

An evil eye begets not only the hatred and contempt of him that it beholds,
but likewise of all those that see the malignity of it is aspect. Envy is rather
an homage paid to the virtue of another, than a pique; and see the effect of
it. Of two Competitors, the enviours voluntarily yields the place, though
fortune did grant it him: and it very often comes to pass, that by rubbing on
other men's actions we make them bright, and thereby more illustrious.

This vice without any plausible pretext or excuse, as others have, is alike
common to the great, as to the mean, because the mean cannot with patience
abide that the virtue of those of their condition should place them at a
distance from them; nor the great that their inferiors should come near them:
instead of this mutual envy, the mean would do better to tread the steps of
those that go before them, and the great to keep their advantage.

There are few noble Families that have not had some predecessor raised by his
fortune, that progress could not be made without changing the interval that was
betwixt him, and the men of quality of his time, his posterity may do the same:
and therefore, my children, I entreat you; to have an esteem for those that
raise themselves by their virtue, one day they may lend you a hand, and they
that follow after by your example, will push you forward.

CHAP. XX. Of Grief and Sadness.
There are not many passions which are not formed in us with violence, but
Sadness is of the number of those, that breed in the soul by a free
acquiescency of the will: we have so great a disposition to it, that beside
that all vices are in the end dogged with an inward sorrow which attends them,
the least cross accident brings it upon us without any resistance. Let it be
the punishment of our vices, for we deserve it: it is just that evil should
beget evil, but that the accidents of life to which humane nature is subject,
and which come on us from the hand of God, should afflict and make us sad, is a
thing that we should not permit.

Sadness is so essential a mark of a sinner, that by that alone the Scripture
discovers to us the heart of an hypocrite, God in his just Judgment being
willing, that his concealed enemy, though he may disguise himself in
appearances, being gnawed by the internal worm of his conscience, should carry
always on his forehead the stamp of punishment which his disloyalty deserves,
and that is sorrow.

This passion is in some sort the visible image of hell, inasmuch as by the
loss of the good which we lament, it robs us of the use and relish of those we
possess, and that it so much infects with it is bitterness all the functions of
our soul, that it kills in it the love of our selves, and our gratitude toward
God.

Observe, my child, how far the industry of a man that afflicts himself
advances; who by making a review of all possible felicities, of Riches,
Pleasures, and Honors, composes of all these blessings which are wanting to
him, the venom that empoysons him. Make better use, I pray you, of sickness,
crosses of fortune, and an infinite number of other evils which you suffer not,
which are many more in number than those that lie upon you; make of them rather
a preservative and antidote against this deadly poison.

If there be any sorrow excusable, it should be for the loss of a Father, a
kind Brother, a wise Son, a trusty Friend, a good Master, or for the death of a
faithful Wife, which is rather a dismembring of our selves than a separation.
It is not in our power to forget the memory of them: and though it were, that
forgetfulness being a kind of annihilation of the thing loved, I should never
advise you so barbarous a remedy; for it is true that on such hard occasions,
which have their root in the midst of our bowels, it would be inhumane to be
insensible.

What must we then do for our comfort? Weep over the dead as our Savior did,
raise him again by a sweet reviving of his memory; and leave our grief buried
with him in the same grave, since we cannot retrive him from thence. The fable
by turning into stone the unfortunate Mother after the death of all her
children, instructs us that we are of too soft a matter to suffer in flesh and
bone an evil of that nature: Insomuch notwithstanding that an extreme sorrow
seems to be a secret repining against providence, let us humble our selves
before it, and acknowledge that there is no internal grief whose continuance is
absolutely lawful, but what afflicts us for the evil which we do. That sorrow
alone kills sin, raises the sinner, and restores to him joy and gladness.

CHAP. XXI. Of Joy, and that there is none without Virtue.
AS there is nothing that marks so much sin to us, as Sadness, so likewise
there is no solid contentment but what springs from virtue. If it proceed from
our immoderateness, it passes like lightning, or as a flash of gunpowder,
which lasts but an instant, and is immediately turned into a stinking vapor.
If fortune be the cause of it, she is always treacherous, what ever she do. If
she grant us nothing, she is unfaithful to our hopes; she is so likewise if she
take from us what she has bestowed, and is so still even when she continues
them with us, in respect that the sense of the good that she does us evaporates
in the enjoyment; the duration of it is sufficient to deprive us of it is
relish; so that we may say that contentment where virtue is wanting, having
nothing to enliven it, is but only the carcass of felicity.

Joy, which proceeds not from virtue, fails often in it is bulk: if it be
little, it is imperceptible: if excessive, there is danger that the heart of
man prove not too weak and small a vessel to contain it is overflowing without
being split and broken.

Know also, my child, that the pleasure of sense is impure and of short
duration, that of taste, though it be but an essay that is made in passing of
the victuals which the stomach receives, is yet the cause of lasting evils, as
of crudities and indigestion, vertigo's, and obstructions of the brain, which
are the interreigns of the soul by the cessation of it is actions; from which
sometime death does ensue, by a secret and clandestin blow, the cause of which
cannot be perceived at so great distance. As to the pleasure that spring from
the two great abundance of spirits, it is so sudden in it is act; that it is as
soon extinct as kindled: if it be urged too much, it is put out of breath; and
by continuance, degenerates unto feebleness.

The smelling is for the bad as well as good smells: the latter if they be a
little strong, make the head ache as well as the former, instead of comforting
the brain. As concerning the hearing, if jarring discord trouble the soul,
harmony dissolves and softens it, and displaces it from it is seat. Seeing,
which is the purest of all our senses wearies at length of the beauty of it is
object, what it admired at first glance, only pleases it at the second look; at
the third it does not as yet offend it, but in process of time it is cloyed by
the frequent custom of eying it. In a word, my children, the pleasure of our
senses, though they were even always satisfied, is but superficial; it affects
only the extremities of the organs that are destined for their functions; if it
come nearer and incorporate with them, from that instant it ceases to be
sensible.

As to what concerns the contentment which Honor, Glory, Dignities, Nobility,
Authority, and Riches afford; the opinion of those who consider these things
but as imaginary goods, or instruments of our vanity, is, in my judgment, a
little too severe. Though virtue may find in it self contentment, yet humane
policy, to provoke men to emulation, in well doing, has most wisely appointed
Honor, Glory, Dignities, and Nobility, to be a visible homage which should be
rendered to virtue, and that Authority and Riches should be the means to give
greater extent to it is operations.

All these goods, notwithstanding, ought to make no other impression on us, but
as goods of retinue and attendance, which are but the baggage of virtue; for in
effect Honor and Esteem is but a passing vapor, which is derived to us only
from the fancy of another; Nobility but a politic acknowledgment of service
performed, and Authority but a power to maintain with Dignity the Laws, which
the same Laws confer upon us; all these things being but foreign concessions,
can establish in us no solid contentment: nothing but virtue alone whose acts
are all our own, can bestow it.

As it is impossible but that a body of a good Constitution, lovely, healthful
and vigorous, must be sensible of the pleasure that there is in the enjoyment
of all these blessings; so by the same reason, when the soul is purged from all
it is perturbations, which are it is maladies, when it wills nothing but what is
honest, and just, wherein consists it is true beauty, and that it is always in
readiness to do good, it cannot be in that condition, and not feels already
some foretast of the joys of heaven.

Would to God, my friends, that ye were capable to know the happiness of those
who have attained to that perfection, and that ye could see presented to the
eye in some worthy subject a living scheme of the excellence of virtue, to the
end that the sensible object of it is beauty might attract you with greater
violence to the Love of it.

CHAP. XXII. That we must choose a profession. Of the profession of Arms, and
what ought to be the first institution thereof.
HAving discoursed to you, my child, concerning your manners, and the vices
that may corrupt them, I come now to speak of the profession that you are
obliged to follow; for though we have all one and the same original, yet the
wisdom of him who is the author of it, has been pleased that there should be
amongst us many different conditions and trades, all which should stand in need
of one another, to the end that the mutual service which is performed in that
diversity, might be to us all a common bond of love: wherefore, my friends,
that we may not be useless members of this community, every one of us ought to
propose to our selves, a course of life which may according to nature and Law
satisfy this public duty.

Upon the account of that common obligation, it is my intention that two of my
three Sons serve the King in his Armies, and that the third be a Churchman,
provided he be endued with the good qualilities that so holy a Calling
requires; if not, I design him likewise for a Soldier, though I have already
lost three elder Brothers Children, one before Corbie, another before
Perpignan, and the third in the return from the Siege of Thionvile: and
likewise three Sisters Children, whereof the one died in Garrison, the other
killed before St. Antonin, and the third at the Battle of Nordlinguen, yet we
must not forsake the Trade.

I am not ignorant that a Soldier is only a Sacrifice devoted for the service
of his King and Country; that he is their Martyr, and that our Kings have more
reason to call the Gentlemen the Limits of their Dominions, considering the
Progress of our Wars, than that Ancient, who showing his fellow Citizens, said
that they were the Walls of the Town.

Since it is so, I think there should be a little more care taken of their
primary institution for the wars, and that it were to be wished that there were
some place in the Kingdom that might serve for nurseries, where the Gentry,
when they leave the College and the Livery, might be trained in the exercise
of Arms, and that in such places there were Academies for riding the great
Horse, for Vaulting, Dancing, Fencing; for Arithmetic, Cosmography,
Navigation, and the Languages, whereof the Masters were entertained at the
public charge, for the use and benefit of the Children of poor Gentlemen who
may have died or grown aged in the service. The matter is not without example,
two persons of quality have done heretofore at their own cost, to wit Monsieur
de St. Luke in Brouage, and Monsieur de Vic at Calais, with so much honor and
reputation, that there was never a younger Brother that came out of their
Garrisons, who did not respect them as long as they lived as much as the King,
and honor them more than their Parents.

That little expense is very inconsiderable in so great a Kingdom as this, in
respect of the great advantage that may redound from it. In the first place,
what bad habit a Page may have learned in the company of Lackeys where he has
been bread, and from whom he only differs by the fashion of his breeches, will
turn to discretion when he comes to be instructed by his Officers, his Masters
and the rest of the Gentlemen that run the same career with him. The Scholar
that leaves the College, ill-bred, diffident, and wild, will learn grace and
assurance, finding himself in a company more resolute and civilized than that
from which he parted: whereas if a Page after his commerce with Lackeys turn
himself straight over into the Guards, the contagion of the Pickpocket or
Highway-man may in a great City prove dangerous: and it is likewise to be
feared, lest a young Scholar, being but a fresh water Soldier, may not for
want of a good Tutor forsake the service, when he finds that in his noviciat he
is the sport of his Comrades in that place, where there is more license given
than in a well ordered Garrison.

It is likewise very considerable that young men leave the College and the
Livery of the Page, in the flower of their age, and that this flower is blasted
without bearing any fruit, or if it bear any, it is bad, if it be but in the
least neglected. In this fair season the blood and spirits, which are in their
prime, are very dangerous Counselors, if the motion of their impulse have it is
free course. So that it is a matter of pity and commiseration to see young men,
who leave the Family of a person of quality, to whom perhaps by reason of his
negligence, they have only been known by his Liveries; or come out of a
College where they have learned nothing but what must be forgotten, for want
of skill in Tutors for the education of youth, left to their own conduct.

After such shipwreck of their first years, it is to heap evil upon evil to
send them into a Garrison, where all that they have to do, is once in three
days to mount the Guard. By the sloth of the other two the mind is in danger of
becoming more lazy than the body. Against this inconvenience I see no other
remedy, but the different exercises which I have proposed, which by their
variety might always keep in breath the bodies and minds of youth, and by a
laudable emulation of striving to excel, break the bonds of evil habits before
contracted, and introduce better in their place.

It would now be very superfluous to send our Youth into Holland; the success
of our Arms, and the diligence of our Sieges, make appear that of Scholars we
are become Masters in that Trade; and besides I have found by experience in two
journies that I made there as a Volunteer, the one at the Rupture of the Truce,
and the other during the Siege of Breda, a younger Brother, though of thirty
six years of age at the first, and of forty at the second, that Brandy and
Tobacco made in that place the greater share of the Exercises of our cadets.

I am much of opinion that what I propose, is but a wish in the blade, whereof
I neither expect flower nor fruit. So that knowing no Garrison in the Kingdom
where there is any care taken of the Youth, I would advise you, my Children,
before ye go to the Army, to serve the King a year in his Guards: ye owe him
the first fruits of your services; there the Grandees of the Nation are to be
seen in gross, elsewhere they appear but in retail: whilst in that place you
learn the duty of a Soldier, you will neither want Masters nor time for your
other exercises, provided you have discretion to manage it aright in the same
place. The commerce of the Soldier, the Officer, the Citizen, Tradesman,
Pickpocket, Religious, and the Presence of the Court, may offer you at one
glance a general view of the order and disorder of the world, the consideration
of which will not be altogether useless to you for your conduct: so after that
your years of noviciat in the Guards is expired, you may go and make your
profession in the Army.

CHAP. XXIII. Seven Counsels for a Soldier.
HItherto, my Children, I have treated you as a good Father, who teaches his
Children their first steps, and holds them up by the strings; but when I now
consider you as entered into the Trade, beside the quality of Father, which I
had before, I acquire likewise over you the quality of an ancient Officer, and
on this double respect ye own more deference and regard to my Counsels
concerning the profession to which ye are called.

COUNSEL I.
The first counsel that I give you, my Son, is, that if you perceive that your
heart is not good for the wars, and that you are not fully resolved faithfully
to serve the King, you meddle not that way: though your quality oblige you to
it, yet no body will force you: the Arrear-ban is now no more in use, and
though it were, the prudence of our Laws allows you to supply your place in the
service by another, who may be of more worth than your self. Add not to the
Cowardice of your heart, Sacrilege, in violating by baseness, or infidelity,
the Oath which you make, of true and faithful serving the King. The promise
which you give at the head of the Regiment with hand lifted up to Heaven, is a
solemn Vow in the presence of God and men, which is no less obligatory than
others. These are but made once in ones life, yours is renewed at every Muster.
Their pay is only in credit and hope, yours is in present money; yea, we may
say that by deserting they commit but a private trespass, and you a public
crime.

Wherefore, my Child, die rather than do the least thing in the Army which may
dishonor you, for you will have there too many witnesses of your shame. The
ancient Discipline that punished the Coward with death, was not so severe as
ours, which prolongs the sense of his disgrace, by letting him outlive his
honor.

COUNSEL II.
My second advice is, that you be not obstinate in the fight longer than the
enemy makes head against you: when they are once broken, and that there is no
more hopes of rallying, desist, and let those who have need to be fleshed with
booty complete the overthrow. Defile not your self with the blood of him that
flies, and far less of him that renders himself. Wounds given on the back are
more disgraceful than wounds there received. You are in fear of him whom you
strike in that condition, and by letting of him alone, you slight him. There
are three sorts of courage in an Army, the first begins the victory, the second
pursues it, and the last makes the Massacre: strive you to be of the first.

COUNSEL III.
If any one render himself prisoner to you, being of that quality that you may
dispose of him at your pleasure, let him appoint his own ransom: if he will not
promise you any thing, do a deed of charity without opening your purse, and
send him going: if he promise you any thing, set him at liberty upon his
parole; if he fail in performance, believe that it has been his inability to
make satisfaction, and that in vain you should have assured him of his life, if
you had deprived him of what was needful to maintain it: to say the truth, such
a traffic is but a sign of low ambition.

COUNSEL IV.
Above all things I recommend it to you that you never plunder your Quarters;
he that harbors you is your Landlord, and you his Guest, which is a relation
of mutual good will. If it be your own Country that you sack, you are thereby
guilty of Parricide: if it be a conquered Land, spare it, my Child, for it
becomes the Dominion of him that has given you your arms, where your insolence
should not make his Government terrible. If it be an Enemies Country, be not
the waster of it, lest that by your cruelty against the works of Art and
Nature, you match not your self with your Boy, in becoming the companion and
complice of the disorders whereof he is in possession.

COUNSEL V.
If by your services you may at some time deserve that the King bestow upon you
the Government of some frontier place; if it be of his ancient Dominion,
besides your vigilance in your Guard, govern your self in such a way, that your
civility toward the Inhabitants may prove to you a second Garrison; and that
their Neighbors by the Image which in your person they may see, of the
goodness of your Master, may have ground to wish him for their Prince. If it be
a place of conquest, learn this from me that the acquests of force are only
preserved by Justice, and that it alone is able to break the yoke of an ancient
servitude in favor of a new subjection. Propose to your self merely the
service of the King, the security of the place, the protection, and not the
pillage of those that are under the command of your Guns, and the integrity of
an exemplary life, which are the essential marks of a good Governor. A great
Train, rich Furniture, and a sumptuous Table, are but the false appearances of
it; affect them not, if you want estate enough to support the expenses: All
these things which serve only for ostentation, will be so many enemies to your
duty which you have lodged in your breast.

COUNSEL VI.
If any one without a Commission entrust you with the Undergovernment of a
place belonging to the King, and that he abandon the Kings service, withdraw
your self from him without giving him any trouble about that wherein he has
entrusted you. You are no less obliged to observe the duty of the Law of
Nations, which is to restore a thing committed to your keeping, than the duty
of the Law of the State, which is to be faithful to your Prince: by that means
you satisfy both the one and the other.

COUNSEL VII.
Whatever employment you may have, be not too much concerned for your Purse;
look not after that which they call Vails and Perquisites, it is sordid and
sneaking gain, and of little profit. Abstain from that pedling traffic, even
though it be allowed you, to the end that your hands and desire may be
accustomed to their duty at small cost.

I have done what I advise you, when I was an Officer in a Place, where the
Kings Farmers would have continued to me a gratuity which they were wont to
make to my Predecessors, even with some augmentation; I refused it, that having
been appointed by the King, I might not have the shame to engage an Officer of
his under any other pay but his own.

CHAP. XXIV. Three Counsels for ones fortune. The first, Always to follow the
Court and the Army. The second, To follow the inclination of ones Genius. The
third, To propose in all things an honest end.
COUNSEL I.
NOw as to the ways which you must take in seeking that which they call your
Fortune, I have no other counsel to give you, but that you present your self
always to her in the places where she may see you, that is at Court or in the
Army, and that when you are there you let her dispose of you according to her
good pleasure. Let it be your care patiently to expect what she shall bestow on
your endeavors, otherwise you will meet with cross hits. Experience has
taught me that she is a Mistress that only desires the assiduity of our
presence, and will not be forced to any thing but what she pleases; and that
they themselves, whose hand make the distribution of her favors, expect, as
she does, the same submission. I have found that it was in vain that I proposed
to my self to die, or to squeez from her some better luck than I have had, my
life having been preserved almost in despite of me, without having received
but a very small share of her favors.

It is true she offered me once the Lieutenant Colonels place of the Regiment
of Sieur Luc, at present Persan, which I should have accepted, if at that time
I had not been threatened with a Consumption: And four years ago the late
Marshall of Vitry sent to my house to offer me the same place in the Queens
Regiment: but my inability to bear the expenses of it, obliged me to make
within my self this wise reflection, that in the age that I was in, my Family
had more need of my presence, than the King of my service.

Notwithstanding whatever my little fortune has been, I have all reason to
thank God that he has given me the grace honestly to subsist by the Revenue of
the Altar in the service of the Altar; and to have continued in it a
considerable enough time without any shame or disgrace that I know of, to have
thereby made up as much as has reimbursed what I advanced of my estate in the
first years of my services, and that his providence has permitted for my
repose, that I was discharged of a place where my constant attendance would
have hindered me from meeting with your Mother, as now I have, from whence I
have the blessing of your birth, my Children, and another supply which I must
not publish, by means whereof I receive yearly the same Rents which I had of
the King, when I was one of his Officers. So it has pleased Divine mercy to
continue to me my allowance in my retirement, as during the time of my service,
only with the change of the hand of his Treasurer.

COUNSEL II.
I have yet another very considerable advice to give you, my Children,
concerning the Progress of the course of your fortune; and that is, that you
listen to the counsel of your friends: but if it be quite contrary to your own,
and you in age to make the choice of the ways that you should take, follow the
inclination of your genius, if you find that it presses you with violence. Our
designs being measured according to the extent of our souls, whether great or
small, you can hardly meet with one of your own gage which fits you so exactly,
that in the execution thereof another man's measure may not be either longer or
shorter than your own. And that is the reason why every one of us is wise
enough in his own affairs, provided he apply himself thereto, because he
conducts them according to his own measures. The diversity of age,
constitution, quality, and interest, are so many different shadowings in the
aspect of the existence of things, whose variety hinders the counsels of others
from agreeing well with ours about the means which are altogether proportionate
to us.

Great actions which we see succeed, although that before their execution they
appeared to us impossible, can only proceed from an inward impulse of some
particular spirit of conduct, that compels him that does them, to undertake
them in spite of his reason, otherways they would never come to pass.

This is the sole reason, why Commonwealths are not wont to make so great
progresses as Monarchies, in respect that all great designs have in them always
somewhat of danger; and that in Communities the desire of preservation is
popular and more universal than that of enlarging themselves: add, that it is
altogether impossible that so many different spirits which have their vote in
Council can make a common and uniform prognostic of the success of the matter
in deliberation, whether it shall prosper, or not; whereas when all things are
ruled by the will of a single person, we see great designs succeed, whether it
be that his foresight brings near to him, as with Telescopes, the success of
the future, which is imperceptible to many eyes that look differently on
things, or that without any more consultation he yields a blind obedience to
the impulse of his genius, which assures him of the event. Hence proceed the
incredible actions which are achieved in Monarchies under the Government of an
excellent Prince, or the direction of some wise and discreet Minister of State
during his minority; witness the example of the present reign: or under a
Prince, who in his majority has had the prudence to associate to himself in
affairs some wise confident of State; witness the example of the preceding
reign, which probably might have produced somewhat yet greater, if the regular
motion of the direction had not been often retarded by that of the principal
wheel, which was not always concentrick with it.

In verity when I call to mind that I have seen a Gentleman of Poitou, a
younger Brother of his Family, (which was indeed good, but entangled with
affairs) propose to himself before that he was as yet called to public
Ministry, to restore to the King the places which the Protestants held in the
Kingdom; and to change the great designs of the House of Austria into a
necessity of keeping what they had, rather than of getting more; I find my self
wholly convinced (considering the difficulty of the project) to believe that if
he had not had a particular spirit of wisdom that showed him to the eye the
possibility of all these things, he had never enterprised them.

The regaining of The, the taking of Nancy, the last relief of Casal, of
Leucate, and of the City of Turin, are actions too bold, (if it may be said) to
have been undertaken according to the measures of an ordinary conduct, by those
that did them, without some internal foreknowledge of their success. And though
the Battle of Rocroy, which was followed with that of Fribourg, and it, with
the Battle of Nordlinguen, be the certain effects of a prudence that acts
always with the same vigor: Nevertheless these actions are of such a pitch,
considering the cirstances of time, place, and of the age of him that
contrived, and executed them all with his own hand, that they appear to all
those that look upon them at distance, to be the expeditions of a divinely
inspired oldness. His Highness will pardon me, I hope, these extraordinary
impulses have sometime so sudden and unforeseen a motion, that they break out
like those sweet chaces of Music, whereof the art is concealed, and which
transport him that sings out of himself; and ravishes him after they are
performed, with the same admiration as those that hear him.

Children, we cannot acknowledge providence in great things, unless we own it
likewise in small, all things here below being equally small in respect of God.
From the pattern of these great Souls, of whom I have been speaking, we have
ground to believe that the lesser, such as ours, have their particular mover
for their direction, as well as those that appear great in regard of us.

COUNSEL III.
So that I advise you to leave your conduct to the inspiration of your genius.
Assure your selves it will be happy, provided that in whatsoever you undertake,
you propose to your selves an honest end. When we propose to our selves an
honest end, the means of attaining it must of necessity be so likewise;
otherwise the end will not be lawful, and by doing so our actions which are
directed to that end, being virtuous, we shall continue always in the habit and
exercise of virtue, even though our intention should be disappointed of success.

It is above all most important that the designs of great men which are
attended with a great Train of consequences, should always have an aim to some
honest end: if it be otherways, and that there is a breach of public peace
made within or without the state, the calamities that depend thereon, make men
eye the life of those that cause the: if it be short, it appears like a
Whirlwind and Hurricane that overthrows every thing that comes in its way, and
which is at length spent by its own violence. But if it be of long duration, it
is considered as those great inundations which drown a whole Country, the
remains of which, if any there be, appear only like Towers and Tops of Steeples
half drowned, which subsist in the midst of their shipwreck for no other end
but to point out better the horror of the Deluge.

A great man is very unhappy, who when he might have shone with a lovely and
beneficial splendor, appears only like a Comet, his fame and reputation is
very unfortunate when it is only found in the Annals as an Earthquake, or
Deluge, and that his life has been only famous by the mischief that he has
done. There is no fame good or bad, but for great men, the reputation of the
meaner is lost in the multitude, and therefore their inclination toward a good
end should be more violent than ours; they see that thereby alone their name is
continued, that many ages after their death they have still an union with the
living by the veneration that men have for them, and that their memory growing
old yields a sweeter smell, as that of the wicked a more stinking scent, by
reason of the bad end which they proposed to themselves: the fall of the last
is like thunder which tumbles down with a great noise, and leaves nothing after
it remarkable but the ruins that it has made, and an infection that impoysons
the place where it fell.

CHAP. XXV. Five Counsels concerning the conduct of ones Family.
HAving discoursed to you, my Children, of the honest end, which all your
actions ought to have, I come now to the conduct of your House, which is a
matter of no small importance. If like Knights Errant we found always our
Equipage ready, and a covered Table, I should advise you to follow, as they do,
the course of your adventures, without troubling your selves farther: but
seeing you have need of the small portion that I leave you, to serve you for
ammunition bread, until the King give you other, it is convenient that you know
how it is to be managed. The Laws allow us not the disposal of our Estates
before we be five and twenty years of age, whether it has been their scope not
to abandon to young age, which is expensive and inconsiderate, a Viatick
whereof old age stands more in need, or that they have had some other regard,
they seem to me very prudent in having suspended our power of acting in
business until that age; in respect that the conduct of a Family which is
painful, would have made too great a diversion of our first years, which are
more profitably employed in the study of the Profession that we intend to
follow, than in any other business whatsoever. For that effect our Statutes
have ordained that the character of Priest or Judge should not be conferred on
any before the five and twentieth year of age, to give more time for one to
render himself capable of either, and that also because it would not be at all
reasonable that one should be the Judge of another man's conscience, before he
knew how to govern his own; nor that we should have Jurisdiction upon the goods
that are not ours, and not upon our own. You see, my Son, that in these two
Offices one must have attained to a certain age before he can make profession
of them; in this your employment has the advantage of them, wherein to obtain
command; the time, nor the years of service are not reckoned, only the merit
and price of him that is engaged in it, is taken notice of. There has been one
known to have had the disposal of all the Commands of an Army by Law, who by
the same Law being as yet under age had not the power of his Estate. The past
and present ages furnish us with rich examples of this, which I wave, that I
may return to the measures that I would have you follow in the conduct of your
Family.

I. In the first place, my Children, after that you have rendered your first
services to the Public, the interest of which goes before your own, I would
have you at the age of five and twenty take the inspection of your Estate,
seeing that the Laws, who are our wise Counselors, give you the possession of
it at that age.

I leave you no Lawsuit, have not any amongst your selves, I charge you, nor
with your Neighbors either, if you can avoid it. It is my wish that there
should be no need of any other law betwixt you and them, but of the Law of your
own conscience. If there be any commenced against you, strive to take it up
amicably, and rather yield a little of your right, than bring it to a trial.
One arrest begets another, and that a third: nevertheless if you must come to a
trial, expect from your Judges what God shall be pleased to inspire into them
for your repose. When you solicit them, beg of them only attention to your
cause: any other desire beside that of attention, solicits them to their
dishonor. Tell them the naked truth concerning your Business, though it may do
you hurt, they ill thereupon prove more indulgent to you. What ever sentence be
pronounced, render the same respect to your Judges, as if God himself had given
it. They that sit on his tribunal, what ever they do, are still the Ministers
of his will.

II. It is my opinion also that you endeavor to get some general Notions of
your right and family customs, to the end that you may not so blindly give
your self over to the direction of those to whom you commit the care of your
affairs, that you cannot be able to know if they faithfully acquit themselves
of their charge or not: eye them attentively, the Masters eye that makes a fat
Horse, should have a care that his Servant devour not too much, or that he be
not ill served by him. When a servant thinks himself secure under the blind
confidence of his master, from being faithful he turns perfidious; and from
being careful, lazy. In fine it comes often to pass that by this negligence a
Master finds himself more under the government of his servant, than the affairs
are, which are committed to his care.

I give you this counsel, my Children, without believing that it can be applied
to your fortune, for it is so small that it requires no other steward but your
self. But having had the design under the name of you, to call to a share of
this Legacy all the youth of what condition and quality soever, I find my self
engaged to insert in it a great many things, which are rather of public use
than your private concern.

III. In speaking to you, I give advice to all who may have need of assistance
in the ordering of their affairs, never to make use of a sordid or mechanic
person. A base fellow, by his sneaking husbanding of a trifle communicates the
contagion of his Soul to the thing that he manages: he pollutes like the
Harpyes whatever he touches, and besmears them with I know not what filth, that
may reflect on him that employs him. We may say of sordid and sneaking saving,
that for every ounce it spares it spends a hundred weight of reputation, it is
only profitable to him that uses it, insomuch that it serves as a lure for a
greater confidence and trust. Every sordid wretch is greedy, and none that are
greedy can be faithful. He looks upon the goods that you put into his hands as
his prey, and manages them as sordidly as if they were already his own. If he
seem faithful in the conduct of the small streams which should fill the
Cistern, it is only that he may draw more largely and securely out of it is
depth, observe him narrowly in matters which he thinks you do not mind, and you
will quickly discover that he is a good husband only for himself.

IV. Make no use either of a jangling Pettifogger, he is a kind of Croat that
skirmishes and flies and whose seol strength consists in tricks, who for want
of knowledge to cut a Lawsuit by the root, contents himself to split and slice
it, from whence spring an infinite number of new sprouts; when on the other
hand a knowing man in one breath drives a matter to the end, and brings the
remedy to the source of the evil. In fine the snare that a pettifogger lays, is
either so coarse that it is discovered, or so fine that it is broken. So that
it is only pitched for his own Master, who is perhaps also the only prey that
he hunts for.

V. Wherefore it is very necessary that you make frequent reviews of the
affairs of your house, to the end you may see how your Servants carry
themselves. Business has indeed at first something harsh and rude in that it
abstracts us from our selves to it. Let us do better, let us attract it to us,
and it will become more familiar. The first temporal petition that we make to
God, if for our daily bread, if he bestow it on us, let us quicken our natural
light for the managing of it, rather than extinguish it by abandoning of it
blindly to the conduct of another. Instruction in our private affairs, will
make us knowing in the public; Because that the common Law of the state
binding us all in subjection to one and the same Duty, I cannot know in what
manner I should honestly and lawfully dispose of what is mine own, but that I
must have at the same time a notion of what ought to be done in the Family of
another.

CHAP. XXVI. That one ought to have some general notions of public affairs.
That they can only be learned at Court: and wherefore one should spend some
part of his Life there.
It is likewise my Judgment, seeing that every one of us makes but a part of a
greater whole, that you should acquire some general notions, of the manner how
this great body whereof you are a part, is governed, and of what parts it is
composed. Many Souls assembled together, make a Family, many Families a Town
and City, many Towns a Province, and many Provinces a State, which is governed
by the power and authority of a single Person, from which is derived a common
Law, that makes the union of all these parts together, from whence resists a
mutual correspondence between the head and the members, and the members and the
head, for the common preservation of the whole. This total is composed of four
different conditions of men; of the Nobility and Gentry, the Clergy, the Judges
and the common People. From the concourse of the Services of each of these
conditions, and their just harmony among themselves, peace and the security of
the public depend.

The Clergy entertain the union betwixt God and the State: the Nobility and
Gentry secure it at home and abroad by their arms: the Judges keep it in
concord under the authority of the Law, and the common People contribute to it
by their substance. So great is the good understanding of the Prince with these
different degrees of his subjects, that our Kings have almost as often said,
that they were the first Burgess of their chief City, as they have called
themselves the first Gentlemen of their Kingdom. their seat of Justice and
Unction at their Coronation, testify also that they are the chief Justices,
and first Prelates. So that he being head over all, there ought to be a mutual
respect from one condition to another, of which in every several state the King
is pleased to be the first head.

My child, you have a place in this great body: if you can understand how it is
governed, you will fill your place better and more to your own satisfaction.
though your quality call you to a profession for the which some barbarous ages
have believed ignorance to be the greatest and most successful qualification,
yet there are others more discreet, who are of an other opinion. Amongst the
most warlike People that ever have been, the Generals of the Army coming down
from their triumphant Chairs have been ever now and then seen, assisting in the
Council of state, giving counsel to Clients, discharging the office of a Judge,
great Surveyer, and Treasurer of the Exchecquer, and from thence to return
again to the command of Armies, which is an evidence that these functions were
not inconsistent together. We need not search for distant examples of this, our
progresses in Flanders proceed only from this, that our first Princes of the
blood, do as worthily fill the first places in Council as in the command of
Armies, and that to be a good head in counsel, and a good head in War, is
equally the effect of their profession.

Were there no other profit to be reaped from that study, but the satisfaction
to see by how many different pipes the stream of the chief command is derived
even to the lowest parts of the State, and how the return of obedience remounts
to the fountain head of Authority, yet that alone is a pleasant thing to be
considered. That knowledge is more easily acquired than men imagine to
themselves: the reading of the Statutes and Acts of Parliament, assisted with
some conference with those of the profession, of whom you may find all sorts at
Court, will in short time furnish you with that knowledge, which as a lovely
Anatomy of state will represent to you in order at one view all the different
parts whereof ours is composed. It is no small satisfaction to understand the
symmetry of a body whereof we make a part, though that knowledge should ever
remain idle in us, without making any Application of it.

That study, my Son, cannot be followed but at Court, in respect that the Court
contains all the noble parts of this great body, one must spend a part of his
Life there, and endeavor being already the Kings subject, to obtain some place
or pension in his Family. Employ the best of your Services and years in that
design. But if fortune cross you in this as she has me, when you begin to grow
old think of your retreat; for that age is a dull and dead season, which
produces no fruit.

An old Courtier that is still in pursuit of fortune, deserves as much derision
as an old Lover: the mistrisses whom at that time either serve, can do them no
greater favor, than to deny them what they beg, whereof perhaps the functions
would be above their strength. If any thing be allowed to their importunity, if
should be reckoned a gracious gift, which obliges but to very little or no
service at all.

Although that the distribution of earthly goods seem when we come into the
World, already made, nevertheless our portions are not so fixed and limited
that they can neither increase nor diminish, God being willing for the
preserving of some equality amongst men, that the ebbing and flowing of fortune
should now and then make a new division of them. The Court is the most
considerable stage of this vicissitude, there great men rise, and fall to give
place to their rising inferiors, who likewise ruin themselves in the same
place to make way again for others. It is here that the swiftest motion of this
revolution appears: in the Country it is like the motion about the axletree,
which is so slow that it is almost imperceptible. We should do wrong to
complain of this vicissitude; seeing it is an effect of providence, which makes
appear to men what it calls every one of them by turn to the enjoyment of goods
and honors: and because the order that it observes, is to us unknown, we
inconsiderately call the action of God by the name of Fortune.

The Court, as I have said, is the chief theater of this change, every thing
there, in respect of the country is great, and all little in respect of the
Prince, and of those of his blood. The presence of them renders in some sort
all the rest equal, which would not be so elsewhere, though it seem to be a
place of great noise and confusion, and that from thence proceed Thunder and
Tempests, yet it is better and more secure being there, than in the places
where they break. The Court at least has this excellent property, that if it
advance and raise not him who proposes to follow it, it fashions and breeds
him, in respect that virtue is there in it is exaltation, and vice in the fall,
for fear of appearing in view of the Prince.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the vices to which Courtiers are most subject, which are
Vanity, Scoffing, Dissimulation, Ambition, and Luxury.
THe most ordinary vices of Court, are Vanity, Scoffing, Dissimulation,
Ambition and Luxury. Vanity is properly a weakness or impotency of Soul, that
cannot contain within our selves the good opinion that we have of our selves,
whether it be, that the contentment which we receive from it, be too great for
the smallness of the Vessel which should hold it, or that having received it,
it is so weak that it must break to give vent to our Joy. Ladies and exploits
of valor are the most common matter of Court-Vanity. Men that are in love
persuade themselves that to keep it secret, is in some manner to smother the
light of a bright fire, and that it is but a small Joy, that has no larger
extent than the heart of those that feel it. So that it is pretty difficult for
the mouth of a young man to conceal a pleasure wherein it has had so great a
share. In the acts of Valor, those that are the Authors, are likewise afraid
of not being sufficiently seen, and that if Victory be dum, there will be but
small difference between the Victorious and the Vanquished. And hence it is
that both these Vanities do spring, though their principles be very different,
the first proceeding from the impotency of a Soul that opens it self and
evaporates in the excess of it is pleasure, and the other from the weakness of a
mean heart, which measures things according to the pain that it has had, or
the violence that it put upon it self in the performance of them. He esteems
them according to what they cost him, and not according to their true worth,
and this is the cause that we find always little Souls much more given to
Vanity, than the great, in regard that whatever good thing they do, appears to
them beyond their measure; when on the other hand great men who have a larger
reach, and are always above their greatest performances, contain themselves
within as great a modesty as if they were ashamed that they had not done
enough: both these Vanities are no more but the sound of a hollow or weak
Vessel, that deserves rather derision than hatred.

Scoffing is another Court Vice, which springs only from a good opinion of our
own parts and sufficiency beyond others; if seeks it is own and companies
divertisement at the charge of some body. If it could be so modest to work it is
effect softly and gently without grating or wounding deep, I should not think
it altogether unprofitable in Society: when it is only Ingenious and Brisk,
beside that it serves to season conversation, it is sting is in some manner
medicinal; that which is tart and biting in it, making sometimes a more useful
Impression than a wise Counsel. It Is freedom discovers to us many times an evil
that we are ignorant of, which a friend dares not touch; and cures it by making
it known to us. To give it it is due, it should not be thought very injurious
but in the mouth of him that bears us ill will.

Dissimulation is another vice of the Courtier, and nevertheless a Virtue of
State, which has need of that veil, as of a second night, better to conceal
the secrets of government: when a Courtier applies it to his private actions,
that require not such conduct as the public, he makes it a particular Vice. It
is a false reflection of light, or to say better, except in public affairs it
is only but the ape of politic prudence. It is a disguise that puts a man into
such a Mascarade, that the whole course of his Life is but one continued Lie. A
liar has some intervals of truth, a dissembler has none, and most commonly he
resembles those maskers that go about the streets at Shrove-tide, who whether
they be known or not, it is no great matter. Nevertheless distrust always every
man that walks under a Visor, whatever his intention be, in that condition he
gives ground to suspect, that he is going, or coming from the committing of
some foul act. As to your self, fix always your eyes on the spot to which you
tend, go neither backward nor cross-ways, lest that thereby you may take the
wrong rode. Amongst great men themselves dissimulation makes but an ordinary
Virtue. Tiberius was but an indifferent Prince, though the most dangerous of
all the Emperors; And Lewis the eleventh has neither been the greatest nor
best of our Kings. Both which were great artists in this state-craft.

My children, be not at all afraid to make a window in your breast, you may
perhaps amend a part of your Faults by the shame that you will have to see them
exposed to view. When men have once found that in all your actions there is
nothing but Truth, Candor, and Ingenuity; if you meet with any affair where
there is need of Midnight secrecy, the opinion of the integrity of your Life
past will render you invisible in the managing of it.

As to Ambition, it is a vice so inherent in, and inseparable from the nature
of man, that there is no age, sex nor quality that is free from it: but seeing
that the matter of it is more noble and large at Court, than any where else, I
call it a Court-Vice, if an appetite in man to set himself forward ought to be
called a Vice. It is true that if one could always follow an honest course for
his Preferment, Ambition would be rather a Virtue than Vice; but seeing the
desire of growing great is violent and precipitant, and that all means good or
bad are made use of to attain to that end, for that reason it often degenerates
into a vicious passion.

To say the truth, Ambition is the inward worm of a man of parts, which turns
to a Be in the soul of the virtuous, and a Wasp in the mind of the wicked.
That passion has some resemblance to Choler which grows adust by being
obstructed, as the other becomes Malicious and Envious, when it meets with any
hinderance in it is progress. It must needs be of a very blind and inconsiderate
nature, that it can never find a resting place, like birds whose eyes are put
out, which fly always upward, because they know not the place where they should
perch.

It is very strange, that ambition with all it is imperfections preserves still
the seeds of all the most lovely actions of Life. My son, that is but a bastard
issue, to give them a more illustrious and lawful birth, we must have no other
aim in doing of them, but the only respect to Virtue.

Luxury which chiefly consists in the magnificence of Buildings, the beauty of
furniture, the excess and delicacy of Food, the riches of Apparel and in a
great retinue and attendance, may be better called the Pomp than a Vice of
Court. All these things are so many refractions of Grandeur, which appear
crooked when they are not so. The course of that profusion of state flows
secretly back and fore from the Country to the Court, and from the Court to the
Country, as Rivers that fall in the Sea, which return again to their source to
preserve successively themselves and Sea in their just greatness, by ways and
channels unknown to us: without that reflux their source would quickly be dry
or overgorged.

There is no State but ours that can support that excessive charge, others
cannot without ruining themselves; this we see because that in some all their
pomp is ceremonial, and consists only in the right and left hand, or in a
certain kind of parade that lengthens only the tail without enlarging the
wings. In others, they have the prudence not to suffer that the Prince should
always appear in public. This Eclipse of his person is but in effect, the
husbandry of a State which perceives it self not able enough to carry out the
splendor which should always accompany the Majesty and presence of the Prince.

As to other States that endeavor to imitate us in that excess, we may say of
them that they are but our apes, considering the disproportion of their
strength to ours. Our luxury is in some manner an image of the abundance of
nature, which though it may suffer some wast in it is flowers or fruit, leaves
us always enough and to spare.

I will say farther, that Profusion (without offense to our sumptuary Laws) has
in it somewhat of greater policy than Sparing, in that by the liberty that it
gives to great men, who are naturally expensive, to ruin themselves, it
lessens their rents, whereby their power by dissipating it self becomes less
suspect to the State. In effect all things rightly considered, I think luxury
is a private evil and a public good, in respect that by that means, goods only
change hands, and that there is some distributive Justice in that successive
revolution, which is one of the principal causes of the preserving of the State.

My child, in the five things that I have hinted at, I have within a little
reckoned up the most essential imperfections of the Court, others that are
observed there, are but transient faults; these are inherent to it.
Nevertheless whatsoever vices are found there, they are more excusable in that
place than any where else.

In the Country the most ordinary Vanity, is that of pedigree, which is but a
reflection of the light of our Forefathers. Scoffing is injurious there,
dissimulation treacherous, ambition rests in giving presents or doles, and
luxury barely in the table and keeping of days. These defects having at Court
more noble subjects to be applied to, are there also more supportable.

If there was ever at Court a Virtue refined, and without any mixture of Vice
it was that of the late Marquis of Senecy the Father: he was equally wise,
valiant, learned and good, or to say better he was Virtuous in the ways of God
and of the Court, which are two things not so easy to be reconciled together.

CHAP. XXVIII. Containing six Counsels for a Courtier. 1. To serve only the
King. 2. How one should carry himself with his Favorites. 3. To accommodate
ones self to times. 4. To be Flexible. 5. Not to be too Scrupulous about points
of Honor. 6. To follow the Mode.
I Leave this illustrious example that I may return to you, my Son, and inform
you that unless it be at Court, we can find nothing accomplished; nor any thing
of a noble life; and therefore it is my advice that you take the first shape
and form of living in that place: I leave you but a small estate to bear out
the charges of a Court-life, you must run your hazard as I have done, fortune
will have us pawn ourselves in her Service. In the mean time you shall either
get breeding or die in the Service; or if you grow old at Court or in the Army,
the Court or Army will maintain you.

If you reap any advantage from your Services in the Army, which with the
little estate that I leave you may make you able to subsist by your self, let
the King alone be your Master; engage not your fidelity to any besides, lest a
time may come when your honor clashing with your duty may call you to side
with your benefactor.

Suffer your self like the multitude to be surried by the torrents of Court,
which are the Farourites. They are chooses by the King, either to affist him it
carrying the burden of the state, or to be the confidents of his secrets or
pleasures, or meetly to show some work of his creation: on which soever of all
these three accounts it be, they are by himself cut out as the images of his
power, which you are obliged to reverence.

They who are in favor with their Prince, for their wisdom in counsels and
faithfulness in affairs are rather associates in the care of government, than
favorites; the usefulness of their Services, and the ease that the Prince
thereby receives, should make you honor and esteem them, if you be a good
subject. Strive, if you can to make your self known to them, in respect that
the eye of the Prince which is for most part vagrant and ranging among the
multitude will never attentively fix on you, whatsoever you may be, but by
their means: but seeing that men and business run commonly in the same channel,
the crowd is so great that way, that it becomes more easy to obtain access to
the Prince, than to his ministers: one must nevertheless use his endeavors to
appear sometime before them, though it be for no other end but to honor the
choice of their Services.

But then let your discretion keep you at due distance: if you approach too
near them, or see them too often, you will burden their sight and be
troublesome, and by pressing too much upon them instead of advancing forward
set your self back: neither look upon them at too great distance, nor too
seldom, lest you may put your self out of their eye, and by your indifference
do your self prejudice.

As to those who are the Confidents of the Kings secrets and pleasures (whom I
place in the second rank, seeing that it is necessary that the care of
Government take place of his Divertisements) the grandeur of Kings would be
uneasy to them, if it deprived them of the sweetest enjoyment of humane life,
which is Friendship.

To make up a perfect Friendship, there must be some resemblance of age, humor
and quality amongst friends. For the supplying of this last qualification,
which cannot (as the two former) be between a Prince and a Subject, Kings have
judged it more convenient that they might have a share in this pleasant fruit
of society, to raise those whom they have honored with their friendship, to
great places of state, rather than to stoop down to them. In effect what is
called Favor in a Prince toward his Subject, is the same thing as Friendship
between two equals: there is nothing changed but the name.

Some speculative heads have judged this elevation of a Subject dangerous, and
that thereby there might happen some revolution in the State: there are reasons
and examples pro and con. Yet the more sober opinion, and as I think, the more
politic, is that the King should make choice of some person, in whose bosom he
might power part of his Joy or Displeasure, otherways the life of Kings would
become a desert in the midst of the multitude. Seeing their passions are great
as themselves, it is so much the more necessary that they should lose part of
their force, by imparting them to some faithful person, for fear that they
discover not too much violence or weakness in their eruption; or that by
keeping of them secret they breed not some peevish and melancholy humor, or
some obstruction of mind; whose symptoms are far more dangerous, than open
wounds.

History tells us that this profound retreat of Soul stupefied the Judgment of
Charles Duke of Burgundy surnamed the Hardy, a little before his death: and
that the last years of Lewis the eleventh, by reason of his so reserved a kind
of life; were neither his wisest nor most happy years.

Joy and heaviness have this property, that being imparted to a faithful
friend, the first is doubled and the last lessened by a half. So then whatever
can being serenity to the mind of the Prince, has in it always much more good
than evil, their private tempests being wont to become a public storm.

Yet I deny not also but that upon some other considerations it were to be
wished that the Prince might preserve his affections as his rank equal with all
his subjects: but seeing that he is a man as we are, when his inclinations
carry him to some particular person, we should, if we have any tenderness of
heart, from our own experience excuse in him, a passion that never appears in
force but when it is abused.

Above all things beware of that impertinent vanity of not reverencing the
Favorite, it is neither profitable, secure, nor honest; you cannot refuse him
honor, nor even your affection, seeing that he is the Confident of your
Master, but that you break his image in your mind, and are guilty of internal
felony against him.

The third kind of Favorites, is when a Prince raises any one without allowing
him any share in his counsels, pleasures or confidence, he erects him merely as
a Colossus of greatness, that he may leave to the present age and posterity a
visible monument of his power. Kings who are the image of God upon earth, are
pleased sometimes in imitation of him, to make of impure matter some work of
creation that may bear their Image: but as the works of the creature are more
imperfect than those of the creator, so they are of no duration, whether it be
by reason of their inability to support their own weight, or that the artist is
ashamed of his own workmanship, and like God, repents himself that he has made
man.

When that happens, my child, as I have advised

When that happens, my Child, as I have advised you to reverence the other
Favorits, retain also some respect for the wracks of your Masters follies; if
you love him you are bound to conceal or excuse them. The choice of a Favorite
of any of these three kinds, is more honest in the middle Region than in the
lower, and less dangerous than in the upper. There is never any false Idol of
Sovereignty set up in that middle Region, and the Majesty of the Prince is not
thereby in the least vilified.

I advise you moreover to conform your self to the present state of affairs,
the direction of which is not in your power; condemn not what you cannot alter,
and if your judgment find any thing in it amiss, take heed at least that your
Tongue betray you not. You will labor in vain, if the movements of your mind
be not concentric with the Wheels of the Times, their rapid motion will carry
yours along in spite of you, and will prove contrary to you in their
revolution.

Be likewise of a more pliable disposition than I have been; it is the best
Gold that best obeys the Artists Hand, and of which the loveliest piece is
made: the coarser makes only more resistance because it is parts are not so
solid as the others: assure your self then, my Child, that every churlish
spirit is porous and uneven, and that if any good come of it, it proceeds
rather from the excellence of the Workman, than of the matter.

It is to my self that I speak at present, who might have left you in legacy
something else beside counsels; if I had had a spirit a little more flexible.
One may bow like the rush without remaining crooked, and rise again straight in
the same place as it does, when the blast of Wind is over. I confess, my
Children, that I have often wanted prudence in that; for which I can make no
other excuse for my justification toward you, but to protest to you, that in
getting the side of my fortune, I thought always that I followed that which was
most for mine honor.

Here I am obliged to tell you that Honor as well as Devotion, has its
scruples, and that it is very hard for one so to conduct himself in refining of
either, that he admit no mixture of superstition. Wherefore it is my opinion
that the thread and texture of your honor should be somewhat coarse: when it
is too thin and fine, its tenderness shapes out too much work for the
maintaining of it.

If superstition in honor be excusable, it ought only to be in the actions of
War; except in these, it is our greatest glory to be most condescending in
society, and most sociable in conversation. Be not abused by the vain phantome
of I know not what false generosity, which is only superficial. I have often
observed, that those who make the greatest clutter about it, are for most part
all necessitous, and who hazard nothing but rags and words in the profession of
it.

Make it never your business to introduce a new Fashion, the wise are rarely
the authors of them. Neither condemn those that are in use; if they continue,
follow them; if they alter, change with them; in matters indifferent, and
whereat no body is offended, there is more extravagance and presumption, than
judgment, in being singular.

It is enough for a wise man to retire from the crowd, as to the inside, and to
preserve to himself the liberty of judging within himself of matters according
as they are: but as to the outside, he must enter into the common use of
received forms. Public society is in a manner offended at the external revolt
of a particular person, though in a thing indifferent. Besides our mutual
assistance, we owe it our consent and imitation of its customs, yea even though
in them there may be some folly.

If the Mode will have you to wear more cloth in a loose or less in a
close-bodied Coat; and that your Shoes be longer than your Feet, do so; but I
pray you let them not be too straight, the slashes that you give them, cry
against you murder, and the Ribbons with which you tie them are not at all
becoming in that place. Use not your self like a criminal by putting your self
to a Rack, from whence you can reap nothing but vexation, bunches and the Gout.
Let your Periwig or Hair be long and well powdered and your Shoulders too, if
the Fashion will have it so, I am not against it, only I beg of you that you
employ not so much time for the ornament of the outside of your Head; that you
reserve not to your self still some hours for the ordering of the inside.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Divertisements that consist in Play, and in Conversation. Of
the Play of Chess, Dice and Cards, and of Play in General.
I Think, my Children, that I have now handled the principal Actions of Man's
Life except that of Divertisements, whereof the most common are Play and
Conversation. Plays which are not sedentary, as Tennis, Hand-Ball, Pel-Mel, and
the like, are rather Exercises than Plays, which Men love or slight according
to their Age, their Fitness and Disposition, or according as they are addicted
to them. All the hurt that excess in these can do, is to tire the Body without
much troubling the Mind or Purse. The Sedentary such as the Chess, Dice, and
Cards, are more dangerous.

Though Chess have in it somewhat ingenious, yet seeing it abstracts us too
much from our selves, and that the Victory is but vain to the Gainer and makes
the Loser fretful, and that it is so dreaming a Pastime, that it seems to be
the sleep of two men that are awake; since you have the World and Society to
make a proof of your sufficiency in, I advise you, not to reduce it to so
narrow a Precinct. That is an attracting Play because that the pleasure of
every action consists in the end, and that this is sudden, depending on our
own conduct alone, and is often reiterated; all which conditions do hardly meet
in any other action whatsoever.

The Play at Dice is not a Divertisement, it is rather an attempt made upon
another Purse, which the Law tolerates because it cannot hinder. Before you
suffer your self to be infected with this abomination; Look, I pray you, into
the Places and Ordinaries of this unlucky Commerce, and there consider the
trouble and agitation of those that haunt them, the disturbance of the Winners,
the despair of Losers, the Curses, and Blasphemies that there are uttered, and
I assure my self that all these terrible Images will fill you will horror
against it. Though the Hits of that Play are all momentany, and entertained
with the diverse reprises of hope and fear, the Mind suffers a continual
torture under the Wheel of these two Passions; beside that of Fortune.

Cards and Tables are somewhat more moderate: for as the Progress of their
action is slower, so the motion that they cause in the Mind, is more regular.
In these Games Fortune decides one part of the success, and leaves the other to
our conduct. So that it is the most ordinary Divertisement of those that want
business, or desire some relaxation from affairs, which in it self would be
honest and lawful, if there were no cheating in the case: but seeing that Game
is a kind of Exchequer, from whence Luxury draws part of its stock, and that
all men would spend more than they are able, hence it is that there is but
little honesty in a Commerce from which every one hopes to reap advantage.

Play is a kind of contract, which has its forms only in use and custom:
Fortune is the Judge, but the management and conduct is all our own, which ought
to be so much the more sincere, that we are obliged to obey its rules by an
unwritten Law. He that did violate it, was heretofore held as infamous, whom
one might upbraid as a man taken in open Robbery: now adays it is no shame to
be a Cheat in Play, so great is the prostitution of Public Faith that it is
now no more the Trade of a beggarly Knave, there are Persons of Quality that
openly and securely practice it, because it is not easy to bring them to
reason.

So that, my Son, I should be glad that you would renounce this Divertisement,
which is altogether opposite to Charity, in that it grieves either your self,
or Adversary who loses. If you cannot abstain from it, be at least, I pray you,
more patient than I have been, and as faithful to your Gamester.

CHAP. XXX. Of Conversation.
COnversation is the most common and honest Divertisement of Life. Solitary
retreat would be somewhat too ghastly, and the Crowd too tumu tuary, if there
were not some mean betwixt both made up of the choice of some particular
persons, with whom men communicate themselves, to avoid the tediousness of
solitude, or the burden of the multitude. That choice is made according to the
diversity of tempers, every one fitting his Buckle to his Belt, and in this
variety all propose the same end which is the divertisement of the Mind.

As every Week has its working days and day of Rest, so after the painful
hours that are spent at home and abroad, every day has need of its hours of
repose, which are the hours of conversation. wherefore we should have a care
not to mistake in the choice of those with whom we contract familiarity, in
respect that the last seasoning of our manners whether good or bad depends
thereon.

There is no society in the Crowd, the countenances of men whom we meet there,
make no more impression on us than the Faces that we see in a Dream: the sound
of their Voices is not much more articulated than the noise of falling waters.
The mind in that tumult finds no support: If it be likewise alone, instead of
pleasing, it stuns it self in its own career: there is nothing then but the
presence of one or more friends that comforts it. It is indeed most certain
that the disclosing of our hearts to some particular friend cures it of part of
its anxiety: but seeing the conversation with more friends requires a greater
enlargement of our mind, we divide our selves more amongst them, and by
consequent discharge more fully our troubles.

God did me the favor when I was at Court, twenty six years ago, that I was
received into a conversation, which was chiefly entertained by two brothers of
the same name, merit, and illustrious Life. There was every evening in their
house a certain consort of friends, where all things past with such harmony,
and so much sweetness and discretion, that I never had any trouble in mind
which vanished not in that company.

They being persons (...) ^sdom, fidelity, learning and of a most eminent
v^^tue, every one strove to contribute his best, in that honest society. Now
such a kind of conversation, beside that it quiets and stills our passions, it
enlightens likewise the mind: for it will be certainly in vain to fill the
magazin of the mind by meditation, if we vent it not by speech. And therefore
we commonly see good reasons lose their force and grace for want of a clear
expression, which depends only on the turning about, and setting in order the
notions of the mind before they be expressed; conversation embodies them by
speech, and we see them better then, than when they are still shapeless in our
imagination; and therefore it is that men for most part pronounce aloud what
they read or write; words admitting of a more distinct judgment than thoughts.

In conversation, methinks, that men also contract some union with those to
whom they communicate themselves, and that we feel the same effect that appears
in natural actions, which not only fortify themselves by their conjunction,
but better resist contrary impressions. Mankind is a body composed of similary
and dissimilary parts, which is divided into as many portions as there are men.
The Similary Parts by their approach endeavor to reunite themselves: And the
Dissimilary, to maintain their scparation by flight: for from whence can
proceed the love, or aversion that we find at first meeting, if the intimation
of that casual impulse were not inherent in the mass of blood, and the spirits
where it is occasioned.

It is very considerable that there passes nothing in the intellectual nature,
whereof the material gives us not some indication. For example the eye is
better satisfied to join the eye, the hand the hand, and the mouth the mouth,
than any other part of the body. After the same manner we find amongst Spirits
and Humors some similary parts which have so great affection for one another,
that by the sole difference of their sorting together, what diversity soever
there may be in the mass, we may make a certain judgment of a man according to
the conversation wherein he delights. The serious covet the company of the
serious, fools of the brainsick, the gentle tempers the quiet of a corner: but
discreeter persons desire an innocent and pleasing society which forms the mind
and diverts it. There is none but the company of several friends who make all
profession of honor and integrity, that can have all these conditions. Keep to
this last, my son, and prefer it to all the rest.

CHAP. XXXI. Of the Conditions necessary for a Churchman.
I Have formerly declared my intention that one of my Sons should be a
Churchman, provided he were endued with the conditions and qualifications
necessary for that charge. My second Son, I think, will be the fittest for it;
for I find him of a temper more debonnaire and tractable than the rest. And as
the sacrifice of a Son is more acceptable to God, than that of a Lamb, I will
not make my Oblation a Sacrilege, by presenting to him the imperfectest of my
Children. Though they be yet too young to discern which of them will be the
fittest, yet I design him who seems to be so at present, whether it be the
mildness of his infancy that obliges liges me to it, or that I have already a
respect to that holy Character wherewith I desire he may be honored.

My eldest and youngest Sons, are of too brisk and hot a temper, for a
Profession that requires meekness; the constitution of their brother appears
more moderate, and to have some sign also of greater judgment; so that I think
in dedicating him to the Service of God, I offer him the soundest fruit of my
Family. It is greater injury to God to present unto him the refuse of the
House, than to offer him a Sheep that has a blemish; in respect that the
Sacrificer ought to be more pure than the Sacrifice. That is just as to make
the Shewbread of the Siftings of the Flower, and to pollute the Sanctuary of
the Lord with the impurity of our Blood.

The Platonic Laws require of those that aspire to the Priesthood, that they
should be lawfully begotten, sound in Body and Manners, of an ingenuous and
honest extraction, virtuous persons; and that afterward the hand of God should
make the choice by giving them their preferment by Lot. The Canons of the
Church agree in all these qualifications, except the Election by Lot, which
they have judged too blind and casual for so worthy an Employment: and
forasmuch as the imperfections of the Soul are more hidden than the defects of
Body, which are obvious to the Eye, they have been prudently circumspect in
their inquiry and examination, and in not permitting that any should be
honored with that Dignity before a certain age, and without evident proofs of
Learning and Integrity of Manners; and have therefore appointed Orders to be
conferred successively one after another, to the end that during that progress
it might be known if the person to be admitted were not guilty of somewhat that
might render him incapable of that holy Character which separates him from the
Laics and consecrates him to the portion of God which is the Clergy, from
whence there is no return.

Hardowin, my Son, when you have attained to the years of discretion, enter
into your self, and deliberate maturely with your Manners and Passions, which
will then be in their vigor, if they can suffer you to lead the Life of a good
Churchman. It is better that you should be a bad Layman, than a vicious
Priest. The reverence toward God and the scandal of your Neighbor will therein
be less: Consider likewise, if you be sufficiently instructed in the matters of
your Profession, the Lord preserve you from that shame and confusion, that any
one should be in doubt when you approach to the Foot of the Altar whether you
be the Sacrifice or Sacrificer.

You must likewise, my Son, be a lover of Books or renounce your Profession.
Study is one of the chief exercises of a Churchman; for beside that it serves
to instruct himself and others, it serves also to divert him from idleness; his
Prayers are short, and the day long, if he employ not his time in Study, what
will he be else, but an empty ground, that is exposed, Vitiorum primo
occupanti, to the first possessour of his Vices?

Employ your Studies in endeavoring like the ancient Fathers to become more
knowing in positive Divinity than in Scholastic, the one makes the Master, the
other but the Scholar. The positive is humble, dutiful, and full of the Holy
Ghost, the Scholastic is subject to be headstrong; arrogant, and so full of
contention, that very often it puts out Charity.

A certain person has said more judiciously, I think, than maliciously, that
it has been hatched by the idleness of some Monkish spirits, who were indeed
subtle, but having had more fire than light, would have reduced Theology to an
Art, by subjecting it to the forms of Logic, as Aristotle has done all his
Works. From thence is derived that Deluge of Arguments, Questions, Objections
and Distinctions (great indeed in bulk, but small in substance) whereof the
most part are of no consequence, and where there is neither Bottom nor Bank.

The Positive consists simply in the Word of God, in the Exposition of it
according to the Fathers, and in the understanding of the Mysteries of Religion
according to Faith. The Scholastic mingles with it so many vain Subtilties,
and so much Embroydery of less value than the Stuff, that hardly can the
ancient Texture of it be known. My Son, the business is to labor for our
Salvation in the reading of holy Books. So long as you busy your self to
reason of God, and his Attributes, have a care that you mistake not the way
that you must follow to guide you to him.

In primitive times he that desired to be a Disciple of Christ, was obliged to
resign all his Goods and to lay them at the Apostles Feet. It was needful at
that time that the primitive Zeal should make up a common stock for the use of
the Faithful and Poor: but now adays when there remains little more but the
Smoke of that ancient Heat, and that the Manners of Men are changed, the honor
of Priesthood requires that he that undertakes it, should have a sufficient
subsistence.

If God bestow upon you, my Son, somewhat more than is necessary to maintain
you decently in the rank that you may have in the Church, distribute it amongst
the Poor. They that live in the place where your Benefices (if any you have)
lie, have the first privilege: your Relations and those of your Blood, if they
be necessitous, the second: and afterward the rest of the Poor according to
your ability. Govern your self nevertheless with so much wisdom in that
Economy, that you send not so much nourishment to the Branches, as may exhaust
the Sap of the Stock.

My Child, if you would entirely dedicate your self to the Service of God, I
have an advice to give you, which is more Apostolic than Religious Vows;
render your self capable of the charge of a good Parson or Curate. For that end
you must renounce all sort of impurity of Flesh and of Spirit, be submitted to
your Superiors, and be no more your own man, but give your self wholly to all
the Souls committed to your charge, which is the lowest abnegation that you can
make of your self, and the most illustrious purity to which you can attain.

When I hear men speak of the Life of some Parish Parsons heretofore deceased
and of some still alive, I think that in their actions I see a living Emblem of
the greatest Purity that has ever been in Christendom. They Pray, they
Practice, they Catechize, Confess, Preach, they distribute their Goods amongst
the Poor, they comfort the Afflicted, they visit the Sick, far and near, night
and day, at what hour soever they be called, a foot; and give them the
Sacrament; they assist them at their Death, and what danger soever there may
be, accompany them to the Grave, and perform to them the Office of Funeral.
They are all to all in particular as well as in general. The holy Apostles and
Jesus Christ himself did no more, except the working of Miracles, which was
rather an effect of their being visited by the Holy Ghost, than of their
Character.

As we are touched with reverence at the happy meeting of such holy Persons, we
should likewise be with horror, when we see any that neglect the Souls of the
Faithful committed to them, and abandon these Apostolic Functions which are
their duty, for any other employment whatsoever, unless it be the service of
the King and State; such persons will hardly prove more faithful to man than
God, their first breaking warrants them in the second. God preserve you, my
Son, if you be called to that holy charge, from doing any thing that may be
contrary to the purity of so sacred and holy a Profession.

CHAP. XXXII. Five general Directions for Virtue, whereof the last is
Submission to the Providence of God, which makes the conclusion of the Second
Part.
MY dearest Children, if it behove me to make a review of all the particulars
which may conduce to the fashioning your Body and Mind, I should never make an
end. I have only therefore touched those things which I thought most necessary
for you, and wherein you ought to take greatest care to improve your selves.
There is no industry which languishes not by neglect, nor strength that becomes
not weakness when nummed or stupefied. Virtue will not have its Action put off
till to morrow: that delay is nothing but a modest complement that an
irresolute soul makes to it self, which has neither the power to grant nor
refuse what reason requires.

Your active and working temper is a rude and unpolished diligence, that stands
in need only of a wise direction; this is the effect of Virtue alone, the
series of which that is made up of all occasions and all kinds of matter,
exposes to view the lovely prospect of the Lives of the Illustrious. Virtue is
not the work of an hour, a year, of one or more actions, it requires our whole
life, it is always beginning and it is progress should be so continued that it
allow not the liberty of judging thereof till after death. It is true that the
purchase of it is painful; but seeing that difficulty makes matter for it, the
greater that is, the more noble will be its actions.

The hardest Marble frustrates not the hand of the Statuary, but by the
difficulty of shaping of it into form his diligence is doubled. Virtue is only
inaccessible to those that look upon it at distance, such as have a heart to
approach it, find it is avenues easy enough: it consists only in four or five
general points.

The first is never to be idle. The fore part of man bends all forwards: the
hands, feet, and face, to teach us that the Mind should conform to the Fabric
of the Body, and be progressive as it is. Let us not suffer those two parts of
our Body to loyter in laziness and sloth: we find that we weary sooner standing
still than walking, and that the best spirits are like the strongest arms,
which are far sooner put out of joint by beating the Air than striking on a
resistable Matter.

So that Action being more commodious to us than Rest, let us apply our selves
to something. The Head without the Hands and Feet is a Monster, to show us that
we must determine our selves to action, and that whatsoever delicateness there
may be in our words and thoughts, if we employ our selves in nothing else, we
appear like the winged heads of those little Cherubims, which are so much the
more imperfect, in that they are neither Angels nor Men; as an Ape is deformed,
because it is of an ambiguous nature betwixt a Beast and a Man.

The second Method of preparing and plaining the ways of Virtue, is to be
watchful, and to consider if in whatsoever we do or say we propose an honest
end, and take honest ways to attain it. If we be assiduous in that observation,
and in that study of our selves, we shall without doubt insensibly mount to the
top of Virtue, without being much incommoded or hindered by the steepness of
it is ascent; for though the affairs of the World, have many times crooks and
knots which seem to subject them to some indirect circumstances which may
divert us from the right road that we must keep in managing of them:
Nevertheless if our will continue firm and immovable toward a good end, and
that the biasses that we take to arrive at it be likewise honest; we may assure
our selves that the imperfection of the matter will be redressed by the
integrity of the Workman. It is impossible to carry on all things by a straight
line: business like ways have their turnings and windings, which of necessity
we are obliged to follow, otherwise we should make in both but a bad progress.

The most important secret of life is to have prudence and skill honestly and
lawfully to accommodate Virtue to times, men and affairs; for by that means we
not only sweeten what is most harsh and austere in it, but likewise give it the
best and most commodious use that it can have.

My Third Advice is, that when you have most carefully observed your self, you
likewisely attentively consider the actions of others. All the actions of Man
are good or bad; for the greatest part of those that we call indifferent, are
not so, they are rather the marks of, or predispositions which tend to good or
evil. If you exactly consider both, the good will furnish you with an example
of imitation, and the bad with a better example to make you abhor and detest
them. Assure your self, my Son, that the faults that are committed in your
presence, have in them a more certain corrective, than what proceeds from your
own escapes.

The Features of another Face which appears directly to our eyes, make a more
lively impression in us, than our own, which are not seen of us but by
reflection, other Men's vices are considered nakedly as they are in themselves.
Our perturbation (for there is no Vice without perturbation) confounds the
appearances of our own, and hinders us from seeing of them in their ugliest
shape: from whence it comes to pass that when there is a calm in our minds
again, we retain no more of them but an imperfect Image, the kindness that we
have for our selves, which reaches not to others, blotting out of our memory a
part of their deformity.

My fourth Counsel is, that every night before you go to rest, you make a short
recollection of all that you have seen, done, and said during the day; this
trial not only inflames the foul with the love of good, and the hatred of evil,
but serves also as a memorandum for the conduct of the day following.

It is not just that we should give the whole night to the repose of the Body,
and the digestion of the Victuals, wherewith it has been loaded in the day
time, and refuse half an hour only or less to the Soul, for the concoction of
good actions, and the evacuation of it is impurities.

By this recollection Virtue ferments and swells; and Vice dissolves; it is of
so excellent an use, that some of the very Ancients, though they were not
illuminated by the Light of the Faith, have made it one of the chief Articles
of their Morality. Let us not suffer, my Son, that they should have been more
careful than we in an exercise so necessary for the salvation, and conduct of
the Soul of a Believer.

I will conclude this second Part, and my Counsels concerning Virtue, by the
last of the four which the Divine and unimitable Thomas a Kempis directs for
obtaining peace in the Mind. His three first Counsels, to wit, to affect rather
to do the will of another than ones own, to covet always the lowest place, and
to desire rather too little than too much, are of a higher perfection than I
wish you to have.

These three which are Virtues in a retired Life, are imperfections in the
order of Society, which requires that every one keep the rank of his Parts and
Quality. As to the Fourth, which is to submit our selves in all things to the
Will of God, this last does really crown all the Virtue of Man; it will be in
vain for you to be diligent in well-doing, to observe your self in your
actions, to draw instruction from the Actions of others, and to make an
examination of your Conscience; if your mind submit not to the events of life
which are not in your power, and your will be not entirely conformed to the
Will of God, the rest will stand you in no stead. The loss of Friends, Goods,
Health, Crosses in our Designs, and a thousand other troublesome accidents,
come all upon us by an eternal decree: and in respect that our eye and
understanding are too weak to trace step for step the connection that all these
things have with the Providence of God, we esteem them casual.

Let us not abuse our selves, my Children, there is nothing in the world
casual, Providence orders the smallest as well as greatest things; a grain of
dust, a Gnat have their dependence on God as well as Men and Angels, every one in
their several order, there is no event how small so ever but has it is cause,
and that cause it is dependence on another cause till we come to the first.

So, my Child, if all things come to pass by appointment, he that gives it,
intends nothing thereby; or rise all things happen for the best, if not in
respect of you, yet in reference to the Universe, the interest of which takes
place of yours: you cannot then be afflicted with any cross accident, but that
your mind is in open rebellion against him who is the cause of it. To avoid
that, I charge you, my dearest Children, Sons and Daughters, to submit your
selves to the obedience of God, and to desire that in all things his Will be
done rather than your own.

There is no softer lenitive to sweeten the bitterness of the cross accidents
of life, which depend not on us, than constantly to believe that they are the
effects of the providence of God which come upon us by his order. By so doing
the necessity that lies upon us of bearing of them, will be easily changed into
a complacency to his Will: by accommodating our selves to his pleasure, there
will nothing from thence forward happen to us in spite of us, and we do not
only a thing that is pleasing to him, but become in some manner participant of
his eternal Counsel, to which it seems we subscribe by our consent, when it
goes along with his.

In effect it is a most gross mistake to imagine that all the adventures of our
life are guided by a blind power, it is God, and not that, who leads us.
Whither? to himself. Which way? inquire not, your guide is not obliged to give
you an account of the way he takes, let it content you that the Almighty is
your guide. This is very strange in the vast extent of the Ocean, where there
is neither Path nor Road, man commits himself blindly to the faith of a Pilot,
who has no other direction whereby to make his course round the World, but his
Compass and a Star; and in the Revolution of Life he can hardly confide in the
providence of him, who is not only the Creator of that Star, but the mover of
the Universe, in the conduct whereof it is impossible that he can be mistaken,
because that being the Founder thereof, all it is ways are known to him.

Dash out of your mind then, I pray you, my Son, that vain name of Fortune,
which is an empty apparition, that has its being only in the foolish
imagination of man: pronounce not so much as the name of it, lest that by
forming the word you grave not a false Idol of a thing that is not, and by
attributing to it any kind of power, you rob not the Divinity. Consider whither
your error leads you, when you cannot comprehend the order of the World, nor
the connection of it is causes; under the name of Fortune, you transfer your own
blindness to their Mover. Although you cannot follow within distance the
contiguity of events, whereof the effect of the one is the cause of the other,
yet for all that they have an eternal and immutable principle, from whence that
order is derived. Content your self to be measured by it, without calling in
question the rule of the Measurer. Universal and particular things are linked
together, without any the least confusion. The last Wave that beats the Shore,
receives the same common impulse with the rest of the Ocean. According to that
general disposition, it ought to be no small contentment to man, to see that
the same order that makes the entire revolution of the Universe, is at the same
time the cause of his.

Add this then, my Children, to the Articles of your Faith, [That God does all
for the best.] It is as true as the rest, more suitable to your reason, and of
larger use; in so much that if you be once persuaded of this truth, it will be
to you an internal Haven, where you may ride secure from all the Tempests of
Life.

THE Fathers Legacy: OR FAITHFUL COUNSELS OF A GOOD FATHER TO HIS CHILDREN and
FRIENDS.
The Third Part; Which treats of the Duty of Man toward Man.
CHAP. I. Of the Force and Necessity of Society.
GOd having had the goodness, my Children, to make Man after his own Image, and
to multiply his kind, we cannot, I think, preserve that resemblance that
resemblance that is betwixt him and us, if man behave not himself toward Man,
like a God; that is to say, unless he be good and beneficent to him. In the
First Part of these my Counsels, I have handled the Duty of Man toward God: In
the Second, his Duty toward Himself which depends on the moderation of his
Passions. This Third Part, which consists in the respective Duty of Man toward
Man, is nothing else but a lawful application of these two first Duties toward
his Neighbor: for it is most certain that every man that fears God, and
conforms his Will to Reason, will prove a good Husband, good Father, good Son,
good Brother, good Master, good Servant, good Neighbor, good Citizen, good
Subject, and good Prince, which are the chief links of humane Society.

It has been said by one, with very little judgment, that to lead a retired
Life, one must be more than man or less than man, because I have never heard of
a Hero that became so in solitude, there is more probability to think that the
avoiding of company proceeds only from the lubbardliness of a rude and rustic
soul, buried in matter, which wanting force to push it self out into the world,
only retires to hide its own infirmity. And if the Ancient zeal have exhibited
to us some virtuous Anchorites, they are so few in number, and the imitation
has been so difficult that, that perfection has not been able to descend to
us. If there remain any image of it at this day, it is in the retreat of the
Carthusian Monks. It is true that every one of them has his Cell apart, yet to
compensate in some sort the austerity of their Rule, their institution appoints
that of twenty four hours, whereof day and night is composed, they should
employ ten in the Church by intervals, and thereby entertain a mutual society
in the exercise and duties of their worship.

Man is of so sociable a nature, that for want of company, if he be in the
night time alone in a Desert without light, the presence of a Dog, a Horse, a
Bird, or of an Infant in the Swaddling Clothes, is able to lessen his fear, and
it may be it was for that reason that the Beasts and other living Creatures
were created before him. The flight of a rout, the pursuit of a Victory, panick
terrors, the flocking of eleven thousand Virgins, and forty thousand men to
martyrdom, are so many different effects that proceed only from the force that
a blind impression of society makes in the mind, which is sometime so uniform
in its action, that a whole multitude seems to be governed by one single spirit.

When two or three of you shall be gathered together in my name, I will be in
the midst of you, (said our Lord) to oblige man to some society. He promises
not the same grace to man alone; for though a man by himself may love God with
all his strength, yet his charity is imperfect, in that it is defective in the
officious part of it is duty, which is the love of our Neighbor; wherein is
comprehended the mutual duty of man toward man, which is the last thing that I
have proposed to my self to treat of in this Will and Testament.

CHAP. II. Of the first Society, which is that of Husband and Wife, and of
their respective Duties.
I Shall then begin this last part by the first Society in the World which was
made by the hand of God himself, and that is the conjunction of Man and Wife,
whereof all the circumstances are very considerable.

Before that the Woman was made, God faw (says the Scripture) that it was not
good for Man to be alone; for when he is alone he is many times the greatest
enemy that he has, and of whom he should be most aware. Afterward he said,
that he would give him an help meet for him: betwixt two things that are meet
for one another, the convenience ought to be equal and reciprocal, which gives
us an evidence that the Woman should neither be the Mistress nor the Servant of
the Man, otherwise they could not be meet for one another.

Before that he gave her to him he cast him asleep, to teach us perhaps that we
have no need of our eyes on that occasion, and that they are often enough very
bad Counselors in the choice of a convenient good, and that it is also
altogether necessary that the mind should be settled and in repose before we
take a Wife; for if in the matter of Marriage covetousness possess and trouble
the Mind, or we be pre-engaged in any other love, we can very hardly make a
good choice.

The Woman was neither taken out of the Back nor the Forepart of Man, but out
of his Side, as being appointed for his Companion and equal. The Scripture
observes not out of what side she was taken, to the end that she might take the
right, that is to say, the conduct of the Family, if she be more capable of it
than the Husband.

Lastly, The Woman is made of the same Skin. Bone, Flesh, and Blood, as the Man
is, to the end that both may know that there cannot be a more strict union in
nature than is betwixt them. The knowledge of their duty should be so perfect,
that it must appear like a Cement, which joins Obedience so well with Command,
that it can hardly be distinguished who commands and who obeys.

With the good leave of the Doctors, the division which they have made of a
Family into two parts, to wit, the Man, and the Goods, and Possession, seems to
me very imperfect, if we add not a third, to wit, the Wife; seeing that man
cannot propagate Posterity but only by her means, nor transfer his Estate
unless to the uncertain pillage of others, if she give him not a lawful
Possessor. So that the denomination of the Family should have been taken from
the Wife; in respect that the principal parts that constitute it, cannot be
governed with good order and economy, if she take not upon her the direction.

Wherefore, my dearest Children, I give you my advice, that you take the
greatest care imaginable in the choice of a Wife, as being the most important
action of all your Life. If you be cheated in the goodness of a Horse, in the
price of a House, or any thing else, you are not wedded to them, you may turn
them off when you are weary of them: but in choosing of a Wife, you engage in a
contract, which can only be annulled by death.

Would ye choose her well? consider rather the purity than Antiquity of her
Blood; and the Virtues and good manners rather than the Honors and Dignities
of her Race. The imperfections of Body and Mind are hereditary evils whose
contagion (as we often see) skips from the Grandfather, and Great
Grandfather, to the Grandchildren; if it sleep in some generation, it is
rather a Cessation and Truce than Peace, which will not be of long continuance.

Marry not too young, the first man was in a state of perfection before the
Woman was given him. You see that men never take the seed of a green Apple nor
the grain of Corn that is in the Bud or Flower for Planting or Sowing. A Body
that is but loose and half fastened, whereof the first ebullitions of Blood are
but as yet Froth and Scum, can produce nothing capable of perfection. The Laws
which deny you the disposal of your Estate before a certain Age of majority,
seem tacitly to suspend you Marriage until that Age; otherwise you would marry
before the season. It is unseemly to have a Housewife before you have the power
of a House to commit to her management. Seeing that the Body and Soul enter
both in the composition of Man, the maturity of the Body is not sufficient for
that effect, you must likewise expect the ripeness of the Soul, which is not
supposed to be, until you be of Age. I beg pardon of our Lawgivers, they have
left us a just suspicion of their incontinence, by by giving us permission to
marry sooner.

As I advise you not to marry, until you be somewhat advanced in years, so if
you would find an help meet for you, court not one either that is too young;
let the verdure of her tender years grow up to maturity under the care of a
wise Mother, and the virtuous modesty of her virginity, before you present your
self to gather the fruit. You will know better when the season is come, if it
be corrupt or not, than if it were as yet but green. What assistance can you
expect to find in an age that is not ripe enough to understand what is its
duty? She must learn that under the modest name of Maiden: For if she has once
got the name of Wife, it will be then too late; for that is a name of
Authority, but the other of Maid, a name of fear and submission.

In vain should the first Woman have been given to Man by the hand of God when
both were in most perfect age; if it had not been fittest for their comfortable
living together. The man was made before the woman, to teach us that the
husband should be oldest, but it was only a very short time, to give us
likewise to understand, that there should not be betwixt them too great a
difference of age. When the one is much older than the other, such a match is
rather a common hinderance to both, than a convenient and mutual help; since
neither the Law of the Land, nor the virtue and solemnity of the Matrimonial
Promise have force enough to solder together two opposite things, such as are
the two extremities of Life; betwixt which nature seems to have made a double
divorce, as well in the dissimilitude of the properties of the Body, as of the
passions of the Soul.

The Latins called Marriage (Conjugium) a term very proper which signifies the
coupling together of the Husband and Wife, under the same Yoke. This
Conjunction is made for three ends; First, that they may spend their Life more
pleasantly in that Society: Secondly, For the propagation of the kind: And
lastly, That Children being distinguished one from another by Marriage, the
care of their education should be divided amongst the Fathers and Mothers, that
they might thereby oblige them to help and succor their Parents when they
become old or infirm.

These three ends cannot be well accomplished, if the Husband and Wife be not
well matched under the same Yoke. For that purpose they ought to be very near
of the same age, the same manners, and of the same mind: otherwise it is
impossible that one should ever be meet for the other. Two Horses very young
are too wanton to be yoked together, if the one be too young, he draws away the
other; if he be too old he retards him: if they be both old, it is a common
hinderance: if the one be tractable and the other froward, they make no way;
and if they be both froward they go backward. When the same difficulties happen
in marriage, the contentment of living comfortably together, and the mutual
succor which is drawn from the affection of Parents toward their Children,
and of Children toward their Parents, which is the chief end of that society,
is quite lost.

It is certainly very difficult to have the same House, the same Fire, the same
Table, the same Bed, the same Interests, the same Children, and to live happily
together, and not to have the same Mind and Will. All these circumstances do
from time to time furnish new matter of love or hatred, according as Marriages
are fortunate or unlucky. And therefore we find no affection that grasps so
close as the love of a good Wife and good Husband, because living always
together they render one another upon all occasions a thousand little offices,
which are so many common ties that make new knots in the Soul, whereof the one
never slackens but the other is untied.

If likewise the Husband and Wife agree not well together, beside that it is a
punishment to them as long as they live, their misunderstanding in the
particulars of their actions instills on either side a common aversion into the
blood and spirits, whereof the venom is propagated to the Posterity, it being
impossible that two natures betwixt whom there is so little sympathy can ever
produce a good generation; and perhaps from hence proceeds the little love of
Parents to Children, of Children to Parents, and of Brothers and Sisters
amongst themselves, which upon the contrary reason seldom happens to Children
that are begotten in a happy Marriage.

My dearest Children, Sons and Daughters, though ye be not as yet of age to
know what is to be done, and what not, yet your Mother and I are already so
well satisfied with the respect and obedience that ye yield to us, and with a
certain tenderness of brotherly love which you have for one another, above what
can be expected from your understanding, that we have ground to believe that
your good nature is an effect of that perfect correspondence that is betwixt
your Mother and me, communicated to the blood and spirits from whence you have
your original. Ye may very well perceive what blessing we enjoy in our
marriage, and what ye may expect, if God bestow the same favor on you, as he
has done upon us. For the obtaining of that, there is so much circumspection
to be used, that it is impossible for the prudence of man to foresee all the
necessary cautions. The Wise Man informs us that the industry and care of man
may procure him other blessings, but that a wise Woman is the gift of God. The
surest way to find her is to sleep as Adam did, I mean that having your eyes
shut and your other passions at rest, you should expect her from the hand of
God, and that you should beg of him only without proposing to your selves any
other design, that he would give you a helper suitable and meet for you. In this
manner was your Mothers marriage and mine made up, wherein we have both this
blessing, that she is satisfied with me, and I so much with her that should I
say that there is nothing more to be desire but the only content which I find
in her, I think I should speak modestly enough: our union by the mercy of God
is so perfect, that

-- pende
Da un fato solo, l'una e l'altra vita
Colpo, que ad un sol noccia unque non scenda
Ma, indiviso e il dolor d'ogni ferita.
On the same fate do both our lives depend.
The ills that angry fortune does impart,
If piercing one, still wound the other heart.
CHAP. III. Of the Duty of Parents toward their Children, and of Children
toward their Parents.
I Have just now shown you, my Children, that the first society that was ever
made in the world, is that of Husband and Wife. The second which springs from
it, is that of Parents and Children; in conformity to that order the first
place in our affections, is due to the first, and the next to the second. When
the first is perfect, it unites two Bodies and two Souls into one, from whence
proceeds an union betwixt Man and Wife as dear and intimate to them, as the
love of our selves is to every one of us. The Bond of the other Society which
is between Parents and Children, is somewhat more slack, being but at first a
bare inclination for the continuing the progress of nature, whose Laboratory
would quickly be idle, if for the preservation of the several kinds that fill
it, she had not stamped on every living creature a desire to bring up, and have
a care of what they bring forth into the World.

There is no doubt but that this first appetite is common to us with all other
living creatures, and that it appears ever often more tender in some of them
than in Man. But seeing the care of their young extends no farther than the
Body, and that so soon as they are in condition to provide for themselves, and
have left the Nest and Kennel: that tie of nature leaves no more any mark of it
self, it appears that there ought to be a great difference betwixt the parental
affection of Man and that of the Beast; for besides that of all living
Creatures Man comes into the World most destitute of necessaries, and longest
without ability to provide for himself, he is likewise composed of two parts,
the Soul and the Body, which both stand equally in need of Food and Education.
The care of both concerns the Parents, wherein it is impossible for them to
make a complete progress, and their Children to feel it, but that there must be
formed betwixt them, by reason of knowledge, an affection wholly spiritual, and
altogether different from that rude and blind inclination which appears in
other living Creatures toward their Parents.

If our care did terminate simply in the Body, as theirs does, our Children
being bred like Beasts, should not transgress the order of nature, if they were
no more respectful nor thankful to us than Beasts are to those that have given
them Life. All Duty between us would cease, so as the Body stood no more in
need of assistance; and it would even be to be feared, that the Child who had
received no other impression of pleasure but what was sensual, might not have
just cause to complain of his Parents, if they afforded him not the means to
satisfy it. We see in the Life of Country Clowns an instance evident enough
of the neglect of paternal duty in respect of the Soul, in that we find not
amongst them but a very obscure sentiment of friendship betwixt the Father and
the Son, the Son and the Father, and the Brother and Brother, which subsists
only because their fellowship in labor requires it. The cause of that hardness
of heart proceeds from nothing else but their Education, the care of which
aimed only at the body, and that by the ordinary commerce that they have with
Beasts, they contract a middle way of living betwixt that of Beasts and of a
sociable civil Man.

It is then unquestionable, that the care of the Body is but the rough draught
of paternal affection, and that that of the Soul gives it the last strokes. And
therefore our first duty toward you, my Children, consists in these two
points, and from which also should spring your gratitude toward your Mother
and me.

As we both concur in begetting of you, and that ye are made up of two parts,
the Body and the Soul, it seems likewise to be the will of prudent nature that
you should have two births, and that for our common comfort the care of these
should be divided betwixt us. The first has been the birth of your Body,
whereof your Mother alone has had the charge, by bearing of you nine months
in her Womb, and afterward bringing you forth into the World. The giving of you
Suck, the Cradle, Blankets, Clouts, the trouble of carrying of you constantly
in her Arms, all this lesser toil concerns her still, until that your second
birth discover it self in the actions of the Soul: then it is that I must also
take my turn and labor by suffering in breeding of you, all the inconveniences
of your second birth, before that ye become perfect Men.

There is some secret Mystery in it, that the operations of the Soul are
younger than those of the Body, and that they appear last. God has so ordered
it, that by the service of the Body that goes first, and which is gross and
external, we might be taught what ought to be our duty toward the Soul, which
is more internal, and harder to be discovered. So soon as the body is born, we
prepare clean Clouts for it, lay it on the back with the eyes upward, stretch
out its arms and legs in their most natural posture, and swadle it in a fast
and easy swathing Band, to keep all its Members in a convenient situation for
fear of dislocation. The same method must be observed, as soon as the Soul has
given the first indication of its birth, and provision must be made of wise and
innocent counsels for its postures: we must lay it so as that it may look
upwards, by raising its knowledge toward Heaven, to which it should aspire;
rectify the appetites and affections of it, which are its members; keep them
in their place and duty by an easy, yet close restraint, to the end that their
operation may not be subjected to the tyranny of a scrupulous and superstitious
conduct; nor be loosened and slackened by the tumultuary impulse of the will.
The Arms and Legs of the Infant are for some time kept wrapped up in Swathing
Bands, and are not set at liberty, till both have given some token of strength;
to instruct us, as I think, that the use and liberty of our will is never to be
allowed us, before that the Soul has given some manifest sign of its
sufficiency to govern it self.

Negligence in the first Swaddling of the Body and Soul gives the beginning to
all the defects and imperfections of both, Use and custom compleats them.
Wherefore the Soul being naturally more ready to receive a good or bad
impression than the Body, we should keep watch to observe its first blowing,
and to begin to train it in a constant habit of good, from the very instant
that it has given the first sign of Life.

Child, it is altogether impossible that you could have articulated your words
according to the accent and use of your Country, without applying of some
attention. It is not done by chance, your ear by some occult virtue must of
necessity have made the distinction of sounds, and your eye observed the motion
of the lips of those that are about you, and that afterward another hidden
faculty have made the composition of them, though you have not perceived it.

The first twilight of the mind discovers it self in this action, and this
external articulation of words produces a manifest though confused image, of
the first internal reasoning that is in us. It is therefore my opinion that as
soon s male Children begin to have the use of their Tongue, Women should be
removed from them, and discreet Men put in their place, who besides the care of
their trifling concerns should likewise take the inspection of their primary
deportments, and behave themselves with circumspection in their presence (I
speak of persons of quality) for indeed manners become good or bad, according
to their first patterns.

If we see (as it often happens) some vices naturalized in Families, and become
a part of the inheritance; that flows only from the contagion of the Parents or
Servants, who are of so loose and depraved a Life, that they have not the power
to forbear but a little their dissolute courses in the presence of their
Children or Masters.

Since then an Infants speech is the dawning of his Soul, I think the care of
his conduct should begin with it, considering the dominion of custom whereof
nothing can give us a more speaking representation than speech it self. The Eye
sees nothing when it is framed, neither does the Ear hear but confusedly and
without making any apparent distinction of the kinds of sounds, and
consequently the operation of the Mind must as yet be but confused and
undistinct: Nevertheless we find that by the often hearing of words spoken,
these three faculties of hearing, seeing, and reasoning, do (though
imperfectly) concur, to frame by the frequent hearing and imitation of the
voice, the same understanding, sound, and accent of the impression which they
have received, and from thence proceeds the difference of idioms.

Think it not then strange, my Friends, if I have always an eye over you; and
if I begin so soon to observe you: In observing of you, and those that are
about you, I my self stand upon my guard, that nothing that is contagious may
pass in your presence. It is as easy to speak well as ill, and to do good, as
bad: Good and bad manners are formed in us by example, as language by a good or
bad accent, without any other study but use and custom.

There are some other duties still of a good Father, besides that of your
institution, which I ought not to hope to be ale to render to you, considering
the difference of our ages, unless nature will be pleased to suspend the
execution of her laws in favor of me.

One is to use familiarity with our Children, and make them intimate with us:
It is more becoming, in my opinion, to reason, than to trifle and play the fool
with them: And since we make our selves sharers of their pastimes and
entertainment, so soon as they begin to walk and speak, which is but a mere
action of the sensitive Soul; when the reasonable acts in them, and they become
Men, it is unjust and out of time to deny them the continuance of a familiarity
whereof they have already in their infancy got the possession. Consider what
befalls us by a severe and rigid countenance toward them: we have gained their
affection by an infinite number of cares, which we have heretofore had of them,
and we lose the effect of them by an idle policy of distance and respect.

Children, if God give you grace one day to be Parents, make your Children your
first Friends, when they be of age to be so; their friendship is a graffing of
natural Slips into a natural Stock which produces better and more pleasant
Fruit, than any other strange and bastard graffing, which retains always
somewhat of the roughness of its wild stock.

When they are become men, and perhaps wiser than your selves, change the
quality of Father into that of elder Brother. This last is common to us all;
the other is but an alliance contracted by Blood, and by consequence you cannot
follow the order of nature; if when your Children are grown up to the perfect
state of Men, you treat them not rather as their elder Brother, than as their
Father, Acquaint them with your household affairs so soon as they are capable to
understand them. You and they both will thereby reap this advantage; that in
the first place by letting them understand what is your revenue, and what your
charges, they will undeceive themselves of the opinion that they might have,
that you may allow them a larger Portion than you do; and so preserve their
affection. Secondly, by calling them into that society they will ease you of
part of your care. And in the third place they will learn the management of an
estate whereof they are one day to be proprietors, and will by that means know
what portion of it every one of them is to expect; which will make them more
satisfied with their shares, and more cordial in their love to one another,
when you shall leave to them the entire possession.

To conclude, It is very dangerous for Fathers to be too great husbands of
their Purse toward their Children, left that too much sparing may debase them,
when they have not means to set themselves forward if they can. From being
Citizens of the World, they are thereby confined as Prisoners to the
Chimney-corner or Precincts of the House: and it happens often that for want of
somewhat to be husbands of, being incapable of all aeconomy, they grow prodigal
in their abundance, because that they never learned in their necessity the art
of spending to purpose. In fine he that never allows his Children any share in
his Estate but when he dies, does no more oblige them, than he that leaves us
his Spoil, because he cannot carry it with him.

Now as to the Duty of Children toward their Parents, prudent nature has
thought fit that when we come into the World the same ligament that sustains
us, and which as a Conduit-Pipe conveys to us our nourishment for the space of
nine months, should still remain fastened to our Womb-bed, and not break of it
self as all the other Membranes wherein we are wrapped; to be to us a visible
mark, that the ligaments which sustain the Soul, and which give it Life by wise
instruction, and a thousand testimonies of love and good will which children
receive from their Parents, should be stronger and less apt to break than that.

The burden of the big Belly, the Pains in Childbearing, the servitude of
giving Suck; of taking up and putting to Bed, of keeping clean, instructing,
and on all occasions furnishing all that is needful for the subsistence of Body
and Soul, are so many various chains of Parents toward their Children, from
whence spring an equal number of links of the same metal and workmanship which
tie Children to their Parents.

Wherefore one would think that the command of honoring Father and Mother were
superfluous, considering the obligation that lies on Men to do it; but God
seeing that there were Souls so ungrate as to fail in that duty, and even in
the duty of love toward himself, which is more according to the laws of
nature, he has thought sit that both Commandments should be written in the
Tables of the Law, since they could not be graven on their Consciences, to the
end that those who obey them not, should be abominable to God and Men, as being
convicted by their infidelity in these two, of treason against both.

My Children, I am already so far advanced in Age, and ye as yet so young, that
in all probability your Mother will remain charged with the care of your
institution, as she has been already with all the troubles of your Infancy.
She is so good and discreet, that I make no doubt but that you will find in her
alone the affection both of a Father and Mother. If that come to pass, as her
good offices will be doubled toward you, so as ye desire the blessing of God
upon you, unite all the force and faculties of your Souls, to render to her
alone the honor and respect which ye owe us both in common.

If I say nothing here in particular concerning the conduct of my Daughters, I
would not have them believe that I have past them by in my Testament. That
direction belongs to their Mother, who knows better than I how they ought to
demean themselves. She fears God, loves her Husband, is careful of the House,
so humble and modest, and so wise and discreet that many times I stand in need
of her counsel. Daughters, make use of that good example that ye have from her,
and of her good counsels, and I assure my self that if ye do so, they will be
found better and more faithful to you, than those which now I give to your
Brothers.

CHAP. IV. Of the Duty of Brothers amongst themselves.
NExt to conjugal affection, and the love of Parents toward their Children, and
Children toward their Parents, the third and strictest tie of Nature, is the
love of Brethren to one another; they are like the Branches of the same Tree,
which being nourished by the same Sap, though they be different in Body should
bear Fruit of the same taste, otherwise they give ground to suspect that there
has been diversity of Grafts. The Harmony that appears betwixt the two hands
which are Sisters, and amongst all the Fingers for the common use of the Hand,
is a lesson of mutual love and assistance, which God gives to Children of the
same Family, if they intend to follow his order.

There are commonly three things which cause the misunderstanding that is seen
amongst Brothers. The first and chief is an original fault of conformation and
nature, which proceeds (as has been already said) from corruption in the mass
of their Parents blood it being altogether impossible, that a production which
springs from the mixture of two disagreeing seeds, can contain in it any thing
that is sociable, nor that any thing capable of harmony, can be produced by the
dissonance of a Marriage full of discord and contrarieties. So that enmity
amongst Brethren is not only ignominious to themselves; but makes an injurious
rebound to the dishonor of their Parents, and in so doing breaks the second
Table of the Law, by the which they are commanded to honor them.

The partiality of Parents affection toward their Children, is the second cause
of misunderstanding amongst Brethren, built (as I think) upon a very weak
foundation: for if there were no violence in men's inclinations, which is not
easy to be avoided, yet it often happens that one of your Children is more
respectful and obedient to you than another, and that that difference of their
respect and love toward you, begets another in you for them; and in that case,
they who think themselves wronged, have no reason to complain, in respect that
they have been had Stewards of the mutual good will, which ought to be between
them and their Parents.

There is another very considerable reason, why a Father should not treat his
Children equally with the same affection, and that is, when a Father perceives
a hopeful nature in a Child, which of it self acquires some pre-eminence above
the rest, he is obliged to cultivate it with more care, and the Brothers ought
to consent to this birthright of good will, which in end has often no other
design but the general good of all the Family. We see the same order in nature;
Amongst the Branches that grow like Sisters from the top of the Trunk, the
strongest draws always most nourishment to it self, and the stock affords it
more Sap than the rest: If I in imitation of that example, my Children, be more
liberal of my care and affection, to him that shall best deserve it, I conjure
you not to take it ill. I should be very glad to see you strive in emulation to
gain this first place in my esteem, I promise it upon the word of a good Father
to the most virtuous; your endeavor to obtain it is as much in your power, it
consists only in abstaining from evil and doing of good, which is a thing not
at all above your strength. Might I see in you a desire so uniform to prosecute
this goodly design, that my inclinations did rest so equally suspended amongst
you all, that neither ye nor I might ever be able to judge, to which side the
balance ought to cast.

The third and most ordinary cause of little love amongst brethren, proceeds
from the distribution of their portions: the wiser Parents leave the
disposition of them to the custom of the Country: which being according to Law,
howsoever it be, is always better and less subject to the jealousy of our
Children among themselves, than our own. Our Estates belong to our Families,
and our Families to the State, whose public ordinances we cannot transgress in
favor of our Children, but that our memory becomes odious to others, and
amongst them we sow contention. When the Law (as in certain cases it does)
allows us the liberty of our will, it is rather a civil permission that it has
given us, to keep our Children in more strict subjection to their duty, than an
absolute power to deprive them of the right of their birth, to which they are
called by common Justice.

To maintain a perfect union amongst you, my Children, in this manner should it
be my opinion to dispose of my Estate, if I had sufficiency to give every one
of you a competent share. In the first place seeing that there are some times,
and ages more expensive than others; it should be my design to assist every one
of you according to your present need, and in that distribution which I should
make of my goods in my life time, to observe rather a Geometrical than
Arithmetical Proportion. That disposition which would evidence to you an equal
affection, though there might be perhaps some inequality in the expense,
should, I think, satisfy you, seeing that therein I should have no other
respect, but the common advancement of you all.

As to the division of my goods after my death, be content I pray you, my
Friends, that I transfer it to the Law of the Country where they are; I have
but the use of them, the propriety belongs to it, and I can alter nothing in
what it appoints, without offending the judgment of an infinite number of wise
persons who have all agreed concerning the extent of its power; I must give
them my consent upon my Deathbed, otherwise I shall give ground to suspect
that I am sicker in Mind than in Body.

It is true that our custom is a little too indulgent, in remitting to our own
disposition all the Chattels and Purchases, and a third part of the ancient
Inheritance; they are so many seeds of envy amongst the Brothers, which a dying
Father that thinks he leaves some stem in his Family more able than the rest to
maintain it, considers not sufficiently; for it comes to pass often that
instead of continuing it, he disperses it by giving such advantages, the
affection of the younger to the elder abating as their part of the inheritance.
Wherefore it is my opinion, that Fathers should only accept of that liberty
which the Law gives them, as an act of civility done to them, whereof they
should make no use. The Law which only assigns the first part of the real
Estate and Inheritance to the Eldest, though it extend our power farther, seems
to regulate our duty merely on that side, and to hint to us that as to the
overplus we owe him but the same prerogative and advantage in our Chattels and
Purchases, if we would follow the intention of it.

As to those customs which give almost all to the Eldest, it is reasonable also
to comply with their authority being already past prescription, and to suffer
it as an old wound which is healed by time and long use, the pain of which is
past. But when the Father himself grants this favor, it is a kind of
disinheriting a part of his Children, which like a new wound makes a solution
of continuity in that strict union that ought to be in fraternal friendship; it
being impossible but that the weakened parts should bear a grudge and envy
against those which are the cause of their weakness, and that being even
destitute of power to maintain themselves, they should be likewise of mutual
affection to one another.

The only way to provide against this inconvenience, is (as I have said) to
leave when we die the disposition of our Estate to the Laws and received
Customs: not to abuse our selves with this vain folly of thinking to make our
name immortal, when we our selves die, by an useless attempt to preserve our
Estate whole. The duty of brotherly love is first in order, and more natural
than the desire of preserving our Inheritance, and by consequence our chief
care should be bent to keep it in its place.

The Stock of Families, fruitful in the number of Children, is like a Tree
surcharged with Fruit; a part of them fall of themselves, another is beat down
by Winds, and a third comes to maturity, so that its fruitfulness does neither
exhaust nor dry it.

According to this example we may confidently and securely, remit to the
conduct and providence of the Laws, the ordering of our Estates, and the
duration of our posterity; let us assure our selves that the undoing of both
will be occasioned rather by the misunderstanding of brothers among themselves,
than the plurality of their Portions. When there are many to be made, their
shares will indeed be less, but in recompense of that their counsels and forces
will be redoubled by the conjunction of many hands and many heads together.

This union is far more helpful than that of the fabulous men with three Bodies
and an hundred Hands, who being incorporated in one Trunk could not separately
sever one another in several persons, when brethren who are united together by
a mutual affection, though their persons be divided, may continue inseparable
in all the functions of mutual aid and common defense; and being divided in
place, in body and action, maintain the same conjuncture of mind in all things,
provided they follow the inclination of nature, and that there has been no
mistake in their original conformation. Naturally the same spirit, the same
blood, the same principle, and the same education should produce the same
inclinations and wills.

Children, the correspondence which appears in the fraternity of the fingers of
the hand, is a pattern to you of the duty of yours: a single motion opens them
altogether, and another shuts them; to teach you that all your wills ought to
have but one common impulse: and as in laborious actions where the effort of
all the hand is necessary, the little finger contributes as much as the thumb;
so should this serve you for example, that whatsoever inequality there may be
amongst you, yet your whole strength consists only in your union; and finally
though the three greatest fingers be only employed in all manufactures, yet the
other two are not debarred from a society in the wages, that you may thereby
understand, that the most active and intelligent amongst you should supply the
necessities and defects of the weaker.

We have at present in our Family the experience of this succor: but seeing
the modesty of him from whom we receive it, forbids me to publish it, let us
beseech him, my Children, to permit us to render him from our Souls most hearty
thanks, and to consider him as a secret Buttress which serves to support our
House, without being seen.

Under brotherly Love I comprehend the duty of all the kindred, until that
degree wherein the Law permits them to contract new consanguinity by the Bond
of Marriage, all that is betwixt that branch and the Stock being but the same
blood, is obliged to the same duty of reciprocal affection, according to the
rank of its proximity. When this alliance advances farther, it is confounded in
the public Mass, whence it is that the private duty of a Family terminates at
last in a civil obligation.

CHAP. V. Of the Duty of Masters and Servants.
THe reciprocal duty that is between the Master and the Servant, is the fourth
in order in civil society. Though it be the most common opinion that the name
of Master have its rise only from an usurpation made upon the public and
common liberty, yet I am of a contrary Judgment. The Body Politic, as the
Humane, is composed of parts that command, and parts which obey: such in
either, as are found to have most reason and authority, have put themselves
according to nature in the possession of command; and the rest though many
times the stronger and most virtuous, according to the same order, are reduced
to the necessity of obedience.

Otherwise if they had all together aspired to the command, there would have
been no mutual service; and if they had likewise all submitted to the duty of
obedience, their services would have been performed with confusion, for want of
order and conduct to guide and rule them.

To trace the matter to its original, it is probable that force has made the
first division of the Earth among Men, and that the possession thereof has
been since warranted by common consent, for avoiding a second time this Primary
Anarchy, during which all things were possessed in disorder and confusion. They
who got the greater share in this division, finding that they had more than
they could employ and put to use, were constrained to call to a Partnership of
their Portions such who had been unfortunate in the distribution, under such
free and easy conditions, as being well observed, I think there is no
difference betwixt the Master and Servant but only in name.

In the first place, according to the Law of Nature, both are cast in the same
Mould; according to the Law of the State, both are free, and both the Subjects
of the same Prince; and by the Law of Religion, both they and the Prince
himself are the Members of Christ.

Secondly; none of us all whoever he be, can force a man of what base condition
soever, to serve him unless he be willing. This privilege is so common to us
all that none but the King alone can break it.

In the third place, whatever inequality there is betwixt me and him whom I
would have for my Servant, I cannot bargain with him for his Service, but that
he stipulates with me for his Wages, and that so by contracting together he
become my equal: as he is by our Covenants obliged to me. so am I to him; if he
be my domestic, he enters into society of house and fire with me; and though
he eat at the lower Table, yet he is my daily Guest, and I am even bound to
protect and defend him against others.

What do you think that he whom you take for my Servant does for me, in
recompense of so much care? He serves me: You are mistaken, he serves himself:
the same labor that he must do in his own house for a livelihood he performs
in mine; if he engage to me his will in my service, mine remains a pledge for
his Wages; if I reap any benefit of his services, he is no loser; if he meddle
in my affairs, it is soon perceived that he neglects not his own; if he labor
my Land, he shares with me of the Fruits; if he dress my Victuals, he has the
first tasting of them, he is at the pains, and I at all the expense. Our
Partnership appears in so many things, that all well considered, I think the
conjunction of Master and Servant is nothing else but a society contracted
betwixt a poor man and a rich for their common profit, in which there is not
any difference but of name.

It is not amiss, my Son, that both of them should know, that the distance
betwixt them, is not so great as men think, to the end that the command of the
one should be more mild and easy, and that the other (though he serve) should
do nothing unworthy of the liberty of his condition. An honest Servant is the
Masters observer and watch, and a good Master the Servants example. And
therefore there is no conjunction amongst men, next to that of Husband and
Wife, that has more need to be well made, than this.

And forasmuch as it is difficult that the Master and Servant can be always in
so good correspondence together, that there may not sometime happen little
debates betwixt them: it is convenient that in matters of small importance the
Master should sometimes yield to give a little breath to the liberty of his
Servant, for fear lest by striving to deprive him of all, he set him not on the
desire of recovering all, and so make him forsake his Service.

The repugnancy that we find in our selves to obey the will of another,
proceeds from this, that our life being in it self nothing else but an act of
sense and knowledge, it seems to us, when that act is not in our own power that
we live rather by the soul of another, than by our own. That unwillingness to
obey which is natural to man springs from this, and therefore Nature and the
Laws making no Servants, if they are not willing of themselves, we should have
the prudence to treat ours with discretion, if we find our selves well served
by them, lest that by the tediousness of too rude and harsh a subjection we may
give them cause of repentance.

For the quiet both of Master and Servant, it is many times necessary that the
first were blind, and the other deaf. A clear sighted Master if he observe his
Servants too narrowly, shall never want fresh occasion of vexing; he should
slight or not seem to take notice of part of their faults, when they are
committed through want of skill or judgment, or even through a little itching
humor of liberty, which would still retain its right; they are to be excused,
and the rather because if the matter affect us, beyond reason, the trouble will
remain, and the fault cannot be undone.

It is as necessary also that a Servant be not too quick in hearing; because
choler being a thin and subtle humor which easily mixes with mastery, it is
very hard that a Servant can so duly follow his Masters directions, but that
now and then he may give him some occasion of being angry: from whence it comes
to pass that his troubled reason, imparts suddenly its disorder to the tongue,
and strives to ease it self by that member.

For two reasons the Servant ought to be deaf at that time: First, that he may
not be obliged to answer, because his answering may make a new repercussion of
his fault in his Masters mind, whereof silence weakens the force as of a stroke
in the empty air: And secondly, that he may blunt the edge of the reproaches
and injuries that are said to him; the cutting sense of which may give him some
aversion from his Master if he be too attentive.

There are few other faults wherein a Master ought not to be indulgent, except
those that are committed against him with deliberation, and that tend to the
offense of God. And then it is not to be reckoned a bare fault, it is a vice,
or maliciousness: when this happens, how useful soever a Servant may be to you,
turn him off, if he be not young enough to give hopes of amendment: have a care
also if he be a hardened sinner, that by endeavoring to reform him, you
contract not somewhat of his pollution, and draw upon your self some part of
his scandal.

If you find that your Servant loves Gaming, Drinking, and the Debauchery of
Women, be assured that he will likewise prove a Blasphemer, and that it is
altogether impossible, that with so many wicked qualities he can prove faithful
to you, besides the scandal that comes of it, if you keep him in your service;
these three first vices being no vices that go on credit, you must of necessity
pay for them, or if any other Purse besides yours maintain them, you are,
though ignorantly the Confident and concealer.

If you would have your Servant be faithful to you, be so first to him by
honestly paying of him his wages; force him not by keeping back his hire, to
pay himself with his own hands, lest that you both become culpable at the same
time.

The Teeth in the constitution of the body of man are the emblem of what
servants should be in the composition of a Family, and what qualities they
ought to have; the Teeth should make the first preparation of our nourishment,
be set in order, labor all, lest that those who are idle putrify; be clean,
to the end that nothing stick to them which may spoil them; and whole and
sound, lest if they be hollow, something of that they chew may remain and
corrupt them. Their duty is to chew and not to taste; and according as they are
sound or rotten they give an indication of the good or bad disposition of the
body to which they are fastened: It is just so with Servants.

My Children, that I may put an end to the duty that ought to be betwixt
Masters and Servants, as they came next in order after our Kindred in society,
so should they be in our affection. If you mind the Prayer which your Mother
makes you say daily for our common preservation, you will find your Household
Servants in that Rank: seeing our engagement with one another is free and
voluntary, let us not make it with them with a reservation of heart.

All service without affection wants relish, if it be performed to me with
regret, though it be my due, yet I receive it still with more regret, and there
is nothing but the warmth of the heart that can season it. Sure it is so, let
us endeavor to be beloved of our Servants: the way to procure their affection,
is to love them, friendship cannot be interchanged on other terms. If it be our
design then to attract to us their affection, they being many in number, the
greatest part of the Loadstone must be on our side, to the end that its uniting
virtue may be the better communicated to all, and produce its effect in common.

I have not been so large on the duty of the Servant, as on that of the Matter,
because the Master has always more power to compel the Servant to his duty,
than he to refuse it.

CHAP. VI. Of the Duty of Neighbors among themselves.
THe duty of man would be of a narrow compass, and his acquaintance small, were
it only confined to the enclosure of his house. The earth is open on every
side, that man may with more ease communicate with man; his first commerce when
he comes out of the Family is with his Neighbors. Son, what do you think your
Neighbors are? I Will tell you, they are only an overflowing occasioned by the
swelling of the first Families of the world, which being increased to too great
a number, were forced to separate and take a greater space of earth to live in,
than they had possessed before; so that if you remount to your original, you
are a part of your Neighbors Family, or he is of yours.

Without tracing the matter so far as its source, a Family is very
inconsiderable that has not alliance, gossipship, or consanguinity with the
greater part of the Neighbors of the same quality, not reckoning the injuries
of time which effaceth all the tracts of ancient Kindred. So that, my Children,
we are bound to live with them as if we were all Kinsmen, and the rather
because likewise from Kindred to Neighbors, the common Bond which constitutes
the state is continued.

As our Kinsfolk are next, so our Neighbors are near to us, whom God has
commanded us to love, not as our Kindred, but as our selves. In effect if our
house be on fire, if we be sick, afflicted, or in any pressing necessity, our
readiest help comes from the hand of our Neighbor.

We are to one another the first object of our charity, and the most helpful is
always the nearest of our Neighbors; witness the Samaritan in Scripture, who
tough he was execrable to the Jews, was judge the Neighbor of him that had
fallen into the hands of robbers, though he was the last that saw him, because
he took pity on him, when both the Priest and Levite, who saw him before,
passed by without taking any care of him.

There are three things especially, wherein if a man do not a little moderate
his desire, and do himself justice, he can very hardly prove a good Neighbor:
one is the interest in Goods; the other interest in Pleasure; and the last,
competition for Honor.

As concerning interest in Goods, our Neighbors are either our equals, or
stronger, or weaker than we: if we be equals, and there happen any debate
amongst us, it falls presently into a Lawsuit or a Quarrel: and as there is
nothing so frail as man and his riches, from that contest it often happens,
that two Neighbors of equal power break themselves by clashing together. As
concerning the strong and the weak, if he that is powerful be unjust, he is in
his Country like a cancer in the flesh, which by little and little devours all
the parts about it, and grows always more malignant the more that it spreads.

If he that is poor and weak be froward, he is troublesome in his neighborhood,
as a hand-worm in the skin, which for all it is so little, fails not to cause
smarting, itching, and inflammation. God keep you from these two kinds of
Neighbors, because you must always anoint the one, and by scratching the
other, you pluck off the skin.

Interest in Goods is common to all sorts of conditions; interest in Pleasure
that may occasion trouble amongst Neighbors, such as hunting, concerns only
the Gentry; the Farmer labors the ground, the Tradesman works, the Merchant
follows his Traffic, and the man of affairs his business: so that none but
Gentlemen are idle; and seeing when they are in the fields together they have
but one common divertisement, which is hunting: it is very hard for them to
take so good measures, but that there may happen many times amongst them some
debate.

Children, if you will follow my counsel, you shall not delight in hunting no
more than I; but if you love sport, and have Neighbors never so little touchy,
I charge you for fear of dipleasing of them, that you be ever more severe to
your selves than the Laws of the King, who have regulated the duty of every one
in that matter. And if you have any Neighbor prepossessed with that passion,
since you see that it makes him to more than he can: excuse him if he do more
than the Law allows him.

The pains that he takes in this exercise, the fatigues of body after hunting,
should incline you to think, that he who is addicted to that passion is rather
possessed than delighted, and that the convulsions and transports of it deserve
better an exorcist, and your compassion, than resentment. As to Hawking and
Fowling, which is gluttonous, and minds the belly more than the exercise of
body, and contentment of the mind, it is reasonable that every one should
follow this divertisement.

Hunting makes one part of the Civil War amongst Gentlemen; and competition for
Honor the other. This last point is subject to so great a variety of
emergents, that it has been impossible that the Laws could so foresee and
adjust the duty of every particular person, that there should remain no
occasion of noise among men. In this matter, my Son, it is my advice, that you
govern your self after this manner.

In those places where the order of the world requires that you should keep
your rank, do it with so much discretion, that though the Law give it you, it
may yet appear that you receive it from the courtesy of him that yields to
you. Be so tender of the honor of another, that men may see you far rather
inclined to remit somewhat of your own, than to usurp any thing of what is your
neighbors. In places indifferent, and on rencounters, fear not to be
over-respectful; honor is like the stream of a torrent, which comes upon us
with more violence, when we stem its course than when we follow it: above all
things, in the Church, which is the most common Theater of the vanity of man,
if any one invade your right, I command you to suffer it, you are in the
presence of God, to whom you owe that reverence, and before whom the humblest
is always in the place of honor. If notwithstanding you see that he take to
himself the difference which you render to the Altar, there will be no danger,
if he dares dispute you your place, to make him sensible that he is your
inferior.

Finally, since Peace is a blessing, we cannot say that we enjoy it, though it
may be in the State, if we entertain it not with our neighbors. So that I
judge a good neighborhood to be absolutely necessary for the repose and quiet
of life, and that the living near a bad neighbor is a fourth Flail of God,
which being permanent is alone more dangerous than all the others together,
which are but transitory.

Imagine not, my Son, that none but he whose house joins to yours, and your
land to his, is your neighbor. The command that is given to you, to love your
neighbor as your self, would be too much contracted, if it were confined to
him alone. Seeing the world is patent on all hands, and that you are free to go
whithersoever you please, you must know that he whom you meet, see and keep
company with, wherever you be, and of what condition soever he is, becomes a
neighbor to you, and you to him; and that your presences engage you in a
mutual duty of doing good to one another.

CHAP. VII. Of Friends, and of three springs of the actions of man toward his
Neighbor, which are Good will, Friendship, and Charity.
IN the Soul of man there are three springs of love toward his Neighbor, the
first of which touches him but superficially, by allowing him only some slight
wishes of good, without the endeavor of doing it. The Schools have named that
superficial good inclination, by too favorable a name, in calling it
Benevolence, because that every good inclination which helps not in time of
need when it can do it, is not altogether innocent, and so cannot be good; and
by consequence (with our Doctors favor) I think that that inofficious
inclination of the Soul deserves not so fair a name, as that of Benevolence,
and that it is only a bare itching of nature toward good. Nevertheless it is
true that that inclination is a predisposition to friendship, when he for whom
we have it is touched with the same affection for us that we are for him; for
then there is a concourse of benevolence, which having no other design but to
conciliate themselves by a mutual complacency, mingle together with so perfect
a harmony, that the solder that joins them is altogether unperceptible: and
from this consociation of benevolence proceeds the second motion of the Soul in
the love of our Neighbor, which we call friendship.

These two inclinations of affection which proceed from man, are imperfect, in
that the first touches none but him that feels it, and that the second regards
only some particular persons. The third that takes its original more high, is
quite another thing, as being an efflammation of the heart of man toward God,
which comes from God, and makes its reflection toward our Neighbor, according
to the extent and greatness of its principle; for as God is indifferently good,
to the good, and to the bad, so man by his example becomes equally beneficent
to all, to his enemies as well as his friends, without distinction of persons
or conditions; and this third spring of affection is called Charity.

So that then all the duty of man toward his Neighbor, is terminated either
in Benevolence, which is an inofficious friendship; or in Friendship, which is
an imperfect charity; or in Charity, which is a living lamp, and like a public
fire burns always for the use of those that need it.

My Child, though the first of these three inclinations seem only a transitory
impression, yet since neither friendship nor charity can be formed in us, but
that benevolence has gone before, I wish you may have that tenderness of
heart, as being the Nursing-mother of the other two: it is noble in that it is
disinteressed, otherwise if it were mercenary, one should be benevolent to
himself.

And although it remain inofficious, yet it represents to us in one draught an
image of the goodness of God, who is universally benevolent to all his
creatures, and another image of the negligence of man, who suffers in himself
the fountain of his inclination to good to dry up, for want of giving it a
course.

Its course is opened two ways: when benevolence within it self is nothing but
a good will without effect, becomes active and mutual amongst some particular
persons, then does it turn into friendship: and when it breaks forth upon all
mankind, and indifferently offers it self to the necessity of the first comer,
and renders it self one to all, and one to every one; then it becomes Charity.
The practice of these two, my Child, is necessary to you, if you would acquit
your self well of your duty toward God, your self, and your neighbor, which is
the thing that I proposed to my self to instruct you in.

Now as to Friendship, methinks that the man who is incapable of it, is in the
world and out of the world, like to those barbarous and wild Islands, which are
not only divided from the continent, but destitute of any way to enter, or to
get out of them, as if provident nature, which does nothing in vain, had
removed these places and men from commerce and society, as parts infected,
pestered with monsters, and contagious to the whole. Friendship is so necessary
to the life of man, that it were better for him to be deprived of all other
blessings than of that, because that without it he can have the enjoyment of no
other good.

The want of friends is a kind of wilderness in the crowd. Consider that if you
were alone to taste all the pleasures which the eye, the ear, the smelling
afford, and all those whereof any part of the body is capable, what relish they
would have without the company of your friends. The attainment of all the good
qualities that can be desired to body and soul, is a beauty without grace, and
a light stifled, if it be not communicated. In fine, without that commerce
which is entertained by the means of friendship, we seem to one another rather
so many Statues on a Wall, or in a Porch, than so many men. This is a blessing
of so great value, that it raises nature to the highest exaltation that
humanity can suffer, it doubles, triples, quadruples, and multiplies it
according to the number of ones friends.

The Ancients who would restrain its perfection only to two friends, by
preserving the memory of some famous couples, have not sufficiently understood
its whole extent: if it be true that our friend is our other self, with this
condition, there can be no friendship betwixt the good and the wicked, which
are the two extremes; nor between the wicked and the wicked, who may indeed
agree in some things, as far as their interest requires; but never in all, nor
always. It remains then that it can only exist betwixt the good, whose actions
are uniform, in that they are directed to that which is virtuous and honest.

This being so, as it is not more strange to see many Needles touched by the
Loadstone turn always to the same point, than to see two; it is less strange to
see an honest consort of many persons of honor, seeing that there is no virtue
in nature, more attractive and unitive, than the concourse and common
conspiration of good men toward good.

Could it be possible that there should have been so little union amongst those
that gave themselves to the exercise of virtue, that the names which are used
in the ancient Dialogues, were but only supposed names, and that the study of
Philosophy could not have the power to conciliate a common affection betwixt
the persons speaking, and some of their hearers? The narration of such examples
without doubt deserved better to have been transmitted to us, than that of
those renowned couples of friends; unless it has been perhaps judged that it
ought not to have past to posterity as an instance of a rare thing. In effect
the action of a poor friend, who when he was dying, left by his will, (which
was accepted and executed) his Mother to be entertained by one of his friends,
and his Daughter to be married by another, and who substituted, the one
failing, the other in this duty, is of a far higher pitch of friendship, than
the action of him that gave himself in hostage for his friend; and nevertheless
though it be more illustrious, it is less known, because such things were so
ordinary amongst virtuous persons, that they were then looked upon but only as
common actions.

Child, it is not enough to render a man one and the same with another, which
is the effect of friendship, to agree with him in interest, exercise, play,
divertisement, and in sensual pleasures, which are all the appetites of the
body, and of the inferior part of the soul; an union contracted upon the
consideration of these things, is dissolved with its cause, which is subject to
change: the identity which makes the union of two persons in one, cannot be
perfect if it have not its original in the superior part of the soul, which
constitutes the essential form of man: For that effect it is necessary that we
be one, even in our selves, before that we can be so with another, because that
one who is discordant with himself, can never make a good harmony with another.

Since then there is nothing but virtue alone that can produce in us that
uniformity of soul, it is manifest that there is nothing but it also that can
animate us toward our friends in the same manner as we are to our selves. By
directing all our actions as they do constantly and perpetually to a good end
without ever turning aside, we are never out of the same road. When we desire
honor, riches, and contentment, for our selves, we make the same wish for
them, if we have the possession of these, it is so much in common with them,
that to make all the rest reap the fruit, it is enough that one of us enjoy the
blessings.

The same thing never happens to the wicked, who can suffer no body to share
with them in their good fortune. As they disagree always with themselves, they
do so with others. A soul that is so variously tossed, is more miserable than a
body whose Members are all disjoynted. Let me pray you, my Child, from this to
take a horror against vice, for two reasons; first that you may not be
deprived of content and complacency in your self; and next, that you may
redouble the faculties and powers of your soul toward good, by the Union that
you shall contract with those who make profession of virtue as you do.

All friendship built upon another foundation is defective; betwixt Father and
Son, the authority of the one and the submission of the other spoils the
perfection of friendship; betwixt the Husband and Wife it is hermaphrodite
amity; amongst Brothers, blood contributes more to it than our choice, and
betwixt the Master and Servant, the distance is too great to suffer a
conjunction.

So that it cannot be entirely perfect, unless it be abstracted from all
considerations but of that of virtue alone: And as virtue brings under the same
duty all ages, sexes and conditions, it can likewise unite many persons in one
and the same mind; and by consequent it is an old error to think that
friendship cannot arrive at it is excellence and perfection but only between two
friends; my friends friend is my friend, the friend of my friends friend, is
likewise mine; provided that all of us have the same scope, which is the desire
of honest things.

This were a lovely Theory, if it could be put in practice; but that conformity
of the Soul which the perfection of friendship requires is circumscribed with
circumstances so nice and delicate, that they seem to be inconsistent together.
For instance in friendship one would be the most beloved, because the most
beloved supposes the most lovely; and because the agent is more noble than the
patient, one desires likewise to appear the greatest lover, which is such a
contradiction as in effect destroys uniformity in our selves, and that which we
ought to have with our friends.

It is most certain that friendship in it is highest exaltation is but a mental
being, which like heroic virtue, exists only in our imagination: yet though it
be impossible to attain to perfection in either, it is not altogether
superfluous to cut out the perfectest image that can be had of it, to the end
that man who is the subject of virtue and friendship, may be the more violently
allured to the exercise of both, by the highest and most excellent notion that
he can conceive of their perfection.

Indeed virtue which is the bond of friendship, is of so ordinary a pitch in
man, that if we bear not with the infirmities of one another, we cannot
continue long friends: as he is unconstant and fickle, so is his friendship
liable to his failings, his pauses and returns. He that pardons most, is most
faithful, and honors most his choice. We cannot renounce the love of our
friend, without weakening our selves thereby: if he forsake us, let us follow
him: the lips of a wound close again by bringing of them together, let us be
steadfast in it, that death it self which unties every knot, may not be able to
break ours: let us revive it toward the Children of our friends.

Friendship is a spiritual hospitality, the right to which is transferred to
posterity. If we perceive that their friendship for us, is much less than ours
for them, let us not be angry, they follow the universal motion of the world,
where all things ascend more weakly than they descend, even to the love of
Children toward their Parents.

In fine, my Child the greatest praise that can be given to a man, is to call
him a good Friend, because that supposes him to be virtuous; As on the contrary
when that goodly name is applied to a wicked person, the purity of it is
defiled, and the thing that ought to be most precious amongst men thrown out on
the dunghill.

Though it seems when one devotes himself in particular to his friends, he
takes himself off from Charity, whose obligation is more universal;
nevertheless because that friendship is an affection more adapted to your
measure than the other, which would have us become one to all in general, and
one to every one in particular; I give you only my advice touching that which
is most proportionate to you; to obtain the other, one must go out of himself,
and be divinely seized with that wise and holy foolishness of the Apostles.

This divine transport is violent and painful, because it makes an union
betwixt God and man, notwithstanding their extreme distance. And therefore we
may observe in the writings of St. Paul, reachings and throbs of love, which
break forth like a flame of Nitre, whose vehemence denotes still some
resistance in the matter. In St. John, we see the contrary; and seeing
Friendship is more calm, and more fitted to the measure of men, then Charity,
it seems the mildness of this affection is only to qualify the violence of the
other.

And for this reason, his love appears in his writings as a cherishing, gentle,
pure, and vivifying heat, always equal. This difference proceeds only from
this, that the former seems to love man only for Gods sake; having only had
acquaintance with the divine nature of the Son of God, who discovered himself
to him when he was dazzled with his shining brightness.

The affection of the other is more tender, he loves man for Gods sake, and man
for man sake; because he had shared in the love of his master as God, and in
his friendship as man, having been the beloved disciple.

Charity is so high a virtue, that it makes man a copy and image of God: by it
he enters into the plenitude of his love, which makes a reflux toward all
things created, if not, with so infinite an action, yet with the same extent of
will and affection: in fine if it operate not where it is employed, it operates
in the person from whom it proceeds, with so much efficacy, that the will
alone, when the power is wanting, stands in stead of operation.

Scripture teaches us, my Child, that God is love, and that he that abides in
love abides in God, and God in him, and although that this virtue be wholly
divine, yet the habits of benevolence and friendship, are two humane means,
which dispose and prepare the heart of man to receive the grace of that
perfection; which is the third and most accomplished inclination of the Soul in
the love of our neighbor.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Persons whose company we should entertain, or avoid.
YOur Neighbor comprehends all sorts and conditions of men, amongst whom there
are some good, some bad, and others of an ambiguous nature, who determine not
themselves to good or evil, but according as example, or the present impulse of
sense incline them.

Above all things avoid the company of men hardened in wickedness, you can
never amend them. The sound parts cure not the corruption of the gangrened;
look upon them as old uncurable ulcers, which communicate not only their
contagion to the adjacent parts, but change the color likewise of the parts
contiguous to the adjacent. I would have you likewise know, that of all wicked
persons the hypocrite is the worst. He abolishes the inward worship of God in
himself, to make the outward an instrument of treachery, he is so much the more
malicious, that under a livery which promises security he intends to surprise
you.

Covet for your instruction the company of honest and virtuous persons; of whom
you may find two sorts: some live a retired life, that they may not be polluted
with the contagion of other men: these being only a voice that cries in the
desert, Prepare the ways of the Lord. I advise you not what purity soever they
may have, to propose to your self their example for imitation.

Others without renouncing of public society, converse indifferently amongst
all kinds of men good or bad, still preserving an intention of well doing,
covet the familiarity of those, if they be not, as Jesus Christ was, the way,
the light, and the life; they are in the way, illuminated by his light, and
quickened in him.

Amongst those who are of a nature as yet indetermined to good, or evil, and
who are only inclined to either by an external cause, there are some so
careless, that they can apply themselves to no side whether good or bad.
Frequent not the company of such, for fear that you be condemned to the fire,
like the fig tree which bore no fruit. There are others more active, that do
evil rather by inadvertency, than out of any bad inclination. To amend these,
there is no more needful but to make them attentive to what they do.

If you be of the number of those, my Son, reflect a little upon your self, and
you shall find that your amendment is not out of your power. There is a third
kind of men who are bad only for want of breeding; a Soul which produces vices
is not barren, no more than ground which brings forth briers and thorns. Would
you make good use of both? cleanse the one from its impurities by good
exercises and wise instructions, and the other from its thorns by grubbing them
out: And then you shall find that the fruits which they bear will be fairer,
better, and more abundant, than of a piece of ground or a Soul that is
naturally barren.

CHAP. IX. Of the duty between a Prince, and a Subject.
THere remains no more but that I should tell you somewhat of the duty of a
Subject toward his Prince, and of the Prince toward his Subject, which is the
most important of all. The duty of a Husband, Wife, Father, Children, Brothers,
Master, Servant, Neighbors, and Friends, which are but the constituent parts
of a State, is but a private obligation. As the name of Subject is general, and
comprehends all these relations; and the name of King, a name of public
function and authority, so is there duty of a larger consideration. Their names
of Subject, and King, which are relative, inform us that the subjection to true
obedience in the one, is in the other an obligation to good government. In
effect the best model of government that can be in humane policy, is that in a
state we be all subject to one single person. If we were all of equal
condition, the strong would oppress the weak, the cunning would overreach the
more simple. And violence and fraud would reign in place of Justice; when on
the other hand in an equal subjection, Jealousy and emulation not only
cease, but every one of us finds our private security under the general
protection of him, to whom we are all Subjects.

One King, one Faith, one Law, is an unity of State, which are reduced to such
an unity in the person of the King, that there have never been any defection
from the Prince, but that the authority of the Law and the majesty of Religion
have been likewise wounded; witness our civil wars, and those whereof England
has been the Stage. Wherefore I command you, my Son, never to forsake the
service of the King, for what reason soever it may be. The Apostle teaches you
that all power is of God, and that he that refists the power, refists the
ordinance of God, and brings upon himself damnation. Be subject, (says he)
not only for wrath, that is for fear of the Prince, but also for conscience
sake.

This is a duty of so strict obligation amongst us, that we had rather run the
hazard of violating the fundamental law of the State, which admits no woman to
the Crown, than to fail in our respect to the lawful successor, by honoring
as our Master an imperfect embryo, whose sex is not known before that it is
birth declare it to be a male. Such an universal deference, which keeps a
Kingdom in this duty, must of necessity have more than humane warrant and
foundation.

It is in God alone, and for him only that Kings reign. Their Scepter, Crown,
Anointing, and the concourse of people that flock to their obedience, are but
the visible signs of the invisible power that does accompany them. Whatever
they be, good or bad, reverence in them the commission which they have from
God; the good are given you for a recompense, and the bad for a trial if you be
good, and a punishment if you be wicked.

As you see then that there is no interreign in the royalty, and that the
Prince never dies, because that when the one gives out, the other comes in; so
likewise there ought to be no cessation in the duty of a Subject toward his
Prince. When he renders to the Prince his due, and according to the counsel of
the Apostle, pays tribute to whom tribute, custom to whom custom, fear to whom
fear, and honor to whom honor is due, it is not a right of servitude that he
discharges, it is rather a right of gratitude which he renders to the Prince,
for the security of his liberty under his protection.

By the means of the duty that he renders him, which is but of small charge, in
respect of the benefit that he receives from him, provided it be not abused in
the receiving and employing of it; the poor man in his thrift, the rich in the
disposal of his wealth, the tradesman in his industry, and the merchant in his
traffic, do all retain an image of principality, in that they live in
security, and that there is not one amongst them, how miserable soever, that
can be forced to serve another if he be not willing: real and effective
subjection amongst us concerns him only who engages voluntarily in it; and
whosoever can live by his industry at home, without Quarrels or Lawsuits, is as
free in his Family under the protection of the Prince, as the Prince himself in
his State.

My child, you are of a quality that gives you the same immunities as the King
enjoys, except the obligation of serving him in the Wars when you are required
to it. I charge you once more, that the sense of the honor of your privileges
may persuade you to anticipate that command. Your duty is so great that way,
that the weight of Monarchy should be so far from being uneasy to you, that
you subsist by it rather as a little Sovereign, seeing the small estate that I
leave you holds of the King in chief, and is erected into a Regality with
Jurisdiction Civil and Criminal, which you may execute by your Offices under
the authority of the Prince.

CHAP. X. Of Seditions, their Ground, and their Remedy.
THere is nothing certainly that can render a Subject more religious in his
obedience to the Prince, than to represent to himself the miseries which
Seditions are wont to occasion. In the first place Rage, which is the most
stunning passion of the Soul, is the beginner of all; from whence it comes to
pass that there is not a part of the State, great or small, which suffers not
thereby convulsive motions.

During such a kind of motion, all are at work, and yet nothing done in order:
all Workhouses keep holiday, and Shops are shut; there is no Butchery but of
men; the Bake-houses, Markets, Entry of Provisions, Arrival of Boats and
Barges, and generally all kinds of Services are stopped, except that of the
Water-houses, which furnishes only with water; whilst in the mean time the
hungry Belly, which is the heaviest taxation, craves, and calls for food.

The Calamities, to which men are exposed during this storm, are not to be
numbered; for so soon as ever the reverence of the Prince is lost, every thing
becomes lawful, Sacriledg, Rapes, Pillage, Revenge; which come attended with so
deadly a Train, that whilst you hold your enemy by the Throat to take your
revenge of him, another enemy of yours kills you: when you have plundered and
sacked sufficiently, and from a poor man become rich, your Booty renders you a
Prey to another indigent person, who robs you to make himself the prey of
another; and so Plunder follows Plunder, and Murder, Murder, until that as in
a fight of mad blind-men, their disorder ceases for want of Competitours.

And if (as it happens often that Devils have a hand in great Tempests) some
powerful Subject take this occasion to make himself head of a Party, assure
your self that this Remedy is worse than the Disease, and that he that would be
the Tyrant of his King, would be so of you, and that with harder conditions
than those which have given cause to the Rebellion.

The most dangerous times for Seditions, are when we are at War with our
Neighbors, and they in Arms: one day of Disorder is enough in such a
conjuncture to make us deliver up with our hands to those whom we have been
accustomed to overcome, our Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Children, our Liberty,
Estates, Country, and our selves.

So terrible is the thought of all these horrid Representations, that I think
there can be nothing in the World which a Subject ought not rather to suffer,
than to betake himself to that desperate Remedy, which causes so many evils in
one only day, that many times entire Ages are little enough to repair the
losses. Neither our Children, nor our Childrens children, nor those that spring
from their Loins, can see an end of them: What is beyond them, affects us then
no more but as a common Interest.

How terrible notwithstanding that Seditions can be, they are but transient
evils, which resemble those thicks Clouds which mount to the middle Region of
the Air, where after much noise they burst at length, being unable to rise to
the upper, which beats them back, and turns them into Hail and Thunderbolts,
to waste and ruin the very place from whence their Vapors and Exhalations did
arise.

But forasmuch as the duty and honor of the Prince are concerned, that he prove
the Father and not the Flail of his People, it is his part to remove all sort
of matter that may occasion such Imposthumes in the body of his State, that he
may not be obliged to use the Cautere, and likewise they become not incurable
Botches: For it is most certain that if they who sit at the Helm of Affairs
content themselves only to remedy the evils that come stealing upon them,
without preventing and diverting of them by foresight, it will often happen
that their Remedies will be like those that are given in the agony of Death,
which are not only useless to the Patient, but disgraceful to the Physician.

And therefore as the Distempers which proceed from inanition, are the most
dangerous, it is of greatest importance that the meaner sort of people be not
reduced to extreme Poverty, for fear that they whose condition is somewhat
better, may not grow dry, like Rivers when the Brooks that feed them are
drained. It is also very convenient to leave somewhat beside what is just
necessary to the middle rank of people; from which there flows back always some
profit upon the lower: for indeed if these two parts from which the Prince
draws his greatest Aid, be once extenuated, it is to be feared that their
weakness may be communicated to the whole body of the State, and that there may
be as many wishes made for a change, as there are persons that suffer.

The greatest vexations are not always hardest to be born, such as threaten a
continuance are most irksome; because the sense of present pain has bounds,
but the apprehension of its duration, none. Whence it comes to pass that a
weakness occasioned by some heavy load, instead of abating turns to rage, when
all hopes of amendment are gone.

For this reason a Prince ought to avoid as much as possibly he can, all things
that may render his Government terrible, to the end that he may not only be
secure from all kinds of Rebellion, but that even the least Tempest may not be
raised in the minds of his Subjects, and that he may reign more absolutely in
their Hearts than over their Estates.

There is nothing that convinces us more of the perfection of the temper that
is in this Kingdom betwixt the Prince and his Subjects, than the duration of
our Monarchy. We see no state that can show like ours so long a series of Kings
and years under one form of Government, which is an evidence that the Harmony
thereof is excellent.

The body Politic like the Natural, has it is principles of long Life: They
both subsist long, when in their first constitution there happens a perfect
Symmetry between the part that commands, and that which obeys. Not, but that it
may be sometimes disturbed, and that as from the middle and lower regions of
the Body there arise of ten undigested Vapors which trouble the Brain, and from
thence also there descend some Defluxions which overcharge the lower parts, the
same disorder may not sometime be found betwixt the Prince and his Subjects:
Yet when the first Conformation is good, there is always in it some radical and
vivifying Spirit, that produces a Noble Crasis, which sets all things again to
right.

It is true there happen sometimes cross and unlucky Conjunctures, that force
the King to raise Taxes from his People; as when it is the public Interest to
entertain War for procuring of an advantageous Peace. In such occasions it is
very just that the People should contribute to it with all their Might, and
that the Prince likewise on his side should remit somewhat of his advantages
for facilitating the overtures of Peace, for fear that if that contribution
should always continue, the whole substance of the State might be exhausted,
and that at length the Foreign War, might become Intestine by the miseries that
it causes at home. For indeed, tho Foreign Wars be but like inflamed Blisters
that break out in the Skin, which are not so dangerous as internal Imposthumes;
yet for all that, they are very troublesome and uneasy, because they are always
accompanied with a great itching, which forces the hand by continual scratching
at length to claw off the Skin.

All things rightly considered, War seems to be nothing but the flail of God,
which Kings should divert from themselves, if they be able, as a thing that
lessens their Greatness by the loss of their Subjects, and the consequence of
an infinite number of Evils that attends it. God is the God of Peace and Love:
A King who is the image of God upon earth, blots out in himself that
resemblance, if he be not, like him, a King of Peace and Love; but seeing Peace
is a Blessing that was proclaimed by Angels at our Saviors coming into the
World, and which was left by himself to his Apostles when he went out of it, we
must expect it from God as a thing purely celestial. However the Prince should
preserve in his mind a desire to make it, and contribute thereto all that he
can, that he may not have this displeasure to see that his Reign is only
considerable by the actions which proceed from the irascible faculty of man.

In fine, My Son, that I may conclude your duty toward your Neighbor, break
never Society with any who-ever, unless with persons confirmed in wickedness.
Live civilly with your Inferior, familiarly with your equal, respectfully with
him that is above you, with all submission and obedience toward your Prince,
and in charity with all men.

CHAP. XI. Counsels how we may not err in the mutual duty of one toward
another.
THat you may not err in any one of these duties, you must know, my Son, that
there are three sorts of Eyes that behold you, to wit, the eye of God, the eye
of Man, and your Own: This being so, I advise you to carry your self in
public, as if the eye of God observed none but you alone, and to live in
private, as if all the World beheld you. As to your own Eye, let there none, I
pray you, that looks more narrowly on you, nor that you stand in awe of, than
of it. By so doing you will retain your original Modesty, which being nothing
but a reflection of the image of God that is in us, makes us delight in honest
things, and ashamed of what is otherwise.

Would you make a certain and infallible distinction betwixt that which is
honest, and that which is not? Set your self always in the place of another,
and reason thus within your self: If any one, thought, did, or said that which
I am about to do, think or say, would it be an honest thing? The place of
another is the true distance that you must take to make a right Judgment on it:
If in that place you perceive it to be honest, do it boldly; if not, have a
care of proceeding any farther. The greatest part of Mortality consists in that
point, whereof one of the adventures of my life will afford you an instance,
which I should be glad you did imitate.

A person alive at this day, whom I knew not, and have never seen since, nor he
me, came to me one day from a place at a pretty distance, and upon a Letter of
Credit of another who should not have had any such confidence in me, proposed
to me a thing that was contrary to the service of the King. At first it was in
my thoughts to have caused Arrest him; but having put my self in his place and
seeing that he did his Masters Service, having seriously weighed what I ought
to do on that occasion, I let him go, though by so doing I put my own head in
anger to save his. It is true that my peril was but doubtful and his certain.
But seeing the place where I had then some command, run no risk by my so doing,
that I performed the Kings service more securely, I took the course that seemed
to me the honestest. If the person in whose place I put my self at that time,
had put himself in mine, I should have since in the space of ten years received
some word of thanks. The person that sent the messenger, and he on whom I
depended at that time, may very well call to mind the truth of this adventure,
though not one of them to this hour know what was the chief motive to my action.

CHAP. XII. The conclusion of the Work by a short discourse concerning Death,
and of three things that usually trouble the mind of Man before his death.
I Think, my Child, that I have now discoursed of your Conduct in all the
actions of Life except the last, to wit, of Dying, which is rather a certain
term where the life of Man ends, than an action of life. Since it is so, as the
conclusion of a work is always better than it is progress, in respect that then
it receives it is accomplishment; so I think also that the last instant which
terminates our life, is that which is of most value. Death is good to the Good,
in that they find therein their rest, and the reward of their labor. It is
good to the Wicked, in that it puts an end to their wickedness, which is
aggravated as their iniquity does increase. It is good to the Living, in that
it frees them from the crowd which is to them a common pressure; and good in
respect of Nature, in that it gives her a larger space to contain her new
Productions. All that is most terrible in it, is the depth of it is Abyss: But
seeing when we came into the World, we came out of the same Abyss without fear,
thither again we should return without astonishment.

Whether it be that our original descends from Heaven, which is not to be
doubted, or that we have been taken out of the still calm of Nothing, as some
have believed; Nature has been very prudent, in rendering that knowledge to us
a little confused, lest that otherways the trouble of our exile, or of our
remove from a nonentity peaceable and without pain, unto a restless and
painful being, such as ours is, might have afflicted us. She has been also
very discreet in that, contrary to all reason, she has made the remembrance of
our past calamities pleasing to us, lest that otherways the fear of future
Evils might not set us upon the shortning of her course, and the anticipating
of her appointment of Dying; but yet more wise by dazzling us with some false
light of apparent good in life, and engaging us to the love of it by the charms
of Sense, of our Works, and Children; and by having in some manner obliged us
to run out her course by the custom of living, and to take care of our own
preservation by the fear of Annihilation.

It is not without cause that at first we appear in the World like Blind-men,
without the knowledge of the gate by which we entered, or that we are, or where
we are; for if our undestanding had a being as soon as our selves, and that it
were not prejudicated by the custom of seeing our selves in the World, we
should not be so nice in quitting the love of Life, which appears to us all so
natural.

Notwithstanding all the charms which life may boast of, yet I cannot imagine
that there has ever been any one bold enough to desire to come into the World,
if it had been in his own choice, and that he had been made to understand that
for that end it behoved him first to lurk nine Months in the Womb of a Woman,
as in a Den, there to lie double like a shapeless Lump in a puddle of corrupt
Blood, wherewith he is nourished; to be dropped from thence with his head
downward, with a gut like a Halter about his neck, ready to strangle him;
naked, impotent and unable to help himself, and suffering already the
inconveniences of life, before he begin to live.

Nature does the act of a good Mother in forsaking of us; for her principal
intention is to continue her Productions, for maintaining of the Universe,
which she satisfies by giving us Life: And by denying of us her assistance at
our first step into it, it seems she intends to commit a charitable Homicide,
that she may have no hand in all those evils which there we are to suffer.

Indeed, when I well consider the constraint of Swaddling, the nastiness of
Clouts, the abundance of Tears that distill from our Eyes during our Infancy,
the ignorance, chastisement and correction to which our fairest season is
exposed: The impatience, disorders and irregularities of our stronger age: The
fears, languishing, and faintings of our weaker; I think it has been said with
good reason, that we are made up of two Executioners, to wit, the Body and the
Soul, whereof the one puts us to the rack by Hunger, Thirst, Labor,
Wearisomness and Diseases; and the other uses us not more favorably by
disquietings, fears, and the tumults of our Passions and Desires; and when we
have all things at will, even by the surfeit that we contract through satiety.
Man in that condition is like a Malefactor on the Wheel, to whom the
Death's-stroke is the stroke of Grace.

Certainly, seeing that we are exposed to such legions of Miseries, it may with
more reason be said, that Life is the punishment of Sin, than Death; seeing
there is nothing so grievous to be found in it, whether we look upon it as a
sleep of Nature, or a last duty which she exacts from us.

In the first place, Sleep and Fainting, which are two means whereby before we
die, we make a trial of the approaches of Death, show us sensibly that we wear
away without Pain. Beside, natural reason teaches us that the Vital parts,
which suffer most in this dissolution, are the most insensible parts of all the
Body; for shortness of Breath, the alteration of the Pulse, its weakness and
intermission, and the Convulsions which are the forerunners of Death, are not
so much the signs of Pain, as of the ruin of a crasie House which shakes when
it is upon the point of falling. The feebleness of the Body, the shutting of
the Teeth, Paleness, cold Sweats, loss of Memory, suppression of Speech, the
contraction of the Tongue, trembling of the Arteries, extinction of Sight, and
the Hickock, are mere signs of the abundance of Vital Spirits which retire from
all these parts with an irregular motion, which are indeed more painful to him
that sees, than to him that suffers them.

To convince us yet more evidently how slight a thing it is to die, there is
not any passion of the Soul, how weak soever, that has not a more absolute
Authority over us than the fear of Death; Revenge triumphs over it, Love
despises it; Honor faces it; the shame of Ignominy embraces it; Affliction
makes it it is refuge; and Fear prevents it. So that the preparatives and
magazins that are made against so weak an Enemy, are rather the marks of
Cowardice than Resolution.

If it be lawful to touch the memory of that Ancient, from whence we have the
loveliest Counsels that were ever given on that subject, we have more
likelihood to suppose, that when he was ordered to die, the apprehension that
he conceived of Death, occasioned so forceable an attraction of his Blood and
Spirits to the heart, that notwithstanding the opening of the Veins of his Arms
and Thighs, and the poison which he had taken, his Soul could not expire; than
to believe, as it is recorded, that the languishing of his Agony was an effect
of the weakness of his age. I am the more confirmed in this conjecture, because
they were fain to put him in a very hot Bath to extenuate his Blood and Spirits
condensed by the chilliness of his fear, and to recall them from the heart
whither they were retired, to the external Orifices, that by that way they
might get out.

It is an evidence that that excellent Man had his Soul wholly infected with
the black vapor of fear, that what subject soever he has handled, he has
always like a huffing Captain, (for he was indeed of Cordova in Spain) mingled
with it some Bravado against Death, which makes me suspect his courage, when I
find him always grapleing with, (a word is enough) and never in any truce with
that deadly Enemy. It is better to be surprised by an evil of that nature, than
to be in a necessity of anticipating of it by fear; for the Science which
teaches us to support it, is more sharp and Corrosive than Lenitive, and the
instructions that are given on this Subject, are only as the voice of a man in
a fright, that makes a noise to encourage himself, wherein there is more of
ostentation than force.

He that said that the end of Philosophy is to teach us to die well, would have
had more reason to say, that Philosophy is to teach us to live well; because
that the whole course of our life stands in need of reason for its conduct, and
it seems that to die well there is only need of ignorance: Witness Beasts and
the inferior sort of People, who are wont to run that Carreer undauntedly and
unconcernedly, which is the loveliest frame of Soul that one can have on such
an occasion.

In effect, when I consider Death as a still and quiet night of Nature, from
whence all its productions creep out, and where they return again to rest, the
depth and silence of that great Darkness causes in me more veneration than
astonishment. I perceive that the time past is one part of that night, and the
future the other; and that the present, which is but an instant, has so steep a
descent from the future which is not yet, toward the past which is no more,
that my imagination it self cannot trace it: So that the life of the World
appears to me as our own, to be nothing else but a breaching in the future, and
breathing out the past.

When I likewise consider, that this flux of Life, betwixt the past and future,
is in the beast merely an act of Sense which ends with it, and that in us it is
an effect of the breathing of God, which emanating from that Divine Principle
is Immortal as he is; Then do I look on Death with greater confidence. Though
the Holy Scripture did not teach me that truth, yet our good and bad actions,
whereof the good or bad smell descends to Posterity, do evidently prove it to
me: Our very Bones and the dust of our Graves instruct me, that since the
basest part of us, which is common to the beast, out-lives us; there is not the
least ground to fear that the better part can be annihilated, which is a part
of God in us.

In the times of our Forefathers, whilst Heavens-gate was still shut, a long
life was the reward of the Upright: Since it has been opened, the Christian
strives to enter it sooner, and to prevent natural death by a civil, which
consists in the performance of certain Vows and Austerities which serve to
humble and bring down Man during his life. But since I foresee, that you and I
are like to have too short a breath for so high a design, I dare neither follow
it my self, nor advise it to you: For that end we must renounce the love of our
selves, which in some manner is comprehended under the love of our Neighbor.

There is a time to live and a time to die, let us employ the time which we
have to live, in the service of God, in the exercise of Virtue; and in the
mutual offices of Society, and we shall insensibly and without fear arrive at
the time of death. The revolution of the natural day is an abridgment of the
whole course of life. As we see that a wise man disposes with order all his
hours, without troubling himself about the hour of rest, before Bedtime be
come; so in like manner it should be enough for us to regulate all the actions
of our life with so much integrity and quietness, that the sleep of Death may
overtake us when we are doing the last act of Virtue.

Life is a duty active in good Offices, and Death a necessity of Nature that
puts an end to it, which we ought not to fear, provided we watch, and have
always Oil in our Lmaps. The wise Virgins were a-sleep as well as the foolish,
when they waited for the Bridegroom, to show us that it is impossible to be
always on our guard in expecting of an hour which is uncertain, and that to
enter into the Bridechamber with the Bridegroom, it is enough to make, as the
wise Virgins did, provision of Oil, that is to say, of good works: Otherways if
it behoved us to be in a continual disquiet for the hour of our death, instead
of living we should be in a perpetual trance.

When we die pining away through the defect of vital Spirits, the weakness of
sight, the thickness of Hearing, the debility of the Stomach, the heaviness of
Body, which are the forerunning messengers of Death, may very well give us some
intelligence of it is approach: But when we are in the flower of our age, and
that the vigor of Blood and Spirits cause in us transports of Joy which even
prevent our will; what can we then do to prepare our selves for Death, but to
resolve to live well?

That we may live well; we must, as much as we can, disengage the Soul from the
Body, purge it from it is lusts, it is affections and fears; stupifie our senses;
and to say better, annihilate our selves. This abstraction of the Superior part
from the Inferior, is in some sort an imitation of Death, which renders the
life of a man that lives well, more calm by the resemblance that it has with
Death, and his death more tranquile, by the conformity which it has with his
life.

In effect to live well is nothing else but to die well; because every instant
of our life is but a gliding of our age toward death; so that there is nothing
that makes a less alteration in man than this last hour, seeing that every one
of us pursues even to that moment the natural inclination of the ordinary
course of life. Which gave occasion to a Lawgiver to call our last Will and
Testament, the mirror of our manners. This we see in that a man of business
dies with his head full of affairs, the careless man, negligently; the grave
man seriously; and they that are of a brisk and gay temper, with a Jest in
their mouth.

Our Soul is quite otherways changed in other passions. anger does so alter us,
that there remains not in us the least appearance of our selves: Fear by a
single assault seizes both our body and mind: Grief and sadness blast both: And
Envy by the foot that it forces out, lets us see too well what alteration it
causes within. This difference of impression which is to be observed between
death and our passions, proceeds only from this, that Death is a mere natural
motion, and that passions overtake us by an irregular impulse, which puts
Nature to the rack.

Although there be nothing more hid from Man, than the knowledge of the place
from whence he came into the World, and of that from whence he must go out of
it, which are two extremities out of his reach; the one being on this side, and
the other beyond his being; nevertheless the power of perpetuating of himself
which he brings with him from the place from whence he came, demonstrates to
him that he has his original from an Eternal Source, and in some manner
assures him of his immortality. As to the place whither he returns when he
takes leave of the World, the depth of its Abyss frightens only him that looks
on it, and not him that goes down into it: We must consider it as sleep, which
is a repose to him that sleeps, and appears a death to him that is awake.

Death cannot be an evil, because Sleep, which is the image of it is a good. As
the one refreshes us, puts an end to the labor of the day, and restores our
strength for some time; so the other does us the same kindness for ever. As it
makes a cessation in us of all the actions of the other functions of life,
except of breathing; so likewise we may assure our selves, that though the
action of the body die, yet the breath of the spirit of God which is in us,
dies not, and that we shall as certainly rise again from death, as we do awake
from sleep.

In fine, my Friends, let us look upon Death as a last act of Life, which we
ought neither to fear at the hour of it, because it is a duty of Nature; nor
desire it before the time, that we may not forsake a warfare which is not to be
left without order. If so be that ye consider it so, ye will thereby alone find
as much instruction for dying well, as there is in all the precepts for a good
Life which I have given you.

There are three things which are wont to trouble the mind of a dying Man, the
thought of what shall become of him after death, the care of his memory, and of
his posterity.

To remedy the anxiety of what shall become of you after death, regulate the
actions of your life, as if your good actions were alone sufficient to procure
you Salvation. Having done so, resign your self to the will of God, as if you
hoped for Salvation from his mercy alone. And so your works being justified by
your Faith, and your faith by your works, be assured that your Soul shall find
all the consolation which it cannot receive when you die.

As to our memory after death, the memory of the Just being a sweet Vapor that
exhales from his past life, continues sometime like a precious perfume which
still sends out a steam, and fills the place where it dies with its good odor.
But seeing there is nothing that has a thinner body than a Vapor, there is
nothing either that sonner evaporates, than the Reputation of a living or dead
man; it passes away like the beauty of plucked flower, or it withers like the
flower it self when it has remained too long on its stalk.

The lives of the most illustrious and sparkling, as of the more dull and
darksome, are subject to the shipwreck of time. If any escape, strange wonder!
it is only to leave us an emblem of the emptiness of worldly greatness, when we
see the grandeur of the highest abased in a Tavern-sign, or in a Gaming-house,
where a Knave is better than a King, and where the most famous Names of all
antiquity are exposed to the insolence of an huffing Gamester, which tears and
tramples on them at his pleasure.

How do we know, but it may be questioned one day which of the two Rouland or
Lercanier was the Knight of the round Table or the Carter? this great debasing
of the vanity of Man comes to pass, because there is nothing Eternal and
permanent but God alone, who is a jealous God, and to whom only belongs Glory,
Honor, and Praise, and not to Man.

The last care of Man, which reaches beyond himself, is that of his Posterity,
the most universal of all; because it is a kind of respite from death. I wish
that when we come to die this care might be so moderate, that our conscience,
which has then enough to do about our own Salvation, might not be troubled, nor
the ordinary course of the Law changed, the public order of which is always
better than our private appointment. The advantages and entails which we are
allowed to grant in favor of the Elder and of the Males, undoes one part of
our Posterity to preserve the other. It is an evidence that in that there is
more Vanity than Justice, that our caution and circumspection holds good but
for one time, which being expired, our inheritance falls in again into the
common road, as being more conform to right reason, than our private
disposition.

It less in our power to order the future than the present, whereof we are but
very bad Stewards. What am I concerned, who am a dying man, whether my Name and
Estate be preserved in the race of my eldest or youngest Son, or if both fall
into the Daughters lap? My blood is as much my blood in my Daughter, as in my
Son; and though even this last prop of our line should fail, Nature provides
for it, and shows us sensibly that the difference is not great betwixt Nephews,
Cosins, and Children, by representing as well the manners and features of the
Uncle or Grandfather in the most remote, as in the nearest in blood.

So that, my dearest Children, let us commit our selves and posterity to the
providence of God, that we may die with peace: When we came into the World we
were not at all concerned with those whom we found there before us, neither let
us be so when we are going out of it, with those whom we leave behind. These
two extremities being equally distant from our beginning, and from our end,
should be equally indifferent to us. The peace of a living man consists in the
obeying of God's Commandments, and when he dies in the hope and confidence of
his mercy: If in these two ye be steadfast, I hope that God in his goodness,
will be pleased to accompany with his Grace, my Blessing which I leave you as
the conclusion of my Will and Testament.

ERRATA.
P. 144. l. 31, 32. the first possessor of his vices, r. the first vice that
seizes him?

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
The First Part. Which treats of the Duty of Man toward God.
CHAP. I. A Child ought to begin his adoration toward God by Speech; God is
the Principle of all things, and his Being is incomprehensible. Page 1 CHAP.
II. In what manner God is to be Worshipped. Of Christian Religion, and that one
cannot be a good Subject without being a good Christian. That no innovations
ought to be made in Religion. Of the excellency of Faith above Reason. p. 7
CHAP. III. Of Libertinism and Miscreancy. p. 13 CHAP. IV. Concerning
Superstition. p. 15 CHAP. V. How we are to use our Will and Reason in the
Service of God. p. 17 CHAP. VI. Concerning Prayer. Of Private and Public
Prayers. p. 19 CHAP. VII. Concerning the Lords Prayer. p. 22
The Second Part. Which treats of the Duty of Man toward Himself.
CHAP. I. OF the difference that there is betwixt the procreation of Man, and
the other productions of Nature; and the reason thereof. p. 27 CHAP. II.
Concerning the moderation of the first appetite of Man, which is that of
living, where Gluttony is handled. p. 30 CHAP. III. Concerning the moderation
of the second appetite of Man, which is the desire of having; where Avarice and
the true use of riches are discoursed of. p. 33 CHAP. IV. Of the Will of a
Child, that it is a rude and indigested reasoning of the Soul, and how it ought
to be guided with moderation. p. 39 CHAP. V. From whence springs the Error of
our Will, and concerning Veracity and Lying. p. 45 CHAP. VI. Studies and
exercises ought to be jointly performed. p. 49 CHAP. VII. Of Exercises Of
Riding, Dancing, Fencing: And of the agility of Body and Hand. p. 50 CHAP.
VIII. That the first knowledge of Man should be that of himself. That he ought
to know the apartments of the place of his abode, which is the World and
Arithmetic. p. 55 CHAP. IX. That History informs Man of the transactions of
the World, and that it is necessary to know it. p. 62 CHAP. X. Of fabulous
History, and of Romance. p. 66 CHAP. XI. Of the different ends of Studies,
according to the diversity of Spirits. That it is very necessary that Kings
should be learned. p. 69 CHAP. XII. Of Christian Morality, which consists only
in Charity. p. 73 CHAP. XIII. Of the vices that spring from Self-love, which is
contrary to the love of God, and of our Neighbor. And in the first place of
Pride. p. 79 CHAP. XIV. Of sensual Love. p. 82 CHAP. XV. Of hatred. p. 87 CHAP.
XVI. Of Anger. p. 89 CHAP. XVII. Of Revenge. p. 93 CHAP. XVIII. Of Fear. p. 95
CHAP. XIX. Of Envy. p. 96 CHAP. XX. Of Grief and Sadness. p. 98 CHAP. XXI. Of
Joy, and that there is none without Virtue. p. 100 CHAP. XXII. That we must
choose a profession. Of the profession of Arms, and what ought to be the first
institution thereof. p. 103 CHAP. XXIII. Seven Counsels for a Soldier. p. 107
CHAP. XXIV. Three Counsels for ones fortune. The first, Always to follow the
Court and the Army. The second, To follow the inclination of ones Genius. The
third, To propose in all things an honest end. p. 111 CHAP. XXV. Five Counsels
concerning the conduct of ones Family. p. 117 CHAP. XXVI. That one ought to
have some general notions of public affairs. That they can only be learned at
Court: And wherefore one should spend some part of his Life there. p. 121 CHAP.
XXVII. Of the vices to which Courtiers are most subject, which are Vanity,
Scoffing, Dissimulation, Ambition, and Luxury. p. 125 CHAP. XXVIII. Concerning
six Counsels for a Courtier. 1. To serve only the King. 2. How one should carry
himself with his Favorites. 3. To accommodate ones self to times. 4. To be
Flexible. 5. Not to be too scrupulous about points of Honor. 6. To follow the
Mode. p. 131 CHAP. XXIX. Of Divertisements that consist in Play, and in
Conversation. Of the Play of Chess, Dice and Cards, and of Play in General. p.
137. CHAP. XXX. Of Conversation. p. 139 CHAP. XXXI. Of the Conditions necessary
for a Churchman. p. 142 CHAP. XXXII. Five general Directions for Virtue,
whereof the last is Submission to the Providence of God which makes the
conclusion of the Second Part. p. 147
The Third Part. Which treats of the Duty of Man toward Man.
CHAP. I. OF the Force and Necessity of Society. p. 155 CHAP. II. Of the first
Society, which is that of Husband and Wife, and of their respective Duties. p.
157 CHAP. III. Of the Duty of Parents toward their Children, and of Children
toward their Parents. p. 164 CHAP. IV. Of the Duty of Brothers amongst
themselves. p. 173 CHAP. V. Of the Duties of Masters and Servants. p. 179 CHAP.
VI. Of the Duty of Neighbors among themselves. p. 185 CHAP. VII. Of Friends,
and of three springs of the actions of man toward his Neighbor, which are
Good Will, Friendship, and Charity. p. 189 CHAP. VIII. Of the Persons whose
company we should entertain, or avoid. p. 198 CHAP. IX. Of the duty between a
Prince, and a Subject. p. 199 CHAP. X. Of Seditions, their Ground, and their
Remedy. p. 202 CHAP. XI. Counsels how we may not err in the mutual duty of one
toward another. p. 207 CHAP. XII. The conclusion of the Work by a short
discourse conceruing Death, and of three things that usually trouble the mind
of Man before his death. p. 209
Books Printed for and sold by Henry Brom.
Divinity.
BIshop Wilkin's Not. Religion. Mr. Combers's Companion to the Temple, being a
Paraphrase on the Common Prayer, and against Transubstantiation, 3 Vol. Bishop
Cosen's Devotions. Mr. Fowler's Design of Christianity. Dr. Patrick's Witnesses
to Christianity. -- His Advice to a Friend. Holy Anthems of the Church. Dr.
Dumon his Prayers. The Reformed Monastery, or the Love of Jesus. Mr. Farindon's
Sermons. Bona's Guide to Eternity, and his Precepts and practices of a
Christian life. -- And several Sermons at Court. Dr. Duport's Three Sermons on
May 29. Nov. 5. Jan. 30. and several Court Sermons.
Histories.
The Life of the great Duke of Espernon, being the History of the Civil Wars of
France, beginning 1598. where D'Avila leaves off, and ending in 1642. by
Charles Cotton Esquire; The Commentary of M. Blaiz de Montluc the great Favorite
of France, in which are contained all the Seiges, Battles, Skirmishes, in three
Kings Reigns, by Charles Cotton Esquire; Mr. Rycaut's History of Turkey. The
History of the Three last Grand Seigniors. The History of Don Quixot, fol.
Bishop Wilkin's Real Character, fol. Dr. Guidot's History of Bathe, and of the
hot Waters there. The Fair one of Tunis, Domus Carthusiana, or the History of
the most Noble Foundation of the Charter House in London, with the Life and
Death of Thomas Sutton, Esquire; The History of the Sevarites, a Nation inhabiting
part of the third Continent.
Physic.
Dr. Glisson de Ventriculo and Intestinis. De vita Naturae. Mr. Wiseman's
Surgery. Dr. Barbet's Practice, with Dr. Decker's Notes. Sir Ken. Digby's
Excellent Receipts in Physic, Chyrurgery, and Cookery. The Anatomy of the
Elder-tree, with its approved Virtue.
Miscellanies.
Vossius of the Wind and Seas. Dr. Skinner's Lexicon. The Planters Manuel.
Treatise of Humane Reason. The Complete Gamester. Toleration discussed, by R.
L'Estrange Esquire; England's Improvement, by R. Coke Esquire; Leyburn's Arith.
Recreations. Geographical Cards describing all parts of the World, and a
Geographical Dictionary.
School-Books.
Screvelius Lexicon, in Quarto. Centum Fabulae, in Octavo. Nolens Volens, or
you shall make Latin. Radyns Rudimenta Artis Oratoriae. Pools Parnassus. The
Scholars Guide from the Accidence to the University. Everlasting Fire no Fancy.
Christianity no Enthusiasm. Erasmus Coll. English. Lipsius of Constancy,
English.
FINIS.



