A DISCOVERY OF Truth and Falsehood.

Heb. 4.12, 13. 1 Cor. 4.6, 7. 2 Cor. 2.10. Joh. 8: 12. Psalm. 25.14 Prove. 3.32.
Amos 3.8. Rev. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
Discovered by the light of God in the inward parts, the spirit of of man being
the candle of the Lord, which being enlightened, it searches the secrets, and
spies out all the deceits of the heart; and the Lord commands that it should
shine forth to others; for the spirit searches all things, even the deep
things of God, that they may be enlightened, that sit in darkeness: Christ
within is the light of the Lord, and enlighteneth the understanding, and
places his fear in the heart, and the secrets of the Lord are with them that
fear him. Oh fear the Lord God almighty, and worship not the beast as all do
that have not found their names written in the book of life, Rev. 13.8. God is
a Spirit, and now he will be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth, Joh. 4.24. for
he is seeking such to worship him, verse. 23. and Ezekiel. 34.11. and 16. The Lord
is gathering all his elect together by his Spirit, out of al Forms, into the
substance of all Forms, to worship him in his temple at New Jerusalem, where
the tabernacle of God is with men, Rev. 21.3. Oh all people, cease from man,
whose breath is in his nostrils, Isa. 2.22. and fear God, Rev. 14.7.
and give glory unto him: for the hour of his judgment is coming: and worship
him that made heaven and earth; the Lord does require it.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord, by one whom the people of the world calls
a Quaker, but is of the Divine nature made partaker: whom the world knows not,
that are in their old nature, and so mock and deride: but woe to the wicked, it
shall be ill with them. Isai. 3.11.


Say unto the righteous, It shall be well with them: for they shall inherit the
blessing. Isai. 3.10. Matthew. 5.10, 11, 12.


Yorkshire, 1652. Rich. Farneworth.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert. 1653.

A discovery of truth, and falsehood.
ALl people, see where you are, and consider how you stand, and see whether you
be yet in the fall, or redeemed to God, and com'd into the promised land, born
of water and the Spirit, and circumcised with the circumcision made without
hands, and baptized by one spirit into one body, having put on Christ, which is
the head of his body, the Church, the first born written in Heaven, 1 Cor.
12.13. Gal. 3.27.
for they that are baptized into Christ, have put on Christ, and are crucified
to the world, and the world to them, being com'd through the law, by which the
old man was crucified, and are redeemed from under the earth, to the Lord God,
and to the Lamb, Christ being the end of the law for righteousness, ruling by
his power alone, in those that are of the new birth, and reconciled to God by
the blood of the Lamb, the enmity being slain, the old man destroyed, with
the deeds of darkness, which the righteous law was to: and the new man raised
up and com'd through the law by the divine power of righteousness, sees now what
the law is to, not to the righteous, but to the unrighteous, and has power
over the fleshly man: they that are in the flesh cannot please God, who is a
spirit, and of purer eyes then to behold iniquity: neither are they Israel that
are after the flesh, but they that are after the spirit: he is not a Jew that
is one outwardly, but he is a Jew that is one inwardly; the Jew outwardly had a
law outwardly, written in tables of stone, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 35. Heb 8.10, 11.
but the Jew inwardly has his law written in inward fleshly tables of the
heart, not with pen and ink, but by the Spirit of the living God, to teach them
the knowledge of the everlasting truth, and to direct them to holiness and
righteousness, to walk humbly before him, that they may inherit the blessing.

In the time of the law that was given forth to the children of Israel after
the flesh, they had it outwardly, written in tables of stone, in the first
Covenant, which was outwardly: Deuteronomy. 27.1, 2, 3, 4. Mica. 3.9, 10, 11. Isai.
1.21, 22, 23, 24.
and they that ruled over man were to be just and faithful, ^it ^as hated God
and feared covetousness; for such the Lord delights in but when they backslided
from the truth, then they did not justice, neither did they execute true
judgment according to the command of God, therefore was he displeased with
them, and sent to cry out against them.

Now see where you are, whether in the transgression, and in the fall yea or
no: and learn to do that which is right in the sight of the God that he may be
glorified by you; do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly before him, and
execute true judgment and justice, for he does require it. Mic. 6.8.


Just Men are to be rulers of the people
Moses was a ruler over the people, and he set over them faithful men, such as
feared God and hated covetousness.

Moses was to set over the people Officers, to judge the people with just
judgment: See thou shall not wrest judgment, says the Lord.

The judges are not to respect persons in judgment.

The Judges and Officers are not to take a gift. See Deuteronomy 16.19 for gifts
blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous

They are to follow that which is altogether just, verse. 20. Deuteronomy. 32.36.


The Lord shall judge his people, and he judges righteously; and says he, If
I whet my glittering sword, and my hand take hold of Judgment, I will render
vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me, Deuteronomy. 32.41.

The Lord shall judge the people, Psalm. 7.8.

The righteous God tries the hearts and reins, verse. 9.

God judges the righteous, and he is angry with the wicked every day, Psalm,
7.11, 13, 14.

They that judge the people must be righteous, that they may judge righteously,
For they judge for God and not for man. See 2 Chronicles. 19.6.

Jehosaphat dwelt at Jerusalem, and he set over the Cities Judges, and gave
them charge, and said to them, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man
but for the Lord, who is with you in judgment, 2 Chronicles. 16.5, 6, 7. wherefore
says he, now that you are to judge for the Lord, see that you judge
righteously, and the fear of the Lord be with you; and says he, Take heed and
do it; for there is no iniquity with the Lord, nor respect of persons, nor
taking of gifts.

And he charged the Judges and Officers, saying, Thus shall ye do in the fear
of the Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart, verse. 9.

The Judge is to open his mouth for the dumb, Prove. 31.8.
in the cause of such as are appointed for destruction.

They that judge the people are to judge righteously, and they are to judge the
poor and needy, Prove. 31.9.

Moses gave the same charge to the Judges that Jehosaphat did, Deuteronomy. 1.16.
says he, Hear the causes of your Brethren, between brother and brother, and
judge righteously between every man and his brother, and the stranger that is
with him.

The Judges are not to respect persons in judgment, verse. 17.
but are to hear the small as well as the great; for the judgment is Gods.

The Lord himself says, That they that judge the people shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment; It is a command of God. 2. He commands that they
do not respect persons: for says he, Thou shall not respect the persons of the
poor, nor honor the persons of the mighty. But 3. He commands them that they
judge in righteousness; See Lev. 19.15, 16. verse.

1. They are not to stand against the blood of their neighbor. 2. They are not
to hate their brother in their heart. 3. They are to reprove for sin. 4. They
must not bear any grudge to the people. 5. They are not to be avenged of them.
6. They are not to be tale-bearers amongst the people. 7. They are not to
defraud their neighbor. 8. They are not to curse the deaf, nor to put a
stumbling block before the blind; but they are to fear the Lord, and lay aside
evil. 9. They are to keep the Statutes of the Lord, that they may judge
righteously, Lev. 19.13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 10. The Judges are not to judge
according to the outward appearance, but they are to judge righteous judgment;
and it is joy to the Just to do judgment, John 7.24
Prove. 21.19.
Justices are to be faithful and just men.
1. He that rules over men must be just. 2. He must be one that fears God.
3. He must rule in love, and in the fear of the Lord. 4. He must be one that
hates evil, and loves that which is good; and he shall be as the light of the
morning, when the sun arises, even a morning without clouds, 2 Samuel 23.3, 4.
The path of the just is a shining light: they are to be just, Prove. 3.18.
and shine forth in brightness, to be examples for others to walk by.

The way of the just is uprightness; Isa. 26.7.
thou most upright do weigh the paths of the just.

The just man walks in his integrity, Prove. 20.7.

It is joy to the just to do judgment, Prove. 21.15.

An unjust man is an abomination to the just, Pro. 29.21
and he that is upright in his way, is an abomination to the wicked.

The just shall live by Faith, Romans 1.17.

John was a just man and a holy, Mark 6.20.

To do judgment and justice is more acceptable to the Lord, then sacrifice,
Prove. 21.3. but an high look, and a proud heart is sin; and it is not for one
that is to do justice, verse. 4. The robbery of the wicked shall destroy them,
because they refuse to do judgment, verse. 7.

1. A Justice is to defend the poor and fatherless. 2. They are to do justice
to the afflicted and needy. 3. They are to deliver the poor and needy, and rid
them out of the hands of the wicked, Psalm. 82.3, 4. 4. They are to remove
violence and spoil. 5. They are to execute judgment and justice. 6. They are
to take away exactions from the people. 7. They are to see that there be just
weights and measures, says the Lord; see if it be so, Ezekiel. 45.9, 10.
Justices.
Thus says the Lord, Keep ye judgment, and do justice; do judgment and
justice, and it shall be well with you; the Lord requires that they do
justice, and be merciful, and to walk humbly before the Lord, Mic. 6.8.

The true Judges was to be men that feared God and hated covetousness; and they
was to judge righteous judgment, without partiality or respect of persons, and
they were not to take bribes, but to do it freely; and likewise the Justices
was to be the same, and to do justice, to take off oppression and violence from
the people, and to see that they had all in equity and justice.

Now when they did pervert the ways of the Lord, he was displeased with them,
and sent forth his servants the Prophets to cry out against them; They are to
do it freely, and to let the cause of the poor come before them, and to judge
without any respect of persons in righteousness; but when they did it for
money, it was odious to the Lord. See what Micah says, Mic. 3.1.
in the 3 of Micah; Hear, says he, I pray-ye, O ye heads of Israel. It was
Israel his own people that had forgot his Laws; It is a dishonor to the Lord,
to have those that profess love to him, and those that had the Statutes and
Ordinances committed to them, for to break his commands, and disobey, and cause
his name to be evil spoken of, by those that made no profession at all; well
might they be forgetful of him, and live in wicked imaginations, when those
whom he had made himself manifest unto, in so large a manner as he did, which
had the Statutes and Ordinances committed unto them, and had a rule given forth
of the Lord to walk by, and had such large promises given forth, that if they
did abide and keep in his Statues and Ordinances committed unto them, they
might enjoy those things promised: but they waxed great and rich, and then
forgot the Lord their God, and the laws and statutes which was committed to
them, and so the Lord was displeased with them; for where much is given, much
is required: but they forgot the Lord, and broke his statutes and ordinances;
and yet professed love to him, and called him their Father: Mal. 1.
but, says he, If I be your Father, where is my honor? and if I be a Master,
where is my fear? for a son honors his father, and a servant his Master, but
ye have dishonored me, says the Lord: yet ye say, Wherein? have ye not
despised thy name, says the Lord, in offering polluted bread upon mine Altar?
They was to bring of the best, and that which was clean, and pure, and they was
to bring it freely; and the Priests was to offer it up freely: in bringing the
best, they brought their hearts, and they was to bring it freely, and it was to
be offered up, a perfect figure of Jesus Christ, laying down his life freely:
and when they did not bring of the best, then the Lord sent his true Prophets
to cry out against them; says he, Cursed be the deceiver, that has in his
flock a male, and offers up that which is unclean, and voweth and sacrifices
unto the Lord an unclean thing. See Mal. 1.14. the curse was upon them, for so
doing; therefore all you professors, and all high, and low; take heed how you
do profess love to God and Jesus Christ, and let your hearts be from him,
either in your pride, or profits, or pleasures, or preferments, or
covetousness, or oppression; for if you profess love to him in words, you which
profess him to be your Father, and Jesus Christ to be your Savior, if your
hearts be not wholly with him, your sacrifices are abominable to the Lord, all
your praying, preaching, and expounding is but Cains sacrifice, which God does
not accept; for the prayers of the wicked are an abomination to the Lord: take
heed of hypocrisy, God does abhor it; for says he, If ye love me, keep my
commandments; and again, My Son give me thy heart. Now if you make never so
great profession in words, and do not put it in practice, and walk answerably
to it in your life and conversation, it is but hypocrisy, and dissimulation,
and God does loath it, it stinkes before the Lord, your professions in words
without actions; therefore take heed of deceiving your selves in making a
profession; profession without possession is but hypocrisy; and says the
Lord, This people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do they
honor me, but their hearts are far from me: Oh see where your hearts are, are
they not in the world? and the Scripture says, If any man love the world, the
love of the Father is not in him; for the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but are of the world, the
works of the Devil, and are for the fire: The Lord is a consuming fire, and he
will burn up all his enemies before him: Oh therefore take heed of dissembling
with him; for God cannot endure a dissembler, he loves the upright in heart, in
life, and conversation. See where you are, are you not going on to destruction?
take heed betime; Oh where art thou? see, art thou not standing by the pits
brink? take heed thou sall not in: can thou see? art thou not blind? thou
art abroad running a whoreing, and the whoremonges God will judge. See, art
thou not committing adultery under every green tree? do thou know? where art
thou? art thou not a sleep in security? take heed, art thou? can thou tell?
See, there was one that had forgot the Lord, and was going after pride; see, is
not thine? Oh thou professor, turn again, that is not the way to Sion; turn
in hither, thou have clear lost thy way: would thou go to Sion? tell me, if
thou would, thou must not go with thy friends; can thou forsake all? It is
a narrow way to hit, there is no room at all for to take thy friends with thee:
I would fain go to Sion, but I have such a love to my friends, that I cannot
part with them; for if I part with them, I shall part with my life; do so,
know thou not what Jesus Christ says, He that will lose his life for my
names sake, shall find it? and he says, He that loves any thing more then me,
is not worthy of me. Art thou willing to forsake thy friends, and lay down thy
life? tell me, if thou be willing, it will be such an exchange as thou art not
yet acquainted with; though thou be great, and have many friends and
acquaintance, they are not to be compared to the life that is in Christ; I know
thou have many friends, but thou must forsake all, if thou follow Jesus Christ;
for there is no room for them there: thou must leave thy friend pride behind
thee, when thou enterest into the straight way, there is no room at all for it
to enter; nay thou must not leave thy friend pride only, but thou must forsake
thy kinsman covetousness, which has labored so much for thee among the
earthworms, to fetch in provision for thee, that did refresh thy friend old
pride; and thou must leave thy heavy oppression behind, that has so much
tyrannized over thy friend simplicity; but simplicity shall go on the way with
thee: but old neighbor guile, he cannot come near within a mile, he is a
wanderer, and thy friends envy, hatred, anger, and malice, they are murderers,
and they are for the fire; and thy friends pleasures and wantonness, they are
for the sword, and all old acquaintance, as lying, swearing, and foolish
talking, which was thy companions for pastime, thou must leave them also, and
thy beloved fashions, and ancient customs which thou have been so long
breeding and training up, they must be left, and all thy darlings; as thy
customary hearing of Sermons, and thy old friends thy companions that went
along with thee, and thou must take thy poor despised friends, patience, and
meekness, and long suffering; for thy friends, thy customary hearers, and
formal professors, and time-servers, they will hate thee, and persecute thee:
and old Pharaoh, before he be willing to let thee go into the wilderness, will
oppress thee, and set taskmasters over thee, to cause thee to make brick
without straw, to be subject to their earthly carnal wills: Be of good cheer,
the Lord will send out his servant Moses, his servant, for he is faithful, and
he will execute true judgment, and justice upon him, and pour forth the Vials
upon him, and there shall be darkness over all Egypt; but thou will find light
in Goshen, and the Lord will send his Angel to go before thee, to lead thee
through the Egyptian Sea of confusion, and troubles, and bring thee into the
wilderness, where thou shall hear a voice behind thee, saying, This is the way,
walk in it: and see that thou mind thy guide, when thou art in the way of the
Wilderness, to follow it, lest thou by looking about: thee, there to see the
rage and envy of venomous beasts, be clouded and lose thy way, for there will
be great danger of it: take heed of looking behind thee, when thou art got
into the wilderness, lest thou lose thy guide, and then cannot find the way
out, and so be ready to turn into Egypt again; if thou do, the curse will come
upon thee, and thou will find nothing but torment and trouble there. Now that
the light is risen among the Israelites, they see gross darkness over all
Egypt: and Pharaoh, he fumes and frets, and says, Who is God, that I should
obey him, to let the people go? If I let them go, I shall lose my honor and my
greatness; for they labor for my lust, and I have my desire satisfied by them:
and there are many Egyptians of high blood, that have been brought up in
pleasures, and had great preferments in Egypt by these bondslaves; and If I let
them go, we cannot work, and our honor will not be upheld; but I will go and
give authority to some lofty spirited men, that is of an high descent, like
unto my self, and before I will let them go free, I will give them the most
part of their increase that they labor for, and they shall get up into an high
place, and stand over them, and they shall be compelled to be under them: for I
will take away their straw before, and make them labor the harder; and before
they will be utterly desolate of livelihood, they will labor night and day,
and so we shall keep them in subjection to us; for if they be not sore
oppressed, they will not matter for us: but come, my Taskmasters, take a
command, and go; I Will give you authority: have not I power in mine hand to
enact and give forth Laws, for all to be subject to my will? Go, take with you
words, and say, Thus says Pharaoh, As for this fellow Moses, I will not meddle
with him, he comes to take you off from your work, and make you to idle; but
I Will not hear him: you must fulfill your tale of brick, and see that there be
none wanting; for Pharaoh has given us authority over you, and now that we
have got authority for him, as for this Moses, we care not for him: keep to
your work, and stay, and hear us, give heed to our words: you were idle before,
and cared not for us, because you had your straw provided for you; but now must
you provide it your selves: we will have our wages on you, that our master does
allow us; for we are men that have spent most of our time in the Egyptian
studies, and we can speak that language very well: and it has pleased Pharaoh
to give us large benefits, which are able to maintain us, and now we will make
you stay at your work, for we are men that are set in authority by our master
Pharaoh, and he does now allow us our wages: before you go into the wilderness,
we will make you to abide here with us; for if we should have let you go with
this Moses, we should have lost our benefits which we did receive by you: but
now you must abide the bitterness of it. If you had been willing to have letten
us been your masters, and so have labored in the earth for us, ye might have
had a little more liberty then now you are like to have; for now we have time
enough to speak to you, for that is our work, but you must labor hard now for
Pharaoh is waxen proud, and high, and he must have a maintenance from you; and
we are his servants, set up by him, to keep you to your work, and when it is
ready, reap us the tenth part of the best of your labors, and we shall take it
into us, and then we are to have part of every thing that you make use of
besides, for we must be something suitable our master, that he may have praise
by us, for you are to be subject to us, therefore keep to your work, and labor
hard, that you may make us great and rich: for if we had letten you alone, you
would have followed this Moses, but now you must be obedient to our master
Pharaoh, therefore labor hard. So the taskmasters of Egypt kept the Israelites
a great bondage, after that the Lord had sent his servant Moses, to bid Pharaoh
let them go free, and when they was so sore burdened, then he came again from
the Lord to speak to Pharaoh, but he would not hearken unto him, till the Lord
poured forth his plagues upon him, and then he called for Moses again, and bad
him pray that the Lord might remove the plague from him, and then he would let
them go: but when the plagues was removed, he forgot the Lord again, and kept
them in great bondage, by tasking of them, and the cries of the poor oppressed
ones came before the Lord, and he sent his servant Moses again, but Pharaoh
would not hearken to him, any longer then the plagues were upon him, and
afterward he hardened his heart, and grew exceeding proud, and kept the people
in great slavery, by his proud and prattling taskmasters, that he had set over
them: but when they would not obey the Lord after so many times sending forth
his servants to show them signs and wonders, that they might repent, and
forsake the evil of their doings, and let the oppressed go free; when nothing
would prevail, he then came with his strong hand, and streched-out arm, and
slew all their first born; and that did something tender them; yet they was so
proud, and high spirited men, and men that had lived in so much pride, and
pleasures, and idleness, and was maintained by their labors, that when they
saw the Lord would have them from under their commands, and that they might be
likely to lose their honors, preferments, and high places, they was sore moved
with envy, wrath, and malice, that if they could not have them to be their
slaves, they would after them, and they would go show all their valor, and
fight against the Lord, that if they could conquer him, they might be Lords
over all the earth: but the Lord was so full of mercy, that he would hove had
them to have obeyed him, and to have letten the people go with him, and that
they might have lived in the land where they was; but they would strive with
their Maker, and would not hearken to him, till they were all overwhelmed in
the water: so the Lord made his power known in the deliverance of the
Israelites; And secondly, in the destruction of the Egyptians. It is hard for
all the proud and lofty spirits in the world, to fight against God, as daily
they do, by seeking to suppress his own work, in the hearts of his poor
people: It is better for them all to sit still, then stand up in the height of
pride and envy, to seek the Israelites blood to spill; for the Lord will make
his power known, and all the crowns of envy, pride, and oppression, and
cruelty must be thrown down, and he will rule as King above, because they will
not do their word, as by their works they do profess, to take the burdens off
from all that are oppressed; they that profess to love the Lord, must let their
mercies run abroad, that he may be set up and honored, and take the burdens
off from all the people, and love their enemies, and feed the hungry, and
cloth the naked ones; as Christ himself did teach all those that followed him,
and for to live in love one with another: but says he, See that you bring
forth much fruit, and glorify my Father: the Lord does look to have all those
that profess love to his name, to be as he is, that his name be not evil spoken
of; he is just, merciful, and exceeding loving; and he would have those that do
profess him in words, to be the same in actions, else they do mightily
dishonor him, and cause his name to be evil spoken of; he looks that they
should be fruitful, loving, and merciful, and not to say they do love him, and
profess to be his people by their words, and by their actions deny him; for he
does not say one thing and do another: he loves faithfulness and uprightness in
heart, life, and conversation; he has showed man what is good, and what he
requires of him, to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly before him,
and to live in love with one another, to do justly, and take off oppression,
and to show mercy toward all people, and to walk in humbleness of heart before
him, and to do freely; for all the gifts of God are free and large, and he is
very loving and bountiful, and now he looks for fruits, not in words, but in
actions; but it is not so among them that profess to be the people of the Lord,
yet in their actions deny him; for the true Church of Christ was loving and
tender one to another, there was not any among them that lacked any thing, they
was of one heart, and one mind, there was no cruelty executed amongst them:
the true Church of Christ is to be as he is, holy, and harmless, pure, and
peaceable, and to be in subjection to him that is head, even to Christ, and to
keep his commands, they that love him do obey him, and abide in his doctrine:
Jesus Christ and his Spouse are both one, he is the head; and his Saints are
the body, and the Spouse must be in subjection to him; and obedient to him in
all things; as Sarah obeyed Abraham, and called him Lord, and the wife is
subject to her husband, so the Church is to Christ: Christ is the head, they
are the body, and the body is guided by the head: Christ is the head in all
things, and the Church is subject to Christ, for he is not without the body,
and they are not without the head; so Christ and the Saints are one, and as he
is, so are they, they are bone of his bone, and flesh of his flesh; the Church
is the love of Christ, and Christ is the love of the Church: as he is, so are
they, all love, united together into one, even into the Law of the Father; the
Father, Son, and Saints, make but one perfect Christ, I in them, and they in
me, as thou Father art in me. Christ gave himself for the Church, that he might
present it to his Father without any spot or wrInkle, or any such thing, but
that it should be holy, and without blemish: and the Church of Christ is
sanctified and cleansed with the blood of the Lamb, and it is covered with the
robes of righteousness, and made perfect through his holiness, being all
glorious within, and the head of it is love; and Christ: and the Church is all
one. But the Church of Babylon is an Harlot, and rides upon the scarlet
colored Beast, and professes love to Christ; but lives like a Whore; for she
is committing fornication under every green tree, and playing the Harlot with
many lovers: The Church of Christ is glorious within, and so the Whore of
Babylon is glorious without, rideing upon a painted Beast; a Beast is that
which is not in the truth: and yet professes to be by words, but in actions
walk contrary, satisfying the flesh with the affections and lusts thereof,
lusting after pride, and lusting after covetousness, and lusting after honors,
and after pleasures, and wantonness, and yet profess love to Christ; and can
speak fine words, painted with the words of Christ, and with the words of the
Prophets and Apostles, but lives in the wicked Imaginations of their hearts,
and the Beast; and the Whore is one, and are united together, to live in
pleasures and wantonness upon earth, being married to pride, and profits,
covetousness, and oppression, and grinding the faces of the poor, and the head
of them is envy, wrath, and malice; and if any speak of the love of Christ
among them, they are so full of envy and wrath, that they persecute them to
death, and yet profess to be the Spouse of Christ too: but Christ and his
Spouse is one in love, and tenderness, and pity, and compassion; and they are
united both into the divine being of the Father: and as the harlot is out of
the divine nature, married to the lusts and pleasures of the world, so Christ
and his are taken up into the full enjoyment of the Fathers love, and they
loath pride and covetousness, malice and envy, wrath and deceit, and
oppression, knowing that all unrighteousness is of the devil. And as the Church
of Christ is all glorious within, and covered with the righteousness of Christ,
and contends for the faith that was once given to the Saints: so the Church of
Babylon is all glorious without, but the inside is full of rottenness, and
filthy hypocrisy, and secret envy, and hatred, and secret subtilty, and
dissimulation, and yet makes a profession of God, and of Christ: but their
folly does appear daily more and more, and their secret abominations are
discovering daily; and as the Saints are covered with the righteousness of
Christ, the worlds Church, they are covered with unrighteousness: and in stead
of contending for the faith in his purity, they contend altogether for the
deceit, that they may uphold the kingdom of sin and Satan, and live altogether
in pride, and oppression, and lust, and excess, and so makes themselves
manifest by their fruits, that they do not live in what they do profess.


