A LETTER FROM A GENTLEMAN To the Honorable Ed. Howard Esquire Occasioned By a
CIVILIZED EPISTLE OF Mr. DRYDEN'S, Before his Second Edition of his INDIAN
EMPEROVR.

In the SAVOY, Printed by Thomas Newcomb, 1668.

SIR,
I Have now for some time expected an Answer from your Honorable Brother, Sir
Robert Howard, to Mr. Drydens Epistle before his Indian Emperor; But I
perceive that your Brother thinks it unworthy of his Thoughts; nor can any
Ingenious Person blame Him, that He rather despises to give Himself the least
Trouble, where nothing of any weight of Reason can justly challenge it; and
besides, possibly being conscious to Himself, that he could not so well make a
Return in a Billinsgate style, which he saw so exactly performed by his Angry
Opponent. But least Sir, that scold ng Text should want a Commentary, I humbly
offer unto you these my Observations upon it, and will make no Excuse for my
own weakness, since the Cause it self affords Abilities enough to any that has
a just Respect to the peculiar Honor of your Brother, and a General Love to
Justice, and Good Manners.

But having called this Angry Author, Mr. Dryden, and He having been displeased
before with that Honorable Person for calling Him an Author; I will rectify
both Errors, and try to Please him (being a wrathful man with the Title of an
Esquire, which he Bestows on Himself, or modestly endures his Bookseller to put
upon him; yet withal hoping he can prove it better by the Heralds than he has
done the Rest; I proceed Sir, to take notice, that the Squire having fixed some
Ironical Complements upon that Honorable Person your Brother, instead of the
Cause he is to maintain, he takes notice of two verses in the beginning of the
Duke of Lerma, for which he would have him lose the opinion of sober men, as it
seems he has done His; not that it is a Consequence, that he should lose any
worthy man's Good opinion for the Squires Ill one, who perhaps not so well able
to defend his own Paradoxes, is disordered with so much passion, which so
confounds his expressions, that I know not what he is most angry at. If he
means the Two first Lines, and the other Twenty, (which he glances at) are
Nonsense, or Ill ones; the Reader is the best Judge, and he only saying they
are so, it is enough to say I think they are not so: But if the Squire would
have it understood, that the Honorable Person used some things in the old
Play, he has acknowledged it already, and professed he would have used more,
had not the Alteration of the whole design deprived him of the Benefit. But the
Squire having writ down the two first lines, what ever he means, I that have
read the old Play will assure him, that the Honorable Person used but the two
first words of it, though he has preserved the method in the beginning. But the
Squire perhaps is justly angry to see any one use the least thing of another
Writer, and enter into his Jurisdiction, claiming the right of Theft perhaps by
continual Custom; witness his Maiden Queen stolen out of the Queen of Corinth:
a great part of his Indian Emperor, and most of his Mock Astrologer, which he
means (for he is a Critic) the Feigned Astrologer out of French Plays and
Romances; from whence I cannot but observe that he is in danger to be thought
an ill-natured Squire; since the Charactor of an Engrossing Plagiary may
possibly be more justly due to him than the Title of Esquire, which he has been
pleased to assume.

The next thing Sir, that I shall take notice of, is his admiration, to be
thought so ridiculous as to dispute whether Prose or Verse be nearest to
ordinary Conversation; by the Squires favor the Honorable Person never said
so, but only presumed to say, that a Play seemed to represent Persons speaking
Extempore, which indeed is ordinary Conversation, and then acknowledged that
the Squire raised Arguments only unanswerable against himself, by laying down
the rule for every thing, to be nearest the nature of what it represents: And I
hope this is no fault in the Honorable Person, who never contended for the
Rule; so that as to this Particular, I think there needs no more to be said,
only adding this small observation, that the Squire cannot endure to be thought
Ridiculous, though he deserves it.

The Squire is then pleased to tell us of a Gentleman, who maintained a
Contradiction in the face of 300 Persons; when he will vouchsafe to tell us the
Person and Contradiction, the Party I suppose will give an answer; which by
what I have heard, I believe none can be ignorant, that Honorable Person can
as little as any be suspected to be the Party; and yet I dare not say so much
for him, as the Squire once ventured to say on his own behalf to a Lady of most
Eminent Quality (equaled with a great Virtue and Parts) when he was so bold,
as to tell her, a Gentleman could not err, and then certainly a Squire is
infallible.

After this he seems satisfied, that the Honorable Person says he had rather
read good Verse than Prose; I believe he had and rather his, than his Prose,
unless it were written with a better temper; but the Squire demands no more
than This from all others, I am his Intercesser, he may obtain his desire; and
leave it to them that are pleased to grant it, to judge, whether they have
bettered his Arguments by their Affections.

Next he urges, that a Play is supposed to be the work of a Poet, imitating or
representing the Conversation of several persons; the words of the Honorable
Person, just before, (which he quotes, and quarrels at) are, That a Play is
supposed to be a Composition of several persons speaking extempore, and yet the
Squire craves leave to dissent, though he says the same thing, all but the
word Extempore. And if there be any otherway of Conversation, it is only known
to the Squire, who has the sharpness to see a difference in the same thing.

But now the Squire says he will be bolder, (truly I thought he had been bold
enough before) and doubts not to make good a Paradox: for having said, that all
things must be nearest the nature of what they represent; he is turned about
now, and says Prose should not be used, because it is too near Converse, which
is the nature of what it represents. I suppose the Squire had need of a Legion
of Parts (which he speaks of) to maintain this: for sometimes every thing is
best, that is nearest the nature of what it represents; and presently it is the
worse for being too near it; and then as luckily proceeds to tell us, that the
most skillful Painters affirm, there may be too great a likeness, and too near
a resemblance in a Picture; I am very confident the Squire never heard an
indifferent good Painter, much less an excellent one, affirm so ridiculous a
thing: but to salve his credit in this, he is left to bring (if he can) such a
Certificate from so excellent a Painter, whose great Authority may make us
submit our sense so far as to believe the Paradox: But were Sir Anthony Vandyke
now living (who I suppose we may allow to have been excellent in that Art) the
Squire would hardly get a Certificate from him, whose Fame, if it be true what
he says, he has blasted in one sentence, for he has proved him to make worse
Pictures than any, because he made all more exactly like, then ever any man
did. But I leave the persuit of such absurdities, nor do I pretend to dwell
upon his Reasons, where the honorable Person repeats his, and only fairly
returns his own, I leave them to the Reader, who in my opinion will easily
judge, that the honorable person could perceive nothing of any new weight to
move him to a reply; and I am confident there had been no answer returned, had
not the Squires Passion led him to Invectives, foreign to the Argument.

The next favor, the honorable person receives from the Esquire; is about that
verse of Seneca.

Reserate clusos Regii Posts Laris. And here he will neither allow Him to
understand a Latin word, nor an English word; Notwithstanding those
Testimonies which in both kinds that honorable person has given of himself:
but if he had not understood the word Resero, nor could have spelt, whereby to
have searched it in a Dictionary; yet since the Esquire was pleased to tell us
the English of it, he might, (had he resolved to have used any modesty,) have
believed it a mistake sooner then so much Ignorance in any one, as not to
understand the difference of the words to open and to shut. I suppose therefore
in stead of wittily Chiding the Printer, he ought to Chide Himself; But in one
Case of the Squires I cannot tell, whether I may assume the Liberty to Chide
the Printer for a mistake he committed in the first Edition of his Indian
Emperor, in this Excellent Verse -- -- And follow Fate, that does too fast
pursue. which in the second Edition is thus Corrected -- -- And follow Fate,
that would too fast Pursue.

There is another Line in his Astraea Redux, which, because the Squire is so
severe, I will not omit.

An horrid stillness first invades the Ear. I have not heard of the like
Expression unless in a Tale of an Officer, that Commanded a Sentinel not to
stir a Foot, but walk up and down, and see what he could hear. Now whether
this first Nonsense be Rectified by the Printer, or by the Squires Increase of
Understanding, or, where fault the last is, I dare not Determine.

But, for all this, the Squire need not believe, that the Honorable Person can
have any Apprehension of the examining any faults of his, since his Passion
guides him so ill, as not to distinguish between a Fault and a Mistake, if it
be believed, that he understands a Word of English; and therefore he is rather
Invited to use his Freedom: For, it is possible some may Believe in his
Promise, that may find nothing in his Performance. So, leaving him to his own
Liberty, I pass over his Arguments, not seeing any thing in them, that appears
(to my Apprehension at least) either New or Weighty, but leave them to the
Readers better Determination; and proceed to the next mark of his displeasure,
which is so ill placed, that the Squire is Angry with that Honorable Person
for Calling the Muses his long Acquaintance; if he means in point of time,
that Honorable Person is only a proper Judge, whether the time seemed long to
him, or not; but if he means he ought to pretend no Acquaintance in the least
with them; it is enough to Referr this piece of Anger to those, who have Read
his Writings, and among them, the last he obliged the World with, the Duel of
the Staggs, is a sufficient Testimony, that the Squire is more angry than he
ought to be.

The next Charge the Squire is pleased to draw up against Him, is about Notions
Politic, and Grave, tending to the Instruction of Princes, and Reformation of
States: I know not, that the Honorable Person seems Guilty of any such Design
in the least, but if the Squire be, as he says he is, for Distributive
Justice, we may justly presume that when his Indian Emperor was first acted,
he intended to instruct and reform all Churches in Polemical Divinity, by his
admirable Dispute between a Christian and a Heathen Priest; which also shows
how great a loss the Church had of him, when he was diverted from entering into
Orders.

Then he quarrels with the Style of that Honorable Person (I wish he had
proposed him one fit to change for) which he says the Critics have branded
with the Name of Obscurity, and False Grammar: Who these Critics be, he is not
pleased to tell us, but writes, as he would have preached, as a certain Author
has it; by which the Squire seems to be one of the Quidams damned at least in
Quevedo's Visions, where I leave the Squire to read his farther Description.

But in his next scolding Paragraph, he is more unhappy in his Anger, and
quarrels with the Honorable Person, for saying he was now fettered in Business
of more unpleasant Natures, which he will have to be State matters. But the
Squire was very much mistaken, for I by accident once heard that Honorable
Person complain that two tedious Suits in Chancery had almost deprived him of
the right use of any time; and yet I think he need not be ashamed of those
Services he endeavors to do his King and Country; so that either way the
Squires Displeasure is very unjustly applied: And above all men, this angry
Squire ought not to be his Interpreter: But his Fortune, and that of the
Honorable Persons are different; for the Squire mistakingly charges him that
the corruption of a Poet, was the generation of a Statesman; but on the
contrary the Squire having been employed as a Puny Statesman under his Father a
Zealous Committee-man, and Sir Gilbert Pickering a crafty Privy Counselor in
the late times, it may more properly be applied to the Squire, That the
corruption of a Statesman is the generation of a Poet Laureat.

Then he quarrels at the word Ubi, had that Honorable Person said Where, in
English, the Squire would have been angry too.

Then he is displeased and says that to perform the manner of a thing is New
English, that cannot be helped; but it is Old English to every one else, since,
the Proverb is so common, That the manner of doing a thing, is as much as the
thing it self.

Then he snaries about the word Taste, which is usually applied to any kind of
liking: but I should be as rude as he is, to entertain the Reader long with
such Vomits of Choler.

The next Displeasure he shows, is, that the Honorable Person says, That it is
not necessary for Poets to study strict Reason (nor good Manners neither, if
the Poet Laureat be admitted President) since they are so used to a greater
Latitude than is allowed by that severe Inquisition. But he says Moral Truth
is the Mistrisse of the Poet, as well as of the Philosopher: Poesy must
resemble Natural Truth, but it must be Ethical; the Poet dresses Truth, and
adorns Nature, but does not alter them. These are the Squires words, but since
he does not prove this in the same place, I will furnish the Reader with an
exact Proof, written by himself in a wonderful Stanza, in his wonderful Poem of
the wonderful year 1666. And withal it tells us how the Fire of London was put
out, which few Country people knew before; the Stanza runs thus: A hollow
Crystal Pyramid he takes,
In Firmamental Waters dipped above;
With this a broad Extinguisher he makes,
And hoods the Flames, which to their Quarry strove.


Now the Reader may easily judge, whether this be not Moral Truth; if this does
not resemble Natural Truth, if it be not Ethical, and if the Squire has not
dressed Truth, and adorned Nature, but not altered them.

In the next place he says (with Truth still Annexed to his Poetry) that the
Honorable Person attaques all the Ancients, and Moderns, while he fights (as
he says) under their ample Shields, as little Teucer fought under the large
Buckler of Ajax Telamon. I know not why the small Squire compares himself to
little Teucer, unless it be very pleasant to him to talk of such a safe way of
fighting: for I never read that the Honorable Person blamed the Ancients for
writing Verse, but him, or any, that lay down Rules against the writing of it.
For Verse could not be thought nearest Nature by all the Ancients, since Seneca
writ all his Tragedies in Verse, and Terence all his Comedies, which may be the
Squire did not remember, or knew not. Now if Verse in Tragedy, and Verse in
Comedy be both nearest Nature, the Squire deserves his Laurel.

But now the Squire begins to be more kind, and offers the Honorable Person
his Help in a Logical way, and makes a Syllogism for him, which is, if one
Stage cannot properly present two Rooms or Houses, much less two Countries or
Kingdoms, then there can be no unity of place: but one Stage cannot properly
perform this, therefore there can be no unity of place: And then he denies that
which he calls his Minor Proposition. But what needs the Squire make a
Syllogism for another, who has no reason to like it. Being pleased to repeat
that which is more truly the sense of the Honorable Person, which is, that a
Stage being one place cannot be two, I think this is true, and therefore can as
little be two Houses as two Countries. But the Squire says it may represent two
Rooms successively, so it may two Kingdoms. This Bog he labors to get out of,
and I appeal to the Reader, whether he sticks or no. I was going to charge this
Notion on his Fancy, but a little after he says, that Fancy and Reason go hand
in hand, the first cannot leave the last behind. If this be true, the Squire
has salved all the Errors of fantastical people, together with his own. But I
doubt that Fancy and Reason are not so good Friends, and if the Squire had kept
them closer together, we should have believed better of their Friendships.

The Squire is then pleased to Confess that the lesser cannot Comprehend the
Greater: yet in a little Glass a whole Room and many pesons may be represented,
or seen: so may a Country be seen out of a little hole of a Window, but the
Room cannot get into the Glass, nor the Country into the Hole. But the
Honorable Person spoke not of what may seem represented, but of what really
could be; and then inserted there could be no such thing as they pretend to
imitate, which was to come nearest to the Nature of that which could not be at
all.

But immediately he appears as unhappy in his Philosophy as in his Logic. When
the Honorable Person only speaks of things absolutely impossible; the Squire
talks of that which is only so ex part, and then would make it no
Impossibility, by the help of the First mover to alter the Nature of it. When
by the help of the Squire (who is the first mover of such Philosophy) the
nature of things are so altered thot two can be one, the Squire is triumphant,
till then it is submitted to the Reader.

But now he says the Honorable Person is to be Excused for declaring against
the Unity of Time, being a person Interessed, for the time of the Play of the
Duke of Lerma contained many years; if this be true, he is not to be blamed;
for by his favor he writ against that which is impossible to be made a Rule,
not against any time shorter, or longer used by any one. But if he had Argued
according to what he writ, sure it is more Ingenuous, than for the Squire, who
so pleads for the Unity of time to write the Indian Emperor, which contains
the time of Cortez his landing to the Death of Montezuma; let him consider
this, and it will appear, he ought to be more displeased with his own
Disingenuity.

And now coming to assault the Honorable Person, when he says he grows
feeble, (which is the most seasonable time for the Squire to attacque any one
in) he says according to his usual Custom, that the Honorable Person improves
his observation to an Argument, that he might have the glory to Confute it. But
it appears on the contrary by his slighting of him, that the Honorable Person
apprehends no glory in confuting any Argument of his: And on the other side, I
believe he never thought any observation of the Squires worthy to be drawn into
an Argument, and accordingly, the Honorable Person called it an Argument, or
Observation being it seems as unable, as others are to know justly what Name or
Title to fix on such a positive Thesis.

But now the storm ceases, and the Illustrious Squire is pleased to shine with
more gentle beams on the Honorable Person; and fawningly says, he lays all
at his feet, and Honors his Person, and Parts. The Squire must needs be
believed, since he has endeavored to describe him to be the owner of such
Excellent ones. He says, he has often employed his Pen in his Commendations, I
hope he means this Time for one. He Adds then, He has many particular
obligations to him. In this the Squire is like to be credited, since this
Return he has made, is so grateful a Testimony of it; yet at the last the
Squire is pleased to give him the Title of a Noble opponent; and to this last I
am confident he will Receive a just return from the Honorable Person, when
ever the Squire pleases to give him cause to call him so. In the mean time, I
believe the Squire cannot reasonably expect it from him, since I have heard
from a very brave Gentleman, who was lately engaged to wait upon the Squire,
that his cold Answer has discouraged the Honorable Person from such an
Expectation.

Thus, Sir, I have Traveled through this foul way, and have Preserved my self
as clean as possibly I could; yet it was so dirty, that some Testimony of such
a Passage must needs stick to any that goes through it. But, Sir, if I have done
like a good Scavenger, and carrried the Filth back to himself the proper
Laystall I doubt not but to Receive from you and all other Just persons, the
opinion that I love Justice, and good manners, which, I hope, will render me
not unworthy of the Title of

SIR, Your faithful and humble Servant R. F.

Postscript.
Sir,
SInce I had writ this Letter to you, I happened to meet a Gentleman, who
discoursing with me about this Argument, told me he could show me in a Copy of
verses of one of the most Excellent Persons of our time, this Question Decided
with as clear Generosity as Reason. I begged him to do me the favor, and he
immediately showed me the Prologue of the Earl of Orrery to his Play of Henry
the fifth. I read it with that content, that I could not but insert it as an
Exact Decision of the Argument.

THE PROLOGUE.
WE have with Foreign Tales so filled your Ears,
As if our Poets were all Foreigners;
This Author begs you will lend him but two hours,
To entertain you with your Ancestors.
He thinks no stories merit to be known,
Nor can instruct us better than our own.
But look not for great Actions in a Play,
Contracted to the limits of a Day.
Nor where the Scene is to one place confined,
To those strict Rules the French their Poets bind:
Yet none of them for this a Reason shows,
But to their Mode of Writing, as of Cloths,
They think the English ever should agree;
Well, when some wit of theirs will let us see,
Why in two hours they on their Stages play
That which presents the Turns of a whole day;
Our Poet then will make it full as clear,
That in two hours he may include a year.
It were not fit, in stories of that Age,
When we ruled France, French Laws should rule our Stage.
Nor is it just in Poetry to bind
Fancy, which is tormented, when confined.
He hopes you will excuse him, if he strives
To break those Laws a Foreign Nation gives.
For sure, without your leave, he will nere submit,
That those whom our Swords ruled, should rule our wit.
FINIS.

