TO THE General Council, AND OFFICERS OF THE ARMY, And to every MEMBER in
particular.
FRIENDS,
I am moved of the Lord to write unto you, in the Name and power of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and in tender love and dear bowels of affection; and to the
Measure of God in you all I desire to be made manifest and known. And I can
truly say, my love is dear to you, and I know that my heavenly Father has
brought you now unto the place of Judicature, that ye may do Justice, where
many others before you have been turned and overturned, and that shortly and
suddenly, of late years; And now are ye come into their place, to be tried, and
weighed in the balance of true justice and judgment. And oh! that your eyes
were open to see what the most high is doing in this his day of power, in this
his day of grace, that so ye might not be blinded as others before you have
been, who would not see the Lords hand, but acted as men corrupt, and so came
to be thrown down by the power which they would not see. You have been the
Instruments of war, and the Battle-axe in the hand of the Lord, which has
even beaten the mountains to dust; and now are ye come into their place which
they were in with whom ye warred. And now are ye come into the place, where ye
may execute that which ye formerly desired after, and suffered for, and
labored for, and warred for. And now that the Lord has put it into your
hands, even to try your faithfulness, and your integrity; Not that he has any
need of you, more then them that went before you, (as ye are men natural) but
as you are righteous men, and guided by the just and righteous principle of God
in you, so you may be serviceable unto the Lord God, for the accomplishing, and
for the performing of the intents of his heart, which he has determined, and
decreed to bring to pass in these latter days, against which no weapon formed
shall prosper, nor no power nor Arm can withstand; For the Almighty will show
forth his righteousness as the morning, and his glory as the noonday.
Therefore as ye love your souls, and your eternal peace, and as ye desire to
be preserved by him, and kept, and upholden by the right hand of power, beware
that ye turn not your hand against his work, that he is working in the earth in
this his day. The powers of darkness has long kept him out of his throne, and
he has holden his peace, and long been still; but now is he crying even as a
traveling woman; and now will he arise, and destroy at once all those that
will not that he should reign, whose right it is, who is the wonderful
Counselor, the Prince of Peace, of whose Dominion and Government there shall
be no end. And as you desire that he should govern and Rule all Nations with
his rod of Iron, now quit your selves like men, and that liberty for which ye
have ventured your blood and lives, let it not now fall in the streets of great
Babylon, when it is put into your hands freely to minister to the Nations. And
let Christ Jesus (who is the supreme Judge in the conscience) have his throne
established, which is for ever and ever. And let the everlasting Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ have its free passage, (which no man need be ashamed of) for
it is the power of God unto salvation. And dear friends, as ye desire to be
owned of the living God, and to be preserved and upholden by his power and
strength, Come into seriousness and sincerity of heart, and let the just
measure of God in you all lead you and guide you, and let his fear possess your
hearts, for ye have seen what has become of those that were before you. And
truly Gods just hand was seen which would come upon them before it came. And
now that ye may escape the scourge that has overturned them, is the desire of
my soul. And as God has honored you, and made you Instruments for his
service, so that ye now might be guided with that which may stand in his
presence. For the Lord gives wisdom, out of his mouth comes knowledge and
understanding, he lays up sound wisdom for the righteous, he is as a buckler
to them that walk uprightly, he keeps the paths of judgment, and preserves
the way of his Saints, that they understand righteousness, judgment and
equity, ye every good path. And truly friends, it is the uprightness of your
hearts that God looks at, and that will only be accepted of him; And it has
been the rotten deceitfulness of the hearts of those that went before you, that
was their overthrow. And so just as the intents of your hearts is for the
advancing, and exalting of the horn of his Anointed, so will ye prosper in this
work; For the decree of the Lord concerning this thing is sealed which shall
never be revoked. Thus says the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel his holy One; to
him whom man despises, to him whom Nations abhors, to a servant o^ Rulers;
Kings shall see and arise, Princes also shall worship because of the Lord that
is faithful, and the holy One of Israel. This is he that must rule the Nations;
whose Scepter is a righteous Scepter; and blessed will ye be if ye advance and
exalt him whom God is exalting in this his day; The Spirit of the Lord does
rest upon him, the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of Counsel
and of Might, the spirit of knowledge, and of the fear of the Lord; with
righteousness does he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek of
the earth; and he shall smite the earth with the Rod of his mouth, and with the
breath of his lips will he slay the wicked, and righteousness is the girdle of
his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of his reins; And this is he (Friends)
that is springing out of the stem of Jesse, and woe unto them that war
against him; This is the righteous branch that the Lord is bringing forth, the
King that shall reign and prosper, whose Name is the Lord our Righteousness,
which is better then every name, to which all Nations shall bow, and every
tongue con^ess him to be Lord. And as ye advance, and ^^^lt this, so will ye
prosper, and so will ye be preserved in the midst of your enemies. And though
we be but little and small in your eyes, a people despised, and every where
spoken against, yet it will be good for you, if ye have our prayers; for we
know the Rock, and the Corner stone, and that which will prosper in his sight,
and we have the testimony, which will stand for ever; And no other foundation
can any one lay then that which is already laid; but let every one take heed
how he builds thereupon; for every ones work must be tried by the fire, and
he whose work is burnt will suffer loss; for the day is risen and appearing
that makes every thing manifest, of what sort it is. And truly friends, it must
be a spiritual building that will stand in the presence of Almighty God; it is
not the pot-sheards of the earth that can strive with him, nor Briars and
Thorns that can stand before him in Battle (who is a consuming fire) nor an
Image made, though of gold, and set up in the imaginations of men, that will
stand in his sight; It is the true and living substance that will be accepted
of him; Therefore dear hearts consider what the Lord is doing, and act not
without his Counsel, nor to please men, lest ye act contrary to his will.
Advance Justice, and Righteousness and equity, and you can never do amiss.
Riches and honor is with me, (says Solomon) yea, durable riches and
righteousness. I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of
Judgment; this is the Saints path, though fools cannot err therein. Here ye
will know the key of David, of wisdom and knowledge, which will open unto you
the way of life. Truly I am affected with you, and I know if ye execute justice
and true judgment, the Lord will own you, and give you to tread on the necks
of your enemies; But if ye fall flat, and grow cold and dead, and dull, and
betray your own principles, (as some have done that went before you) then look
for the same as they have had from an unchangeable God, who is the same to day
and yesterday, and the same for ever. And you that have ventured life and
blood, for conscience, freedom and liberty, now beware that ye be not
limiters, nor lorders over Gods heritage; nor to keep him out of his throne,
(as your predecessors have done) your fruits will make you manifest. And as ye
sow, so will ye reap. It is not for any end concerning us, that I write this
unto you (the living Record knows) for we know the strait, and narrow path;
and we have trodden the path that leads through sufferings; trials and
afflictions have been our portion (as our Lord, and Master that went before us
was made perfect through sufferings) and therefore it is our joy to follow his
steps where ever he goes. And it is only for your good, and that ye might be
guided so as ye might prosper, For it is the grief of our souls to see the
destruction of any; and therefore in tender bowels have we been moved to give
them many warnings, whose day was before you which they cast behind their
backs: but for the Lord they will stand a witness; when the day of their
calamity comes, then will they remember what they have done against the Lord
and against his Anointed: So that ye may be preserved out of the gulf of
destruction, and that ye may partake with us of everlasting peace, and rest,
and safety, and joy which is for ever. And those that wishes well to Sion will
prosper, for she is now arising, and shaking of the dust off her feet, and
putting on her beautiful garments: And the mountain of the Lords house is
established a top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above the hills, and
all Nations shall flow unto it; For out of Sion is going forth the Law, and the
Word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And who can stop, or who can stay this which
God alone works and judges among the Nations? And so we wait to see Justice
and true Judgment executed by you for the Lord, and not for men, or to please
men; For the Law was added because of transgression; and so when true justice,
and true judgment rules, then the Law is executed upon the Trangressor; but
who is led by the Spirit of God, against such there is no Law. And so to the
just and righteous principle of God in you I commit you to be guided, and then
I know (if ye mind it) you will not be time-servers, nor men-pleasers, nor fear
man whose breath is in his nostrills; but fear the Lord God, who when he has
killed the body, can also cast the soul into hell; yea, I say unto you, fear
him; so will ye come to know the just principle in every one, which will knit
and unite your hearts together, in the unity, and there will be your strength
in the one spirit, which joins to the Lord, and one to another. This is the
Standard that stands against all the powers of Hell and Death. And truly
Friends, it is in this, which keeps out of respect of persons, and out of
time-serving, and men-pleasing, that will knit your hearts together. And this
will keep you out of strife, and contention one with another; when the just
principle in you all guides and leads, then will righteousness be exalted. And
here will be your very strength, that ye be knit one to another, in that just
and righteous measure of the Spirit of God in you; that so ye may not be Judges
nor Governors for men, but for the Lord, and for the advancing of his truth,
and the exalting of his Christ, which in this his day he is going to establish
upon his throne; notwithstanding all gainsayers. Though Gog and Magog should
gather together, yet the Lord has anointed his holy One, and his King he has
set upon his holy hill of Sion; and all that gather together against him, shall
fall for his sake. Therefore in pure love to you, that ye may not be found
fighters against God, am I moved to give you this warning, and this counsel,
which ye shall acknowledge to be good, one day; whether ye now hear, or
forbear; and that ye may not bear the sword in vain, (Hitherto ye have not born
the sword in vain) for the Lord has made you victorious, and given you power
over your enemies; and put into your hands what your hearts could desire, And
now, oh that ye would come to execute justice, and true judgment would even be
your preservation and your strength. And that ye may be the Rulers that are not
a terror to good works, but to the evil; that the good may not be afraid of
your power, but the evil; and that ye may be the Ministers of God for good,
and a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil; and that your Acts
and Ordinances may be for the Lords sake; That the people of God may submit
unto you, and may be subject unto you; not for wrath, but for conscience sake;
Forasmuch as you are set, and sent by the Lord for the punishment of evil
doers, and for the praise of them that do well; For so is the will of God, that
with well-doing ye may put to silence the ignorance of the foolish. And so this
is your place, and calling, and now the power and the opportunity is put into
your hands to do good; beware that ye do not abuse the power, nor make light of
it, nor slight it, nor turn the truth of God into a lie, as those have done
that have gone before you; nor turn the sword against the Just; and the
Righteous as they have done, and caused the just and the innocent to suffer,
which God has pleaded the cause of, though they were blind and did not see,
nor would not hear the warning and the exhortation that was ministered unto
them; yet God has said, they shall see and be ashamed. And God will plead the
cause of his own just and innocent Seed, that has no helper in the earth,
which has long suffered under the hard bondage of Egyptian darkness. But he
has seen the affliction of his seed, and he has heard the cry of it, and he
is come to relieve it. So if ever ye will have the powerful God to own you,
and honor you, Beware of strengthening the hands of the wicked, and the evil
doers, and of turning your sword against the innocent; he is the same, and he
lives for ever, that has said, It were better that a Millstone were hanged
about his neck, and he cast into the Sea, then to offend one of his little
ones. This word endures for ever and will be fulfilled every jot and tittle,
though men make light of it, and do not see the Weight nor the Depth of it;
But when their day of calamity comes, then will they see what is due unto that
which has offended this which God so highly prizeth. Therefore as ye love your
souls, and your eternal peace, beware what ye do, now ye are in place and
Authority; and now ye have power to act for God, if ye keep your hearts upright
unto him, he will direct you; And if your faces be toward Sion, he will teach
you of his ways, that ye may walk in his paths, which will be out of the paths
of the broad way that leads to destruction, which all that went before you,
have walked in. And that ye may be preserved out of the snares of the sowler,
which the wicked one lays for those that are in place of Authority (as you are
in) is even the desire of my soul. And if your hearts be not corrupt, ye will
be preserved; For out of the heart proceeds evil thoughts; Murder, and
Adultery, Thefts, false witness and Blasphemies; these are the things which
defiles the man. That which comes out of a man defiles him, not that which
enters into him; Read that near, and consider it seriously; for there is a
great weight in those words; So keep to the just principle of God in you, that
which keeps you clean out of advantages, out of time-serving, and men-pleasing;
so may ye escape the Polutions that they fell into that went before you. And
the God of all power give you to see and understand, that his righteousness he
will exalt in this his day. And oh that ye could believe in your hearts, and
confess with your mouths that Jesus Christ is raised from the dead, then
should ye be saved from the transgressing against the just; For with the heart
man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made unto
salvation. Whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ is borne of God, and
every one that loves him that ^^^at^, loves him that is begotten of him;
mark this, and read this near: So if ye love God which has begot, love that
which is begotten of him in you, and this will keep you out of transgression,
and out of persecution, and out of sin and evil, and teach you to be a
terror to the evil doers, (not a terror to the good) but a praise to them
that does well. And to this Word, and Power Eternal and Immortal, I commit,
and command you, which is able to save your souls; who in his time he shall
show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of Kings and Lord of
Lords, who only has immortality dwelling in the light which no man can
approach, who no man has seen, nor can see; to whom be Honor and Power
everlasting. AMEN. See 1 Timothy 6.15, 16.

Written the 13. of the eighth Month, in the year accounted, 1659. From a
true lover of true Peace and Righteousness, which is coming to rule; for he
has taken upon him his great power, and therefore the Nations are angry.
MARGRET FELL.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.


