Seasonable Advice TO PROTESTANTS: SHOWING The Necessity of Maintaining THE
Established Religion: In Opposition to POPERY.

By Dr. Fell, late Lord Bishop of OXFORD.

LONDON, Printed for Charles Brom, at the Gun, at the VVest-end of St. Paul's
Churchyard. 1688.

A Seasonable DISCOURSE SHOWING The NECESSITY of Maintaining THE Established
RELIGION, In Opposition to POPERY.
IT is not be doubted, but that the Papists (against whom the England, to
exercise their Religions, and suspends the Execution of the Penal Laws in force
against them. They will now so much the more industriously set themselves to
seduce Protestants, since they may securely own and defend their Persuasions,
and even their Priests openly act in all parts their Function, which was before
no less than Capital in any of His Majesty's Subjects. If the industry we
expect from them meet not with a proportionable zeal in all true Protestants,
it will not he hard to conjecture what the Success will be, when the Attaque is
vigorous and industrious, and the Defense faint and negligent. And therefore I
think it cannot be unseasonable to offer a few Motives to the stirring up the
zeal, and awakening the prudence of all such Protestants as fear God, and love
the King, the Church, or themselves; as well as to arm them with some Arguments
for their own confirmation in the grounds of Protestancy, in opposition to
Popery.

II. The first Consideration shall be that of Duty to Almighty God, who has
made us Members of a Christian Church, in which we may assuredly find Salvation
if we continue in it, and live according to its Rules and Precepts. This
Christian Church, our holy Mother, has no other Rule of Faith and Practice than
the Holy Art. 6.
Scripture, of which, when less was written than we have now in our hands* S.
Paul 2 Timothy 3.15.
said then, they were able to make men wise unto salvation through faith in
Christ Jesus. It receives for Canonical Scripture neither less nor more than
those Books Artic. 13.
of whose authority there was never any doubt in the Church, yielding herein as
much to Universal Tradition as any Church in the world: much more than the
Roman does, Cousins Shol. Disc.
who obtrudes her particular Dictates and most notorious Innovations for the
Fundamentals of the Catholic Faith. It professes the same Faith and no more
than what all Christians have made the Badge and Symbol of their Profession,
namely, that which is briefly comprised in the Ant. 8.
Apostles Creed, explained in those others which are called the Nicene and
Athanasian, and proved by the Holy-Scriptures taken in that sense which is
evident in the Text to any indifferent judgment, and approved by the consent of
the Jewel's Apol.
Universal Church, the Decrees of the first General Councils and Writings of
the Fathers.

We are Members of a Church where are used the same Art. 25. Catechism in the
Lit.
Sacraments which Christ expressly left in his Church, and no other. We worship
the only Art. 1.
God, as we are taught to believe in him, and no other. Our Administration of
this Worship and of these Sacraments is in 1 Cor. 14.6, 7, 8.
Language understood by all those that are concerned in them, being performed
with such 1 Cor. 14.40. Preface of Cerem. to the Litur.
Rites as are agreeable to the Word of God, being for Decency and Order; and we
use them not as necessary in themselves, but in obedience to that Authority
which God has given to every particular Church over its own Members. Art. 33.
Our Discipline likewise is according to the Scripture Rule, and Primitive
Patterns, as far as the looseness of this Age will bear; and if this has weakened
the Discipline of our Church, Commin. in the Litur.
we believe it has the same effect even in those of the Roman Communion, and
had no less in the Church of Corinth in the Apostles times.

And for the Book of Ordin. Art. 36. Mason de Min Ang. Bramhal*
Persons who are employed in the Ministry of Gods Worship and Sacraments, and
in the feeding and governing of the Flock of Christ, they are lawfully called
to their Office and Ministry, and are consecrated and ordained according to the
Scriptures, and Canons of the Universal Church: and we show the Succession of
our Bishops to the Apostles of Christ, as fully as it can be shown in any other
Church at this day.

Lastly, We are members of a Church, which above all other Constitutions in the
Christian World enforces the great duties of Art. 37. King Charles Letter to
the Prince.
obedience and submission to the Magistrate, and teaches to be subject not only
for Wrath, but Conscience sake.

In all these respects our Church holds a Communion with all true Churches of
Christ that are or have been in the World, and is together with them a true
Member of that holy Catholic Apostolic Church which was from the beginning, and
will be to the end.

As we pass not severe censures on other Churches, though exceedingly
erroneous, and are for that charity unworthily repaid by the most criminal,
that of Rome: So are we excommunicated by none that we know of, but Her; The
Pope herein dealing with us as he does with all other Christians in the Bulla
Caenae.
World, namely, with most of the European Churches, and in other parts, except
those few whom he has gained of late by his Missionaries.

The common Cause for which we suffer is nothing else but the defense of the
Jude 3. Gal. 5.1.
Faith which was once delivered to the Saints, and of that Liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free; against those additional Articles which he would
intrude into the one, and thar Antichristian Yoke which he would impose on the
other.

The difference between our case and that of our fellow Christians who suffer
with us is only this; that they are shut out from Heaven as far as the Popes
Censures can do it, for they know not what; many of them, even Millions in the
remoter parts, having never so much as heard of him, or his pretensions;
whereas we konw them too well by woeful Experience.

It is not so much more than an hundred years since that our Ancestors were
under his Tyranny: which as their Fathers had insensibly drawn upon themselves,
by their deference to the Sea of Rome, from whence the Saxons had partly
Ethelbert and some others of the South of England.
their Conversion; so they having endured it as long as they were able, after
many fruitless endeavors to make it tolerable, at last with one An. 23. of
Hen. 8. by the advice of the Parliament and Convocation
consent threw the Yoke off their necks.

Our Church being thus freed from the Usurpations of Rome by them who were
deeply Heb. Hist. of Hen. 8. Speed, Baker, etc.
immersed in the errors and corruptions of it; the best use they could make of
their liberty was this, to restore the primitive purity of the Christian Faith
and Worship, which ignorance and interest had fatally depraved. Indeed, 'twas
morally impossible that they should pass untained through so many Ages of
darkness; when the Popes given up to profligate Guicciard. l. 16. Luitprand. l.
1. c. 13. Baron ad An. 908. Council. Constable. Sess ^t. Geneb. ad an 901.
vice seemed to drive on no other design but for Wealth and Dominion; when
scarce any in their Communion understood the Originals of Scripture; when those
that governed were so jealous of it, that they would not suffer any Sixth. V.
and Clem. 8 in the Prefaces of their Bibles.
Translation, but the Latin, which was overgrown the mean while (as they now
confess) with many thousands of Corruptions.

III. Having considered the Obligation we have to the Religion we profess, it
may be seasonable next to reflect on the Religion to which we are invited.

We are invited to one that recals us to the Idolatrous practice of the heathen
World, to Council. Trident. Sess. 25. Bell. de Imag. l. 2.
pray unto our fellow Creatures canonized, to Saints and Heroes to worship
Images and fall down to the stock of a tree. Nay to the worshipping of the
consecrated host, which by the confession of Coster, Enchirid. Controvers. c.
8. de Euch. p. 308. Council. Trident. Sess. 13. Bell. de Euch.
Coster, the Jesuit, and Some others, is a more stupid Idolatry than the worst
of the Heathens were ever guilty of, in case Transubstantiation cannot be made
out. Now that Transubstantiation is not real, we have all the evidence that we
are capable of the testimony of our reason and our senses. The absurd and
monstrous consequences of that Doctrine will fill Volumes, a great part of
which are with great truth and justice drawn together by Dr. Brevint in his
late Tract entitled, The Depth and Mystery of the Roman Mas.

We are invited to a Religion that takes from us, half the Sacrament of the
Eucharist, Council. Constance, Sess. 13, Trid. Sess. 21. Bell. de Euch. l. 4.
notwithstanding the Institution of Christ in express words, and
notwithstanding the practice of the Primitive Church to the contrary.

We are invited to a Church that revives the Heathen Persecution of taking away
our Index lib. probib. reg. 4. Bell. de verbo dei. l. 2.
Bibles* and would involve every Layman in the guilt of being a Optat
Milevitan. l. 1. Cont. Parmen.
Traditor, the next step in the account of the Primitive Church to Apostasy
from the Christian Faith. We are invited to a Church, that as it takes away the
Scriptures and half the Communion, robs us likewise of the benefit of the
Public Prayers, putting the Offices in an unknown Missal. Romans approbat. ex
decret. Conc. Trid. and Bulla Pii V. Cherubini bulla^. Tom. 2. p. 311
Tongue; insomuch that when about thirteen years ago some of the Prelates of
the Church of France had taken care to translate the Liturgy and Scripture into
the vulgar Tongue, Pope Extrait du procez verbal des assembl gener. du clerge
du Fran. tenue a Paris, es An. 1660. and 1661.
Alexander the seventh damns the Attempt, and under pain of Excommunication
commands all persons to bring in their Books to be publicly burnt. We are
tempted to a religion, which contrary to the command of trying all things, and
holding fast that which is good, and paying to God a reasonable service,
enjoins an Bell. de Rom^ Pont. l. 4.
implicit Faith and blind Obedience: to a Religion that instead of the
guidance of the Word of God, sets up an Bellar. de Eccles. l. 3.
infallible Judge and Arbitrator of all Doctrines, the Pope of Rome: Which
instead of the faith once delivered to the Saints adds Jude 3.
new Articles of Faith, which instead of that one propitiation made by Christ,
and the condition thereof Faith and Repentance, sets remission of sins upon
quite other terms, and proposes that gift of God to be bought with Money in the
vile Market of Bellar. de Indulg. l. 1.
Indulgences; for instance, Taxa cancel. Apost.
Sacrilege is valued at seven grosses, Incest at five, Simony seven, Perjury
six, Murder five, and so on in the Tax of the Apostolic Chancery.

We are invited to a Church where we must be Schismatics that we may be
Catholics, and adhere to the Bellar. de Eccles. l. 3.
Roman in opposition to all other; that is to the Catholic Church.

'Twere endless by retail to reckon up the Errors and the Guilts to which we
are invited; the fond ridiculous Rites, the superstitious, burthensom and
heathenish Ceremonies, the Exorcisms and Conjurations, the Blasphemies and
forged Miracles, Cheats and pious Frauds, the Lies and Stories stupid and
impossible as those of Amadis de Gaul, the Knight of the Sun, or the Seven
Champions, witness the Golden Legend, the Lives of the Saints, of S. Francis,
Bruno, S. Dominick and infinite others, or if we have a mind to a Romance of
our own, the long Tale of a Tub which Church Hist. of Britany.
Father Serenus Cressy has lately put out borrowed from Father Alford; the
improbable, that is the greater Miracles, as he tells us, being omitted because
of the unbelief of the Heretics; and yet enough are left to weary the credulity
of the most sanguine Catholic: Wherein also, as he tells us, we may see the
Faith of our Forefathers, and truly we have great reason to thank him for the
prospect, which (as he represents it) gives us strong inducements in so unequal
a competition, to retein our own.

Notwithstanding all that has been said, there are a sort of pacific Writers,
who represent the Doctrines of the Church of Rome under a fairer light, and
would have us believe they have a better meaning than is usually suggested. And
God forbid that we should take things by the worst handle, or make that breach
wider, whose closure we should endeavor to make up with a zeal equal to that
of the gallant Curtius.
Roman, who threw himself on behalf of his Country into the gaping Gulf. Indeed
no price can be too great for Peace, but only Truth; the which we may not part
with for all the tempting charms of Charity and Love: and God knows, in the
present case it is evident, that the excuses which are framed in the Romanists
behalf are short and frivolous; nor besides can any man be esteemed a Roman
Catholic by admitting the Doctrines of that Church in his own private or some
more probable Doctors, but in the public sense. And had these undertakers in
the Catholic Cause power to dispense therein according to that Candor which
many of them make show of, we might attend to what is said; but we are well
assured, that all these fair words can signify nothing, but are merely a bait
and snare laid to draw in the easy Proselyte: for when he is reconciled and
brought into the bosom of the Church, these painted shows are presently washed
off; and all concessions immediately retracted; the Convert must then learn the
Colliers Creed, believe as the Church believes, and St. Peter's Key which threw
the gate open to admit into the Church, will shut the Prisoner in: and the
Child which had a piece of money given him to keep him quiet, shall soon after
have it called for back again, and be awed with the rod, if he repine or
murmur. So that 'twill be a frivolous Project to talk of a Reconcilement with
the Church of Rome, till she first conform herself to Truth; and a Conviction,
and much more a Reformation must here be impossible, where the grossest Errors
are joined with an Assurance of being free from any; nay, a Persuasion of being
infallible.

IV. The Motive which deserves the next place is the Safety of the King's
Person, and the Prerogative of the Crown, which has no higher or more
necessary appendent than his Supremacy in his Dominions in all Causes
Ecclesiastical and Secular, according to the powers invested in the David,
Hezek etc.
Jewish King under the Law, and exercised by the first Constable Theod. Juista etc.
Christian Emperors.

It Is obviously known how destructive both to itself and the Community is the
Partnership of Regal Power; but this must be infinitely mischievous when shared
by a Foreigner; whose interests are necessarily contrary to those of our Prince
and Nation, as the Popes certainly are. But this mischief stays not within the
aforesaid bounds; for the Pope is not content with a bare Co-ordination, but
demands the Preference for his spiritual Sword, and claims a power to depose
Kings and dispose of Kingdoms.

This we learn at large from Bell. de. Romans pont. l. 5. Suar And. Eud. Johan
resp. ad Caesaub. p 12. Suar. defens. fid cath. l. 3. Turrecrem. sum. ecc l. c.
1^. Thom. Aquin. 2.2 quaest. 12. Art. 2. Ledes. Theol. mor. tract. 7. Malder.
com. in D. Thom. 2.2. quaest. 1.
Bellarmin, Suarez, Turrecremata, Card. Perron, Thom. Aquin, Ledesma,
Malderius, to pass by innumerable others, all whose Works were published by
Authority, and so owned as consonant to the Doctrines of the Church, to which
may be added the Pope's definition, who makes it authentic Law in these words
We say and define and pronounce that it is absolutely necessary to Salvation
for every human Creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome, and this Law of
Pope Extravag de majoritate and obedientia c. 1. unam sanctam.
Boniface the Eighth's making, he effectually commented on himself, of whom
Platin. in vit. Innoc. 3.
Platina says, That he made it his business to gave and take away Kingdoms, to
expel men and restore them at his pleasure. All which, that it might want no
Sanction or Authority to render it the Doctrine of the Church, is justified in
the third and fourth Council. later. can. 27. tom. council. 27. p. 461. Council.
lat. 4. Can. 3. Tom. 28. p. 161. Council. Ludg. 1. Sess. 3. Tom 28. p. 424.
Council. Constable Sess. 17. tom. 29. p. 158. and 469.
Lateran Council, the Council of Lions, the Council of Constance, all which
call themselves General, and therefore speak the Doctrine of the Church.

What has been done in this kind since the days of Gregory the Seventh
throughout Europe would fill a large Volume, in the bare Narration, whoever has
a mind to see those black Annals need not consult Protestant Writers, but read
Baronius or Platina, and there he will satisfy himself. Behold at large the
last and greater Triumphs of the Capitol: Crowns and Scepters and the necks of
Emperors and Kings trampled upon in great Self-denial by Christ's humble Vicar,
their Realms and Countries taken from them and involved in blood by the
Leiutenant of the Prince of Peace: Subjects discharged from their Allegiance in
the right of him, who himself disowned the being a divider and a Judge, and in
a word, the whole world made his Kingdom, who pretends his interest derived
from our Lord Jesus, who disclaimed the having a kingdom of this World. So that
it was not said amiss by Passavantius, That the Devil made tender of all the
Kingdoms of the World and the glory of them to our Lord Christ, but he refused
them; afterward he made the same offer to his Vicar the Pope, and he presently
accepted it, with the Condition annexed of falling down and worshipping. The
English Reader who desires to be satisfied in matter of Fact may please to
consult the History of Popish Treasons and Usurpations.
History of Popish Treasons and usurpations not long since written by Mr.
Foulis, to pass by others who have also dealt in that Subject.

At present I shall only add that although our neighboring Princes have
difficulty enough given them by this Universal Monarch, who like his
Predecessors in Heathen Rome, makes it a piece of his Prerogative to have Kings
his Vassals, yet they often help themselves by some Advantages which our
Sovereign is not allowed. The most Christian King has his Capitularies,
Pragmatic Sanctions, Concordats, and the Privileges of the Gallican Church to
plead upon occasion. And his Catholic Majesty as the eldest Son of the Church
has several Rights of Primogeniture, especially in the Kingdom of Sicily. But
the Crown of England is not to be treated with such respect: it alas ever since
the days of Henry the Second or at least King John is held in fee of the Pope,
and we are in hazard to be called unto account for the Arrear of 1000 Marks
per Annum payable ever since that time: And Cardinal Admonish to the Nobility:
Allen has given it for good Canon Law, That without the approbation of the Sea
Apostolic none can be lawful King or Queen of England by reason of the ancient
Accord made between Alexander the third in the year 1171. and Henry the Second
then King, when he was absolved for the death of S. Thomas of Canterbury: That
no man might lawfully take that Crown, nor be accounted as King, till he were
confirmed by the Sovereign Pastor of our souls which for the time should be;
This accord being afterward renewed about the year 1210 by King John, who
confirmed the same by oath to Pandulphus the Popes Legate at the special
request and procurement of the Lords and Commons as a thing most necessary for
the preservation of the Realm from the unjust usurpation of Tyrants, and
avoiding other inconveniences which they had proved, etc. But if this be but
the single Opinion of a probable Doctor, we may have the same asserted by an
infallible one, Pope Mat. Paris, An. 1253:
Innocent the Fourth, who before his College of Cardinals, and therefore in
likelihood e Cathedra, declares, that the King of England was his Vassal, nay,
to speak truth, his Slave. From hence it is that the succeeding Popes have been
so free on all occasions of turning out of doors these their Tenants upon every
Displeasure and little pet. Not to mention the old Mis-adventures of Richard
the Second, King John, etc. Hence it was that Cherubini bullar. Tom. 1: p. 704.
Hist Conc. Trent. l. 1. An. 1538.
Paul the Third sent against King Henry the Eighth, in the year 1538. his
terrible thundering Bull, as the Author of the History of the Council of Trent
calls it, such as never was used by his Predecessors nor imitated by his
Successors; in the Punishments to the King were deprivation of his Kingdom, and
to his adherents of whatsoever they possessed, commanding his Subjects to deny
him Obedience, and Strangers to have any Commerce in that Kingdom, and all to
take Arms against, and to persecute both himself and his followers, granting
them their Estates and Goods for their prey, and their Persons for their
Slaves. Upon like terms Hist. Council. Trent. an. 1558.
Paul the Fourth would not acknowledge Queen Elizabeth, because the Kingdom was
a Fee of the Papacy, and it was audaciously done of her to assume it without
his leave: And therefore Cambd. Eliz. An. 1570. Cherubini bullar. Tom. 2. p.
303.
Pius the Fifth went on, and fairly deposed her by his Bull, dated Febr. 25.
1570. but because the stubborn Woman would needs be Queen for all this, Pope
Thuan. l. 64. Cambd. Eliz. An. 1578.
Gregory the Thirteenth deposes her again, and having two hopeful Bastards to
provide for, to the one he gives the Kingdom of England, to the other that of
Ireland. Nor was she unqueen'd enough by all this, but Cambd. Eliz. An. 1588.
Sixtus Quintus gives away her Dominions once more to the King of Spain: and
after all, when nothing of all this would thrive, Cambd. Eliz. An. 1600.
Clement the Eighth sends two Breves for failing into England, one to the
Laity, the other to the Clergy, commanding them not to admit any other but a
Catholic, though never so near in blood, to the Succession; in plain terms, to
exclude the Family of our Sovereign from the Crown. When King James was come in
notwithstanding those Breves, the Gunpowder Plot was contrived to throw him
out again; and when that had occasioned the State for its own Security to
require the taking of an Oath of Allegiance, Paul V. sent his Breves with all
speed to forbid the taking of it; and for fear those might be forgotten in
time, in the year 1626. Dat. May. 30. 1626. Foulis p. 725.
Urban VIII. sends again to forbid his beloved Sons, the Catholics of England,
to take that pernicious and unlawful Oath of Allegiance. Yet more, in the late
unnatural Rebellion in Ireland, the loyal Catholics, as now they call
themselves, submitted that unhappy Kingdom to his aforesaid Holiness Pope Lord
Orrerys answer to Peter Welsh his Letter.
Urban, to pass by other offers no less treasonable: and after that, as we are
credibly informed, Pope Innocent the Tenth bestowed it as a Favor on his dear
Sister, and much dearer Mistress Donna Olympia. And sure we have all the reason
in the world to believe that every thing of this will be done again when the
old Gentleman at Rome is pleased to be angry next, has a mind to gratify a
neighbor Prince, or wants a Portion for a Son, or a Favor for a Mistress. And
as it is, the Papists of England have but this one excuse for that mortal sin
of obedience to their Heretic Prince; Watson's quodlibets. p. 255. out of
Bannes, Valentia and others.
that they are not strong enough to carry a Rebellion: And truly 'twere great
pity these men should be entrusted with more power, who give us so many
warnings beforehand how they are bound to use it.

But to all this the Roman Catholics have one short reply, That they are the
most Loyal Subjects of his Majesty: and have signally approved their duty by
their service and fidelity in the last War. To this I say in short, that as bad
as Popery is, I do not think it can eradicate in all its Votaries their natural
conscience; no Plague was ever so fatal as to leave no Person uninfected, but
always some have escaped 'its fury. The case is fully stated by King King James
his works. p. 504.
James of famous memory, As on one part, many honest men, seduced with some
Errors of Popery, may yet remain good and faithful Subjects; so on the other
part, none of those that truly know and believe the whole grounds and School
conclusions of their Doctrines, can ever prove either good Christians, or good
Subjects. To speak the plain truth, and what the insolent boasts of Papists
makes necessary to be told them, whatever was done then, was no trial at all of
Loyalty. The late Rebels found it necessary for the countenancing their cause
to make a loud pretense against Popery, and to have the benefit of spoiling
them: So that the Roman Catholics did not so much give assistance to the King,
as receive Protection from him. When they shall have adhered to their Prince in
spite of the commands of their holy Father the Pope, and defended their
Sovereign and his Rights, when it was not their interest to do it, they will
have somewhat worth the boasting: As the case now stands, they had better hold
their peace, and remember that the Sons of another Church served their King as
faithfully as they, though they talk less of it. But since they will needs have
the World know what good Subjects they have been, let them take this short
account from the Answer to the Page 14.
Apology for the Papists, Printed An. 1667. In Ireland there were whole Armies
of Irish and English that fought against his Majesty folely upon the account of
your Religion. In England it is true some came in voluntarily to assist him,
but many more of you were hunted into his Garrisons by them that knew you would
bring him little help, and much hatred. And of those that fought for him as
long as his Fortune stood, when that once declined, a great part even of them
fell from him. And from that time forward you that were always all deemed
Cavaliers where were you? In all those weak efforts of gasping Loyalty what did
you? You complied, and flattered; and gave sugared words to the Rebels then, as
you do to the Royalists now; You addressed your Petitions to the Supreme
Authority of this Nation the Parliament of the Commonwealth of England. You
affirmed that you had generally taken, and punctually kept the Engagement. You
promised, that if you might but enjoy your Religion, you would be the most
quiet and useful Subjects of England. You proved it in these words: The Papists
of England would be bound by their own interest, the strongest Obligation
amongst wise men, to live peaceably and thankfully in the private exercise of
their Conscience, and becoming gainers by such compassions, they could not so
reasonably be distrusted as the Prelatic party which were losers. If this be
not enough to evidence the singular loyalty of Papists in the late War, they
may hear a great deal more of their virtue celebrated from their Petitions and
public Writings in my Page 14, 15, etc.
Lord Orrery 's answers to Peter Welsh his Letter. And because in those
Writings they are so ready to throw the first stone against the late Regicides,
they would do well to clear themselves from the guilt of that Sacred blood
which is charged home upon them by the Answerer of Page 50.
Philanax Anglicus, who has not yet been controuled for that accusation.

V. To this barbarous insolence of Excommunicating and Deposing Kings may
succeed the usual consequent of that, but greater prodigy of Tyranny, the
putting whole Nations under Interdict, and depriving them of all the Offices
and comforts of Religion, and that generally without any other provocation,
than that the Prince has insisted on his just rights, or the people performed
their necessary duty. History is full of instances hereof. Within the compass
of one Age, I mean the eleventh Baron cent. undecim.
Century, almost all the Nations of Europe fell under this Discipline, France,
England, Scotland, Spain, and Germany; and some of them several times over; and
so it has gone down in following Ages. The nature of the punishment we may
learn from An. 1208.
Matthew Paris, who describing the Interdict in the days of King John, which
lasted amongst us for six years, three months, and fourteen days, says, There
ceased throughout England all Ecclesiastical Rites, Absolution and the
Eucharist to persons in their last Agonies, and the baptizing of Infants only
excepted: also the bodies of the dead were dragged out of Cities and Villages,
and buried like the Carcasses of Dogs in the highways and ditches without any
prayers or the Sacerdotal Ministry. One would imagine that he who pretends to
hold his Empire from the Charter of pasce oves, the feeding of Christ's Sheep
would find himself concerned no to destroy and starve them, or withhold from
them their spiritual food for almost seven years together; an unusual prescript
for abstinence in order unto health. But we may not wonder at all this; for
Plarina in vita Greg VII.
pasce oves with a Roman Comment means all Coertion and Dominion; and they who
take away the Scriptures and half the Communion from the Layty are not to be
controlled, if they also withhold the other offices of piety.

VI. A farther consideration may be the Laws of the Land, which in case of
Popery must be content to truckle under the Canon Law, and occasional Bulls of
his Holiness, or Legantine Commissions: The proceedings of the Courts in
Westminster veiling to Prohibitions and Appeals to Rome, against which a
Praemunire will be a weak fence in Bar to the plenitude of the Apostolic Power;
and to murmur or dispute any thing will be especially to new Converts,
interpreted Heresy, a word of so sharp an importance, as not to need a
Comment. There is a Tradition that heretofore the Gentlemen of the long Robe
were in that mean estate as to ply at Westminster Hall Gate as now Watermen do
at the Stairs for a Fare, let the Practicioners in that noble Profession
consider whether some such thing would not in earnest be the consequent of
Popery. And the rest of the People of England would do well to think whether
they are fitted for a Journey to Rome, as often as they shall be called
thither: I do not mean the divertisement of Travel, or devotion of Pilgrimage,
but the compulsion of Citations from that Court, where the attendance and
expense is not likely to be less than formerly it was, when it occasioned the
groans and sad complaints of our Forefathers; which though they have escaped,
our experimental knowledge sufficiently appear in all our R. Hoved. in Hen. II.
Mat. Paris ib.
Histories. Or should the English Law have some quarter given it, and be
allowed a little Chamber practice, this must be only in reference to the Layty.
All Council. Trid, Sess. 25.
Ecclesiastics are under a more perfect dispensation, and only accountable to
the Apostolic See either for their actions or concerns, the benefits of which
though the Secular Priests share in some proportion, the Regulars much more
liberally enjoy, being owned by the Pope Hist. Council. Trident. l 2.
as his Soldiers and Pretorian bands, listed under the Generals of their
several Orders, maintained indeed at the cost of the Countries where they live,
but for the service of their Sovereign abroad, to whom they owe an entire and
blind obedience: And, that they may give no Hostages to the State where they
reside, are forbid to marry. So that if Popery should prevail, we must, besides
all charges necessary to secure our selves from foreign enemies both by Land
and Sea, constantly maintain a vast Army of possibly an hundred thousand men,
for such were the old numbers, to assure our slavery to the Roman Yoke. Nor are
these Privileges of the Church only personal, the places themselves which
these religious men possess are hallowed into Sanctuaries, and give protection
unto any criminal that treads within their thresholds, the most horrid Murder
or barbarous Villainy is to have the Benefit of the Clergy, and if the
Malefactor have but time to step into a Cloister, he fears no farther
prosecution.

VII. But besides the inconvenience of submitting to a foreign Law, that
certain mark of slavery, and the intolerable burdens that attend its
execution, it will be of moment to advise how well our Property and interest in
our estates will stand secured; And though when Princes are upon their good
behavior, to be disseiz'd of their dominions, whenever they offend his
Holiness of Rome, the Pesant or the Gentleman have no great reason to expect
indemnity: yet should the Farm or Manor-house be too low a mark for the Roman
Thunderer to level at, it is not to be imagined the Lord Abbots and the Lands of
all Religious houses will be past by as trifles. The Church is ever a Minor,
and cannot be prescribed against by time, or barred in her claims, and our holy
Father out of his Paternal care will find himself concerned to vindicate the
Orphan committed to his trust. Some perchance who enjoy those Lands think they
need not apprehend any thing, because they hold under Acts of Parliament: But
they who imagine this, should consider, that the same strength that can repeal
those Laws that establish Protestancy, may also do as much for those which
suppress Religious houses: and no body can tell what the force and swing of a
violent turn, especially in England, may produce, where we seldom proceed with
coldness or reserve. Acts of resumption are not things unheard of in ours, or
in foreign stories. Nor is the consent of the Pope in Queen 1 and 2 of Phil.
and Mary:
Mary's days a better security; for in case of a change of Religion all those
grants will be interpreted a bare permission, and that conditional in order to
the great end of reclaiming an heretical Kingdom, which not being then accepted
of, and finally submitted to, will not be thought obligatory when Papists by
their own skill or interest have gotten the power into their hands. King
Charles the First yielded at the Isle of Treaty at the Isle of Wight.
Wight that the Church Lands should be leased out for 99 years, in order to a
present peace and settlement of all things, through the interposition of a
powerful and violent Faction it was not then accepted of: Does any man think
the Obligation of leasing for 99 years remains now? Let our Lay-Abbots apply
this to their case, and then judge whether they upon a revolution will be more
secure of their Possessions than the late Purchasers were; or whether those
Purchasers were not as confident of transmitting their Acquisitions to their
posterity as any possessor of Church Lands now is or has been. The King of
France, not long since has redeemed back to the Crown those demesnes which
belonged to it, paying back such sums as were really laid out by the
Purchasers; and allowing the mean profits as interest for the money so laid
out: Which method of procedure has been defended by very considerable Arguments
to be just and equitable. If the money expended on the Church penniworths at
the dissolution of Religious houses were now refounded, and the advantage of
above 100 years profit already received were thrown in to the bargain, though
the present Proprietaries would have an ill exchange, yet there would be so
much plausibleness in the grounds of it, as in the zeal and heat of a turn
would not be easily controlled, especially if it be farther pressed, that the
first claim from the Acts of Parliament suppressing Church Lands appear to be
not full and peremptory; the Lands of the first suppression in the 27. year of
Henry 8. not seeming to intend an alienation to common and secular uses, but to
have been vested in the King in trust, that the revenues might be employed Cap.
28.
to the pleasure of Almighty God, and to the honor and profit of this Realm,
As to the second in 31 year of Henry 8. The Act supposes, and is built upon the
alienations legally made by the respective Religious Houses and Corporations,
who are said Cap. 13.
of their own voluntary minds, good wills and assents, without constraint,
coaction, or compulsion of any manner of person or persons, by the due order
and course of the common Laws of this Realm of England, and by their sufficient
Writings, of Record under their Covent and common Seals, etc. Now to the
verifying of these particulars a great many doubtful circumstances and nice
points of Law are easily drawn in as requisite, the suggesting whereof in the
forementioned cases however slight and frivolous they may be, no body can tell
what force they will have when dilated on by a Roman Catholic Advocate, and
interpreted by an infallible Legislator. That all this is not an idle dream,
suggested to make Popery odious, will be manifest to any one who will take
pains to read what a French Marquess of that Religion has lately written on
this very subject, who having represented us as a Traitte de la politic de
France. c. 14. p. 283.
People without Friends, without Faith, without Religion, without Probity,
without any justice, mistrustful, inconstant to the utmost extremity, cruel,
impatient, gurmandizers, proud, audacious, covetous, fit only for handy-strokes
and ready execution; but incapable of managing a War, with discretion. After
this friendly character he proceeds to show by what ways and methods we are to
be destroyed, which are first, to put us to the expenses of a War, and by
raising of forces create a jealousy between the King and his People. Then, to
amuse us with fear of invasion. Thirdly, to stir up the several Parties among
us, and to favor one Sect against another, especially the Catholics,
promising secretly to the Benedictines as from the King of England, which they
will easily believe, that they shall be restored to all that they formerly
possessed, according to the Monasticon lately printed there: whereupon, says
this worthy Author, the Monks will move heaven and earth, and the Catholics
will declare themselves. It will not be material to transcribe the whole design
laid down for our destruction by this bold Writer, which with all other
Machinations, the providence of God, and the prudence of his Sacred Majesty
will we hope frustrate. This is enough to show that there are persons in the
world, who can yet nourish hopes of destroying the Nation, and repossessing the
Lands of the Church, and in printed books make a public profession of them.

But if one general Act of Resumption should not disseize at one stroke all the
Lay-Possessors of Church Lands, it is plain that in case of Popery, by retail
they will be all drawn in, for what Papist in his last Agonies will obtain
Absolution without satisfaction first made to Holy Church, for the Goods
sacrilegiously detained? Or how will he escape the lying in Purgatory at least,
and frying there for several thousands of years, who instead of having benefit
from the Indulgences of the Church, Council. Trid.
is solemnly Sess. 22. bulla coenae. in bullario Cherubin. passim.
cursed and anathematized with the worst of Heretics in the Bulla Coenae, as
also the Declaration of the Council of Trent, upon the score of being Robbers
of the Church,? It Is not to be hoped they should have any benefit from the
spiritual Treasure of the Church, who, have enrished themselves with that real
and material Treasure belonging to her, which is the only price that buys the
other. Indeed, they who, without the plea of a precedent right, in few
centuries gained to themselves a fifth part of the whole Kingdom, will not
doubt in a much shorter time, having the forementioned pretenses to recover it
again, even the six hundred forty five Abbeys, whereof twenty seven had their
Abbots, Peers of England: The ninety Colleges, two thousand three hundred
seventy four Chantries and free Chapels, and one hundred and ten Hospitals,
Hebert hist. of Hen. 8. Speed, etc.
which (besides the lesser Dissolutions of Templars, Hospitalers, Friars Alien,
and others that preceded) fell together under the hands of King Henry VIII.

VIII. It would be farther weighed in reference to the Wealth and flourishing
of the Kingdom, and what is necessarily required thereto, the Preservation of
Trade, and the value of Lands and Rents; that the more Popery grows, the more
will Idleness increase, the more Abbey-Lubbers, that is, persons exempted from
contributing in any kind to the uses of a State either in War or Peace, and yet
maintained as drones on others sweat and labors. The more it increases, the
more will Celibate or single life prevail; the more Daughters will be sent to
Nunneries abroad, till they can be fixed at home, the more men will turn
Priests and Friars, and so less people in the Nation which already has too few.
And that the numbers in those Societies may be sure to be full, it is a known
and customary practice to entice and spirit away Children from their Parents
into their Covents, from whence they cannot be withdrawn without Sacrilege. Of
this abuse complaint was made long ago in behalf of the English Nation, to the
Pope by Sermon preached before the Pope and Cardinals at Avenion.
Rich. Fitz-Ralph, called Armachanus, Anno 1360, though without redress.
Laymen, says he, refrain from sending their Sons to the Universities fearing
to have them taken away from them, choosing rather to keep their Sons at home,
and breed them to Husbandry, than to lose them by sending them to the Schools:
In my time there were thirty thousand Students in Oxford, and now there are not
six thousand, and the great cause of this decrease in numbers is the aforesaid
circumventing of Youth. To this Accusation In defensorio.
William Widford, a begging Friar, makes answer in his Apology for his Order,
by undertaking to prove, That it is very lawful to entice Children into their
Covents without their Parents consent. Since the Reformation, what Arts have
been used to People the Seminaries abroad, is a thing too notorious to need an
account, if any desire satisfaction therein he may have it from Mr. Wadworth's
English Spanish Pilgrim. As by this engaging of the Youth in Monasteries and
Nunneries there will be many more idle hands, so by the more Holy Days which
will be kept there will be the less work done; consequently what is done will
be so much the dearer, an ill expedient for promoting of Trade, for four days
work must perhaps maintain a man and his Family seven. The more Popery
increases, the less Flesh will be eaten, a third part of the year being one way
or other Fasting days, besides particular Penances, as good an expedient for
Rents, as the former was for Trade. To salve this, I expect the Papists should
tell us, That great numbers of Forreiners of that Religion will come and live
among us, and supply by their numbers the other inconveniences: but the English
Artificers and Merchants are already sensible of the mischiefs which those
interloping Strangers which are here already do among us, and desire no new
Colonies: Besides, it is obvious to any common understanding, that if the
admission of Popery bring in Forreiners, the discouragement of Protestancy will
in greater and more disadvantageous proportions drive out Natives: and though
it be not certain who will gain by the change; it is manifest that the true
English Interest will be a loser by it.

IX. But to proceed, Popery will wring out of private persons a vast expense in
Masses, Dirges, Mortuaries, Penances, Commutations, Pilgrimages, Indulgences,
Tents, First Fruits, Appeals, Investitures, Palls, Peter Pence, Provisions,
Exemptions, Collations, Devolutions, Revocations, Unions, Commendams,
Tolerations, Pardons, Jubilees, etc. paid to Priests, the Pope and his
Officers; which upon computation amounted to above three times the Kings
Revenue, Mat Paris Hist. Anno 1252.
a great part thereof carried out of the Kingdom in a time when the Indies had
not filled it with Gold and Silver. The tyranny was so intolerable, that the
whole Nation protested against it in their Letter to the Council of Tom.
council. 28. p. 460.
Lions, Anno 1245. wherein among others things they declare, That the Italians
received hence yearly above sixty thousand Marks, besides all other payments to
the Sea of Rome, and carried out of the kingdom a greater revnue than the King
had, who was Tutor to the Church and was to support the charge of the State.
Which complaint yet had no other answer than delays, and a severe example to
terrify them immediately made upon the Emperor Frederick the Second, against
whom his Holiness Innocent the Fourth then Pope, to use the words of the Acts
of the Council, Page 462.
Pronounced and thundered out the Sentence of Excommunication, not without the
horror and amazement of all hearers and bystanders, Only the Annats or First
Fruits of Bishoprics as they were computed in Herb. Hist. King Hen. 8. p. 330.
Parliament, Anno 1532. in a few years came to an hundred sixty thousand pound
sterling; it would be endless to audit the whole Account. As England was by the
Popes styled an Mat. Paris Anno 1246.
inexhaustible pit, so was there no bounds set to the industry of them who
attempted to drain it. After a sad complaint of the Rapine, Avarice, and
Tyranny of the Pope and his Officers among us, Anno 1237.
Matthew Paris breaks out in these words, we might there see heart breaking
grief, the cheeks of pious persons drowned in tears, the doleful moan that they
made, and the sighs which they multiplied, saying with bleeding groans, It were
better for us to die, than behold the calamity of our Country and pious People
of it. woe to England, who heretofore was Princess of Provinces, and Ruler of
Nations, the mirror of Excellence, and pattern of Piety, is now become
Tributary, vile persons have trampled upon her, and she is a prey to the
ignoble: But our manifold sins have procured these judgments from God, who in
his anger for the iniquity of his People has made a Hypocrite and Tyrant to
rule over them. If Almighty God should for the like Provocations put us again
under the same Egyptian Taskmasters, we need not doubt of the self-same usage.
But now, for all this expense, it is pleasant to examine what is to come back to
us in exchange; even Parchments full of Benedictions and Indulgences, store of
leaden Seals, Beads, and Tickets; Medals, Agnus-Dei's, Rosaries, hallowed
Grains, and Wax-candles, such Traffic that an Indian would scarce barter for;
such pitiful Gauds that would hardly bribe a child of a year old; and yet this
is the goodly price they offer for all the wealth of a whole Nation.

X. After this Tyranny over our Estates in the particulars rehearsed, there is a
very remarkable one behind which will well deserve to be considered: It is
Council Trid. Sess. 14.
Auricular Confession; where not to mention its ill aspect upon Government, as
being made an Engine of State, and Picklock of the Cabinets of Princes, sealing
up all things from the notice of the Magistrate; but making liberal discoveries
against him; hereby not only the Estate, but Soul and Conscience of every
private man are subjected to the Avarice and Rapine, and withal the Humor and
Caprice, the insolence and Pride, nay, Lust and Villainy of a debauched
Confessor; Every mortal sin upon pain of Damnation must be confessed, and when
the Penitent after great anxieties has freed himself from this disquiet, he
must submit to the Penance, however rigorous, or chargeable, or foolish, which
the Priest enjoins, he and his Family are entirely in the power of this Master
of their secrets.

And if this Awe and Empire, however grievous, were the whole Inconvenience
'twere something tolerable, it being to be hoped, that so severe a Remedy would
affright from Guilt; but the very contrary happens: the Priest takes often
benefit of the Sin which he absolves from, and having the advantage of these
two Points, that the person whose Confession he has taken has lost Modesty, and
that he can absolve from the Crime, it will be easy to persuade the Repetition
of that Sin, which his breath can easily blow away and render none. I shall not
here mention on the other part the perfunctory Penances, which seem only
imposed to invite to sin again, and those authorized by a most authentic
pattern, that of the Popes themselves, for what Markets may we not expect from
a poor Priest, when his Holiness in his Taxa cancel. Apost.
Tax of the Apostolic Chancery has valued the most horrid crimes at so easy
rates as a few Grosses, or a Julio, and eighteen pence or half a crown
compounds for the foulest most abominable Guilt. Nay, when a Visit to a
priviledg'd Shrine or Altar, and the bare recital of a short Prayer purchases
pardon for 100, 500, 546, 6646 days: Nay, for 7500, 10000, 1000000 years
according to the grants of several Popes to be seen for our great comfort and
edification in the Horae B. Vir. p. 73, 84, 76:40, 73, 79, 72.56, 80, etc.
Horae B. Virginis. So that the story of that plump Confessor, who for six Acts
of Adultery is said to have enjoined the repetition of six Penitential Psalms,
and when 'twas told him that there were seven of them, advised the Votary to
commit Adultery once more, and repeat the whole number, may seem a very severe
act of Discipline, and (besides a full atonement for past sins) supererogation
for future ones.

So that Vice being brought to this easy rate, besides all other
mis-adventures, unless we will stand for the honor of being Cuckolds, and have
our Posterity share the Title which is proverbial in Popish Countries, to be
fills de Prestre; it will concern us to look about us, while it is time, and
prevent these vile dishonours which are preparing for us. If it shall be said,
that it is not imaginable men should pervert so sacred an action, as the
receiving of Confessions to those purposes of villainy that are suggested. I
answer first, That we may without breach of Charity suppose that thing possibly
to be done, which is notoriously known to have been done: as also, that the
horror of the crime is competently allayed by their Doctrine, who think only
Marriage, and not Sleid. comm: l. 4.
Fornication inconsistent with the dignity of a Clergyman. And therefore the
Nephews of great Clergymen and Popes have in all Ages been owned and
preferred, and moreover Corn. Agrip. c. de lenocin.
fornication has been allowed to Priests and Friars in in compensation for
their restraint from marriage, three or four Whores as part of their spiritual
preferment. I say, all this being put together, there will be little hopes to
preserve honor in Families, where so many circumstances concur together to
betray it.

XI. After all this there still remains a farther reason why we should resist
the groath of Popery, even the most pressing that can be urged,
Self-preservation, to avoid Imprisonment and Inquisition, Fire and Faggot,
Massacres, Racks and Gibbets, the known Methods by which the Romanists support
their Cause, and propagate their Faith. Should that Sect prevail, the
Nonconformist shall no longer complain of a Bartholomew day; the Parisian
Vespers, which bore that date, will be resumed again, and silence all
complaints of them or us: and as his Holiness thought fit to celebrate that
barbarous villainy, calling together, as Thuan hist. l. 53.
Thuanus tells us, his Cardinals solemnly to give thanks to Almighty God for so
great a blessing conferred upon the Roman See, and the Christian World; nay, a
jubilee was to be proclaimed through the Christian World, whereof the cause was
expressed to give thanks to god for destroying in France the enemies of the
Truth and of the Church; There may be found on this side the Sea, men who will
imitate the Princes of the holy League, who upon such encouragements from the Sea of Rome, and for the greater glory of God, will be ready to consecrate
their hands in a Massacre here with us. It is vulgarly known what was done to
the poor Albigenses and Waldenses: How many hundred thousand of lives the
planting of the Roman Gospel in the Indies cost: What cruelties were practiced
in the Low-Countires by the Duke d' Alva, what blood in this Island in the days
of Queen Mary, what designed to be shed in the Powder Treason, and that by the
privity and direction of the Pope himself as Disq. magic. l. 6. c. 1. Sect. 3.
Delrio informs us in spite of all the palliations that are now suggested: who
withal adds, that his Holiness Clement the VIII by his Bull a little before
that time, gave order that no Priest should discover any thing that came to his
knowledge in confession to the benefit of the Secular Government: It seeming
safer to these good men to break all the Obligations of Duty and Allegiance,
though bound by Oaths, than violate the Seal of Confession, or put a stop to
that meritorious work, at one moment to destroy their Sovereign with all his
Royal Family, his whole Nobility and Senate, and subvert the Government of
their Native Country. But we need not seek for instances without our own
memories, the carriage of the Lord Orrery p. 29.
Irish Rebellion, where the Papists in a few months cut the throats of about
two hundred thousand innocent Protestants of all Sexes and Ages, cannot be yet
forgotten. Which Act was so meritorious as to deserve from his Holiness a most
plenary Indulgence for all that were concerned in it, Page 61.
even absolution from Excommunication, Suspension, and all other Ecclesiastical
Sentences and Censures by whomsoever, or for what cause soever pronounced or
inflicted upon them, as also from all sins, trespasses, transgressions, crimes
and delinquences, how hanious and attrocious soever they be, etc.

Nor let any man be so fond to hope for better terms, or Liberty of Conscience,
if Popery should now prevail. Let us look into the world, and we shall see on
all hands, that nothing is any where suffered to grow either under or near that
Sect. Where Protestantism has been so strongly fixed as not to be battered down
at once, it has by degrees been perpetually undermined: witness the Proceedings
against them in Poland and Hungary and several parts of Germany, the late
Persecutions in the Valleys of Piedmont, and the methods used in France to
demolish their Temples, and disable them for their Employments, and almost
exclude them from common Trades. I need not enquire what is now done in Vtrecht
and other acquisitions of the French upon the Hollander; this we are sure of;
Whatsoever Articles are, or can be made of favor and compliance, it is somewhat
more than a probable Council Constable. Mist. Jesuitism
Doctrine, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics. The Jesuited Romanist is
at large by Equivocotions to say any thing, and by directing of Intention to do
any thing: they can with very good conscience dissemble their own, and pretend
to the Protestant Profession, come to the devotions of Heathen Idolaters, and
that from express License from his Holiness Pope Clement the Eight upon account
of which, we may, says De convers. infid p. 854.
Tho. a Jesu, be present without any scruple at the Rites and divine Offices of
Infidels, Heretics and Schismatics. Nay Peter In vit. Ignati Loyol.
Maffeius makes it his boast, that Ignatius Loyola imitated the Devil in all
his tricks, cheats and cunning, to convert souls: and how his followers have
transcribed that Pattern the world does know.

Yet farther, they, some of them at least, can set up a new Gospel, where their
is not one word of the Cross of Christ; can worship Heathen Idols with that
pitiful reserve of having in their Sleeve a Crucifix, to which they privately
direct their Adoration: All which as they are notorious for, being complained
of to the Palafox Bo. of Angelopolis in his Letter to Pope Inoc. X.
Pope, so are they uncontrolled for ought appears and permitted by him. Indeed
what conversation can there be with these men who are under no obligations of
Society, no Character of notice or Distinction; who at the same time are
Priests and Hectors, Casuists and Artificers, Presbyterians, Anabaptists,
Quakers, Theists, Atheists, and amidst all this very good Catholics. Let any
honest sober man judge what kind of Religion this is, in it self, and how fit
to be encouraged and submitted to.

XII. To close up all that has been said; from uncontrollable Testimonies and
Proofs, we have seen the influence which Popery has either heretofore or may
hereafter have amongst us in all the great concerns of our Religion, our
Prince, our Laws, our Property, our Country, our Families and Lives, and found
it evidently destructive unto all: the inference from whence can be no other,
but that if we have any love for our Religion, any abhorrence of the grossest
Superstition, Error or Idolatry; any regard for the safety of His Majesty, any
care of our Laws or our Estates, any concernment for the Strength, the Wealth
or Numbers of our Nation; any desire to hold the Freedom of our Conscience, the
Virtue and the Honor of our Families; and lastly, any care of
Self-Preservation, to escape Massacres, and the utmost rage of persecution; it
will behoove us to beware of the prevailing of that sect, in whose Successes we
have reason to expect to forfeit all these Interests, perish our selves, and
bequeath Idolatry and Beggary and Servitude to our Posterity.

FINIS.

