The Gentle Lash, Or the VINDICATION Of Dr FEATLEY, a known Champion Of The
PROTESTANT RELIGION.

Also Seven ARTICLES Exhibited against him.

With his ANSWER thereunto.

Together with the said Doctor his MANIFESTO and CHALLENGE.

PLAUT. Istic thesaurus stultis in lingua positus est, ut maledicant
melioribus.

IMPRINTED, 1644.

The Gentle Lash.
O That we had Faith but strong enough to exorcise these quotidian devi^s, so
weekly appearing in our Diurnals, Mercuries, and Continuations: who pretending
to maintain the cause of Religion, scandalize both it and all goodness, with
malicious Lies: whose anonomous Reporters have even sold themselves to the
Press, to abuse the Peace of this poor distracted Church and Kingdom: whose
audacious Pens bedabbled in the Gall of bitterness, set forth presumptuous
things, maligning Princes, and speaking evil of Dignities, who aiming at the
confusion of the Church, strike at her very Pillars, casting their venomous
Froth upon their Names, whose able and Religious Quils have vindicated the true
Protestant Religion, from the dirty calumnies of learned Heretics. Generation
of Vipers! who has bewitched you? who has infa^uated you to betray Religion
for five shillings a sheet, and to vent so many weekly pennyworths of impiety
to poor deluded People, whom your teachers have brought to this degree of
blindness, that they will not see? How many of the most learned and religious
Divi^s of this Island, passively submitting to the Ordinances of men, and
committed to the Mercy of a Prison) have your printed (and shamefully
permitted) scandals, defamed and slandered, rendering them as odious to the
ignorant, as you are to the wise; maintaining, nay, even deifying those whom
you call, your Holy Pastors, whose help (God be praised) we never wanted
against the Argumen^s of Bellarmine, Stapleton or Fisher whose Net we ^eare had
bin too cunningly said for them to have escaped?

Nor can I here forget that debt the Church of England owes to the sound and
learned labors of that Reverend Champion of our Protestant Religion, D.
Featley, which shall remain in our Church as lasting Monuments of his able
Piety, whilst Learning, and Orthodox devotion find a Friend; whom, at this time
(suffering Imprisonment, for his loyalty to his Conscience and his Prince) your
impious, saucy, and sacrilegious quills (as full of venom as the pen out of
which Demosthenes sucked his death) have vilified and traduced with such
calumnious falsehoods and malicious injuries, my hasty and impartial Pen,
shall take the boldness here to vindicate. To which end, you shall first
understand what the person is; secondly, what his charge.

He is a man, whose life and doctrine need no Advocate; whom detraction it
self could not mention, without addition of some Epithets of respect; nay,
concerning whom the very Diurnalls (whose nature and property is to Lie) could
not for their own credits but acknowledge an honorable truth: some styling
him a grave, some a good, and others a famous Doctor: And indeed, to conclude
him in a word, no object for any evil passion but Envy, and a Subject for no
discourse but what ends with Admiration. He is a man, whose profoundnesse in
learning encouraged the Houses of Parliament to commit the translation of S.
Paul's Epistles to his Review, Marginall Annotation, and Exposition: whose
soundness of Doctrine invited the same Authority to make choice of him, for
the answering of a Popish and scandalous Pamphlet, entitled, A safeguard from
Shipwreck; both performed with solid judgment and singular fidelity; that
extant, this ready for the Press. By which Authority, he was likewise chosen a
Member of the Synod, or Assembly of Divines, for the composing of some
differences, and settl^ the peace of the distempered Church, in these His
Majesty's Dominions.

As touching his charge, it was unhappily occasioned by a Message sent him from
His Majesty, (whose Chaplain in ordinary he is) which commanded him, no more
to join in that Assembly, being convented without His Majesty's consent, and
therefore without full Authority; whereto returning his answer in a Letter
unsealed, to the most reverend Father in God, the Archbishop of Armagh, a
chosen Member likewise of the same Assembly, now at the University of Oxford;
the Letter was intercepted, opened, and falsely transcribed, whereunto the
malicions penman, adding what would most, by wronging him, advantage the Cause,
delivered the Original to the Messenger (with hopes to intercept the Answer)
and dispatched the false Transcript, to the Committee for Examinations:
whereupon a Sergeant at Arms was sent for the Doctor, who having, in his
examinations, refused to consent to every Clause in the Scottish Covenant, was
forthwith committed prisoner to the Lord Peter's house in Aldersgate street,
where now he remains as cheerful as a good Conscience, and as poor as the
severest censure of Authority, can make him.

But when the Lion is down, how every Curre will bark! Him, whom of late
these Sycophanticall Diurnall-mongers had in so good esteem, whilst he
concurred in some things with them whom they have in Admiration, him now they
worry with their temporizing pens: who render him to the world no better then
(to use their own words) a Prevaricator, a Court-spye, and a Traitor to the
Assembly, tryumphing in the Sentence of his downfall, and mingling the bitter
Cup of Justice, with the Exuberance of their own Gall and Vinegar.

The Doctor (say they) has his Livings sequestered, his Estate secured, his
books seized upon, and himself Imprisoned: Spolia ampla refertis. The only
Truth, that Pamphlet is guilty of: sed quo cecidit sub crimine? What was his
charge? What was the heinous crime that moved to such a Ruin? A Letter sent to
the Archbishop of Armagh, an elected Member of the Assembly; whom all the
world admires and honors, unless some within the Line of Communication, who
are more worthy to unty his shoe, then to judge of his Abilities. But what
evil has he done? He acquainted this worthy Member, by that Letter, with some
passages in the Assembly, requiring his judgment in some things there
controverted, concerning matters of Faith. Proh nefandum! Indeed, his very
presence in the Assembly (as far as I see yet) was his greatest fault. Yea,
but he sued covertly for a Deanery: Yea, that was a fault indeed, to sue for
something, which they are now endeavoring to make nothing, to purchase a house
that is pulling down. Put case, he did so. Is it a Crime to provide a plaster
for a Sore that is now a breeding? Clypeum post vulnera, is folly: but ante
vulnus, is Providence: They that aim at the Ruin of the whole body, will be
impatient at the Preservation of a Member. Is it a great fault for a Servant to
beg of his Master, and none at all for Subjects to beggar their Prince?

Perfect Diurnall, page 83.
You have bin often told of ^ome rotten Members in both houses of Parliament,
and ye may see further, there are the like rotten Members in the Ass^mbly of
Divines etc.

Another Truth. Alas, we know, that too well, or else the Head had never bin so
careful to preserve it self.

But tell me, what is the cause of rottenness, in a Member? Is it not the
restraint of the influence from the noble part? Some Members there are amongst
us, from whom the free operations of the Animal spirits are by accident a
while obstructed, through the Malignity of the spleen; others whose obstinacy
is not capable of their natural operation, but resist all influence from the
Head: Tell me, if thou have Philosophy, which of these are most in lining to
rottenness?

But you that so malig^e these Members; say; which of your faction have lifted
up a hand against the common Enemy? which of them have struck a blow but
against a Cushion or an Hour glass? Whilst these menbars whom you so revile,
have with their well ar^'d Arguments laid the Enemy on his back, whilst these
Memb^rs you so Rabsekize have borne the burden of the day, and always have
bin active in the true Religions Cause, and maintained the Truth that Schism
has so struck at: Had your Members bin sound and able, they would have shown
more action, and not like cowards have run away to New England, when old
England was on fire, n^r crept into widows houses whom they devoured under the
pretense of long Prayer: Had those Members ^in rotten, you so term, I fe^re the
Truth ^ad found but poor Champions; This ^ragious Member (whom you so revile)
looked the Lion in the very face, nay when he ror'd, he trembled not; whose holy
Table; when all turned Altars, was no m^veable: stood he not up for the true
reformed Religion in the Kingdoms both of England and France? Did not he
oppose Arminianisme when it was in its fullest Ruff? And when the Crime was
capital to speak against it, were his lips sealed? yet this man has your
black mouth^d malice (which blasphemeth the servants of the most high God)
reviled and st^led by the Name of Rotten. But take heed, and remem^er Nestorius
the Heretic, how he died. Yea but he ^sed whose tongue rotted in his mouth.
with the Assembly to undermine their proceedings, and gave intelligence to the
adverse party, etc,

Indeed, he joined with the Assembly, so long as they joined with the Truth;
And when they undermined it, he countermined them. Had he swallowd the Covenant
whole, and bin for sworn in some particulars, he had bin as sound a Member as
the best. They had past as Birds all of a brown Feather, and had founded a new
Truth, not upon the pious confession of Peter, but upon the perjurions denial
of his Master.

But he gave intelligence of the proceedings of the Assembly: I never heard
before, that Synodicall decisions were arcana imperii, or opera tenebrarum, the
secrets of a Kingdom, or the works of darkness. Truth seeks no corners, nor
is impatient of discovery. Veritas nihil e^ubescit, nisi abscondi. But
intelligence was given to the adverse party: Whom mean ye, the King? or his
evil Council? A well justified Consultation fears neither: if the King be not
the defender of the Faith, why do you style him so? if he be, to whom should
injured Truth appeal, but to her chief defense and protector? But the Doctors
guiltiness of th^se crimes appeared in a letter to Oxford intercepted, which
was brought to the Committee for examinations. And had that Letter a name
subscribed? no: The true Letter had, viz. ^ which the Counterfeitor being a
mere Englishman, took for a Sheep-marke, and omitted it. But for the
substraction of two letters, he added many words and owes the Doctor nothing;
The Original (which carried his errand to Oxford) spoke nothing of the five
times voting him out of his Living at Lambeth; not a word, that He was a
constant visiter of the Kings prisoners in London, or Lambeth; recommended no
suit of his for a Bishopwrick, as the false Diurnall reports. But as the
Devil, so his Children sometimes repeat a truth, to the end they may abuse it;
This Hackney Pamphleter relates a business (though not to the purpose, yet to
his own purpose, which is to wrong the Doctor) and says, that his Barn at
Acton, was burn, by the Parliaments Soldiers, but in the 84 page he poisons it
with a Lie avouching that there was no Corn in it, and that he suffered no
considerable loss by it, whereas it appears under the hands of several able
and honest house-holders and vestry men of Acton, that his loss amounted to
the summo of 211. li. subscribed the 1 of October, Vide ce^ infra.
1643. Varlets! when your shuffling and interfering Truths are so faulty, how
damnable are your through paced Lies? This only by the way: but to return to
the purpose,

page 84.
The Doctor at the Assembly past his vote with the rest upon debate of the
Scottish Covenant, for the quite extirpation of Popery and Prelacy. To see, how
two aiming at one end, may proceed in two contrary courses; The Devil uses to
take from the Truth, this tri-obular newes-Merchant adds to it: Two traveling
contrary ways, may meet at the Antipodes. He that takes from the Truth, and
adds to the Truth, may meet in Hell as well as in their hellish intentions.

The Extirpation of Popery and Prelacy.

For the first, His resolution is a perpetual vote and his action a continual
execution.

For the second, I call the whole Assembly of Divines, some of the Peers, and
diverse of the House of Commons to witness your stupendous Lie. But the Devil
has taught you this curious point of Sophistry to argue, a male conjunctis ad
been divisa. As for the extirpation of Popery, he has acted what others have
but voted; But for the clause of prelacy, your Idols shall be judges upon what
reasons he dissented. First, at his Ordination he took an Oath to obey his
ordinary. Secondly, at his Institution and Induction he swore Canonical
obedience to the Bishop of the dioces. Thirdly, his Benefice being of my Lords
grace of Canterburies peculiar, he took an Oath to maintain the privileges
of the Sea of Canterbury.

Now how this Covenant in that particular can be consistent with the three
former oaths, or how any in the Assembly that takes it, can be guiltless of
perjury, let every good conscience judge. Besides, how is God mocked in our very
prayers, when that mouth which (as it is required and by an unrepeald Act of
Parliament commanded) every day beseeches him to send down the dew of his
blessing upon all Bishops and Curates, shall ipso facto swea^e and vote the
utter Extirpation of Bishops, whom it prays for.

Mercurius Brittan. p. 47.
It was mentioned before, who was intelligencer to speak of passages in the
Assembly, now a word more of it. That grave D I mean D. Featley, that has
correspondency with the Bishop of Armagh, confesses in his letter to him, that
he all this while dissembled with the Assembly.

How uninterrupted boldness will turn to brasse-browd im^udence.

That Letter this Mercury speaks of was surely (...) on the back of that Bull
which was lately sent from the Pope, Credat judaeus Appella. And why did not
this Mercury, to raise his Pamphlet a penny higher, Print that Letter and Bull
both together? Come, come, your own Assembly knows, you lie; and if the Cause
were not kept burning with such Oil, it would go out and stink, and your
historical credit would soon run into a Premuniri. Did not our D. long before
the being of this abused Letter openly and plainly declare himself to diverse
of this Assembly against some of their unwarrantable proceedings? Did not he
really confess his nonconcurrence, and fear his noncontinuance with them? Is
this dissembling?

Continuation Numb. 55.
D. Featley (you heard of) received a just reward for his Perfidiousnesse, and
seeming compliance with the Parliament and Assembly, that he might the better
betray all their counsels and consultatinus to them at Oxford: his livings
were bestowed upon M. White and M. Nigh. These gentlemen you may see can content
themselves, each man with a part of these livings, though the D. was not
satisfied with the whole, but solicited very importunately by his letter to the
Bishop of Armagh at Oxford to have a deanery bestowed upon him. Ab asino majore
discit minor rudere. This Intelligencer has conn'd his Lesson well, and has
got that perfectly by heart, which the other formerly had imperfectly written;
only he plays the Shimei and adds a little railing, and unless i^ be for that,
deserves but a Gentle Lash. This letter has very strange luck: mentioned by so
many and none do it the honor to print it? If it be the Original, I fear it
goes against your consciences to print a truth: why do ye not corrupt it in
the press then, and make it speak as the Oracles did, by instruction and
subornation? If to relate some (...)
passages, and to call so great, so sanctified a judgment in to aid, be
treason or prevarication, why does not your Hangman execute that history which
made him err by the example of S. Jerome, who at a Synod at Jerusalem
acquainted Damasus (then Bishop of Rome too) with some Synodicall proceedings,
requiring his judgment thereof? Had our Doctor ever taken an Oath of
All^igance or secrecy to the Assembly, his discovery might have been blameable:
But having taken that Oath to his Majesty, he had a Warrant both as a Subject,
and a Servant to discover any thing, which by consequence might be derogatory
to his Government.

But the Doctors two Livings troubled you, and I fear, more then the want of
them does him; And why not two Livings, as lawfuly as two Lectureships of as
great a value, besides a cure of Souls? Ask the Assembly, whether it be
expedient to hold two Sequestrations, for a fuller supply? some of them though
never so white, will turn red and blush. But how religiously our Doctor
behaved himself in his Livings, both Acton and Lambeth will tell you, not I.
And what Hospitality the Revenues thereof produced, Newington will inform you.
And time may tell you, whether the new Incumbents bring not the year about
with fuller purses.

But he sues for a Deanery too: How appears that? By his Letter: Hear then the
precise words of the Letter.

I understand that the Deanery of Westminster, and a Prebendary of Canterbury
are now void, and in the Kings gift: If you think meet, you may put in, in the
first place for your self, and in the second for your friend: Now the covetous
Mystery lies in the last word, friend. And you, by the spirit of Revelation
must unfold that Mystery: well, be it so: Then grant him to have the spirit of
Prophefie too, to sue so; who foreseeing a Shipwreck here, catched at a
planck to keep him from sinking.

Now having viewed his offense with one eye, cast your other upon his
punishment, and being impartial, tell me, (...), whether the proportion they
carry be Mathematical. And, to conclude, call to mind but Plato's Apology for
Socrates; or Chrystostome and Athanasius for themselves, in which there are
instances given of the best men in all ages, who notwithstanding have received
hard measure, and been condemned as D^linquents in Synods and popular
Assemblies, or JEROME of PRAGVE, that noble Confessor, and Martyr his oration
in the Synod of Constance: and laying all things together, this ^nsulter upon
the downfall of him (who has stood up so many years for the Truth) if his
Conscience be no^ feared with a hot Iron, will turn his present Gall into
future honey, and his unchristian Censure, into a Christian Commiseration.

WE whose Names are here under written, inhabitants of the Parish of Acton,
in the County of Middlesex, being requested by Doctor Daniel Featley, Parson of
the parish of Acton as aforesaid, to certify the time of burning the Barn,
wherein the Tyth-Corne lay belonging to the said Parsonage, and of the value of
it: We do upon certain Knowledge and true information certify al those
whomit may concern, that the said Barn, being full of Corn, besides three Bay
of Stabling, built by the said Doctor himself, all valued at two hundred and
eleven pounds, or thereabouts, as it was then prized by some of the
parishioners appointed to that purpose, were all burned down to the ground,
the tenth day of November last, by the Parliaments Forces then quartered in the
said Town. And we further certify that this loss fell above five weeks
after the death of M. Henry Leerewood (to whom the said parsonage had bin
farmed, and when the said parsonage was in the Doctors hands, before he had
farmed it to any other. In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our
Names the first day of October, 1643.

John Needler. Thomas Needler. Edmond Biddle. George Colle. Henry Colle. The
Mark ^ of William Wels.


THE PRINTER To The READER.
AFter I met with these grateful lines written with the silver Pen of
Theiomusus Laureatus, in defense of him, who has written and Printed so much
in defense of the Doctrine and discipline of the Church: A friend of his, since
his confinement to Petri vincula, visiting his desolate house at Lambeth, found
there those, who in Sylla the Dictators days were termed Sectores bonorum,
but now sequestrators, rifling the Room, and plundring the study and garden,
and robbing him of choycer Flowers out of the one, than Emmenes or Tulips out
of the other. Among which he culled these which I offer to thy view; and if, as
stolen waters are sweet, so stolen flowers are the sweeter, these cannot but
please thee: for they are snatched out of the Harpies talons and now steal to
the press. Accept this posie for the present, and I hope e^ long to present
thee with a Garland of the like.

SPONGIA, OR, Articles exhibited by certain Semi-Separatists indicted at
Sessions, against Daniel Featley, D. D. before the Committee for plundered
Ministers, Together with his Answer thereunto.
Tertul. Veritas nihil metuit, nisi abscondi. AFter Doctor Featley had waited
diverse weeks, upon the Committee for plundered Ministers; at the last, March
16. 1642. he was called into the Exchequer Chamber, to answer seven Articles
put in against him, when and where M. White, being in the chair, having the
said Articles before him, demanded as follows.

Did not you D. Featley in a Sermon say, that it was blasphemy and ignorance,
to speak against bowing at the Name of Jesus, and that all those that pull
down the Railes from the Communion Table, or speak against them, or oppose
the Ceremonies of the Bishops, are of the seed of the Serpent? etc.

There is no name of Bishop at all in the Articles, nor of other D. Fe^
ceremonies, then the ceremonies of the Church established by Law or Canon, but
I have read in Aristotle, that there is a fallacy called, Sophi Elen^
Fallacia a pluribus iuterrogationibus sub una, when one single answer is
expected to a double or treble interrogation. That I may not be entangled in
such a not, I shall desire you M. White, to propound the Articles distinctly,
and severally, and then I will answer them punctually. But before I hold up
s^ptemplicem clypeum, to ward off your sevenfold stroke, I am constrained to
make a motion to you that some order be taken, that I may safely wait upon this
Honorable Committee* For, animam meam in manu mea porto; I cannot go and come,
without evident peril of my life; besides, jeering, and railing at me, by
those of my accusers sect, in a most unchristian, and uncivil manner; the
grounds of my fear are these.

The next day after the bloody Fray at Lambeth, as I landed at the stairs,
there a soldier that stood Sentinel, one Alexander Bagwood holding his Musket
at my breast, charged me before diverse of the Parish, that I was he who kindled
the late fire; of which words of his I took present witness, and promised to
call him to an account for them; on the Tuesday following, one of the Soldiers
of Captain Andrew^s his Company, being asked when they meant to leave the
court of Guard at Lambeth, said, they meant not to go away, till they had made
an end of me: this Tho. Addams testifies upon ^he Do^ors life ^ught by ^e
(...).
Oath. On Wednesday being the Fast day, one of Kennigton told a Gent. my
neighbor, that she heard the soldiers spe^ke amongst themselves, that they
had missed their mark, and that they did look for me, if they could have met
with me. The Monday following, one of the Parishioners sent me word, that a
Gent. in her hearing, reported, that some of Captain Andrews his Company
said, that they had a Warrant to Plunder me.

In these regards, I humbly desire, that according to the custom of all Courts
in this case, I may have a protection both for my person, and estate, during my
attendance here.

I know no such thing as you speak of, therefore answer to (...). White.
your charge.

The D. being somewhat moved, that so necessary a motion for the safety of his
life should be so slighted, after a little pause to recollect himself, went
on in his speec^, as follows.

Hoc uno die plus vixi, quam oportuit, this is the first day in all my life,
that I ever heard Articles read against me in any Court Ecclesiastical, or
Temporal, or Committee of Parliament. For, what the Prophet Jeremy spoke in
another case; I have neither lent ^5. 10.
on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury, yet they curse me: I may truly
say in this, I never drew Articles against any, nor had any till After (...)
wa^e (...) ed for (...) Chann^ and aft^ for M. Foreb^ last of: for M: White
Dorch^ ster. Heb. (...)
now drawn against me: yet they seek not only my Living (which, I heard in
Westminster hall, was designed already for one M. Putie) but (as you hear) my
life also. But my comfort is, that the like hard measure has been offered to
the Prophets of God, and Ministers of Christ in all ages. * Nay the prince of
our salvation was consecrated through afflictions; and give me leave to
apologize for my self in the words of the blessed Martyr S. Cyprian, nec mihi
ignominiosum est pati a meis, quod passus est Christus, nec illis gloriosum
facere, quod fecit Judas. All the favor that I shall desire is but this, for
as much as all humane laws ought to veil bonnet to divine (as Joseph's
brethrens sheaves bowed to his) that you will not receive an accusation 1 Timothy
19.
against an Elder under two or three witnesses, and those not liable to just
exceptions. I beseech you to take notice of it, the Apostle says not, condemn
not an Elder, under two or three witnesses, for so no other man by the Law of
God might be, in case of life; but receive not an accusation against an Elder;
and Calvin yields a good reason for it, cur hoc singulari privilegio
presbyteros munit? respondeo, Deuteronomy. (...)
hoc esse necessarium remedium adversus hominum malignitatem: nulli enim
calumniis, and obtrectationibus magis sunt obnoxii, quam pii doctores; qui,
quamvis exactefungantur suis partibus, utneminimum quidem erratum admittant,
nunquam tamen mill reprehensiones effugiunt; atque hic est astus Satanae,
alienare hominum animos a ministris, ut doctrina paulatim veniat in contemptum.
Why does the Apostle arm Elders with this singular privilege above other men,
that no accusation may be admitted against them but under two or three
witnesses? I answer (says he) that this is a necessary remedy against the
malignity of men, for no men are more subject to calumniations, and back
bitings, then godly doctors or teachers; who though they acquit themselves
never so well in their function, that they cannot be taxed with the least
error, or fault therein: yet they can never escape a world of calumnies. And
this is the cunning of Satan, to alienate men's minds from the Ministers of God,
that so by degrees he may bring the Word of God into contempt.

As for the Articles, forex suo indicio; the contriver of them sufficiently
discovers himself; the very Articles themselves show that they were patched
together by a Tailor of two names, who is the accuser by the name of Ambrose
Glover, but brought for a witness by the name of Ambrose Andrews: he had time
enough to have stitched them better, for he confesses that he had been about
them this twelve month; yet how miserably are they botched? there is neither
method, nor order, nor coherence, nor sense in them.

In the first Article, there are two distinct Articles comprised, in the second
six, in the third five, in the fourth two, in the fifth three, and to fill up
the number; the first is repeated again in this fifth, in the sixth there are
two, in the seventh five, in which Article also there is most eloquent Non
sense; The keys taken from the Church and left in such hands (who left them?)
as have laid them by, until they became rustie: so that Sodomie, Murder,
Felony, Pillage, and Plunder, is daily committed without punishment, as if
Sodomie, Murder, etc. were ever punished by the Ecclesiastical Courts, or
power of the keys, for which all men know, men are arraigned and condemned at
the Assizes and Sessions.

Leave these speeches and answer punctually to the Articles.

In general, I answer negatively to them all, so far as they contain White.
^atley.
any offensive matter or criminal, punishable either by the Law of God, or
man, civil, Canon, municipall, or common. In particular to the first, which is.

The first Article.
He suffers new Cer^monies, as standing up at gloria patri, which many of his
Parish prastise, and preaches for bowing at the Name of Jesus; and does bow at
the Name of Jesus himself, and said, that it was blasphemy and ignorance for
any to speak against bowing at the Name of Jesus.

Answer. Standing up at gloria patri is no new Ceremony, or gesture; (...)
it has been used in Colleges, Cathedral Churches, and Chappells of Noble
men, and some Parish Churches for a long time. It is a commendable custom to
express some outward reverence in that Doxologie, wherein the Three Persons of
the most Glorious Trinity are named: yet do I not hold it a matter of
necessity but indifferency; and therefore as S. Ambrose, when he was at
Millaine, fasted on Saturday, because such was the custom there; but when he
was at Rome, fasted not, because there they had no such custom: so if I come
to a Church where such standing is used, I join with them in it, but if I come
to any other place where it is not used, I sorbear it, that I may give no
offense, either way. Howsoever the best is, my Informer charge me not with
bringing in this gesture, or pressing it, but only with suffering some of my
Parish to use it. What power have I to prohibit them? or what Law of God or man
forbids this gesture, in saying or singing, Glory be to the Father, and to
the Son, etc?

It is forbidden by the Law, in that it is not commanded. M. W^ D. Fe^


By your favor that is no good inference (such a thing is not commanded, Ergo
it is forbidden by the Law) for indifferene things are such as neither are
commanded, nor forbidden; The standing up at the Gospel, the Nicene creed, and
that of Athanasius, the sitting down in Pewes, or Galleries at Sermon, the
preaching in a high Pulpit, with Steps, Mats, Pulpit-cloth, and Cushions, and
an hour Glass, are no where commanded; will it therefore follow that they are
forbidden? To instance also in the Law of God, though it be true in matter of
substance of Religion and points of Faith or manners, and generally in all
things necessary to (...), that what soever is not commanded is forbidden, yet
in matter of circumstance, of time, place, h^bit, or gesture, or something that
belongs to the exterior acts of Gods worship only, that maxim holds not; for
example, the setting the Psalms to be sung to such ^unes, and played upon such
instruments, as are mentioned in the title of the Psalms, the keeping Fasts on
the fifth and seventh Zac. 7^ 10. 10.
month, celebrating the feasts of dedication, the reading Chapters
intermingled with Psalms, in such or such a number, or order; the lecturing on
such or such days of the week, the receiving the Communion thrice a year, or
once a month, the covering the Communion Table with a linen cloth, or silk
carpet, the standing of Godfathers and Godmothers at the font, nay to have a
font in every Church, or to use such forms in christening, marriages, and
burials, as now we use, are things not commanded by the law of God, will it
follow therefore that they are forbidden? By (...)
this reason I might argue against them, who in other Churches sit aet gloria
patri (which it seems M. White you approve of by your practice) or kneel,
neither of these gestures are commanded. Ergo they are forbidden? or they are
forbidden, in that they are not commanded.

Here one of the Members of the House of Commons being present, said, Doctor
you forget your self, you think you are in the schools, or words to the like
effect: whereupon the D. desisted from prosecuting any more that point, and
proceeded to his answer, to the bowing at the Name of Jesus.

For bowing at the Name of Jesus: Upon occasion of a Sermon preached by a punie
Divine at Lambeth in my absence, who said (...)
that Lambeth was the most superstitious place that ever he came in; for
whenever he named Jesus, they either bowed the head, or knee, or put off
their hatts, which he affirmed to be a popish innovation and Idolizing. I the
next Lords day after, at the earnest entreaty of the prime gent. of the
parish, in my Sermon apologized in this manner, both for the Canon of the
Church, and the practice of our parish. First, that bowing at the Name of Jesus
was very ignorantly termed by him an innovation: for besides the Canon in B.
Bancrofts time, confirmed by the royal authority of King James of blessed
memory, there was an Iniunction for it, 1o. Elizabethae, and the most
exquisitly learned and most Orthodox Doctor of the Reformed Church, Hieronimus
Zanchius says, it was a most ancient custom of the Christians so to do; and
before him S. Jerome, who flourished in the year of our Lord 390. in his
comment upon these words of the Prophet Esaias, to me every knee shall bow,
testifies that in his time there was mos ecclesiasticus Christo genua
flectere: etc. Secondly, that it could be no idolizing, to bow at the Name of
Jesus, for that: Idolum being derived from (...) video, is properly the object
of the eye, not of the ear: which argument God him self uses, to deter the
people from Idolatry. You heard D 12.
the voice of the words, but saw no similitude, only ye heard a voice v. 15.
16. Take heed therefore unto your selves, for ye saw no manner of similitude on
that day, lest you corrupt your selves, and make any graven Image, the
similitude of any figure. Thirdly, it is one thing to (bow to the Name of
Jesus, another thing to bow in or at the Name of Jesus, as it is one (...)
thing to kneel at the Communion Table, another thing to kneel to the
Communion Table; it is one thing, adorare ad scabellum ejus, to worship toward
his footstool, which is commanded in Scripture, another thing adorare
scabellum pedum ejus, to worship his footstool, which is flat Idolatry. To how
to the Name of Jesus, whether we mean thereby the syllables, or the sound, is
gross superstition: but to bow in, or at the Name of Ies^s is not so. Now what
the Canon prescribes and we in obedience Can
thereunto practice, is, when in the time of divine service, the Lord Jesus
shall be mentioned, to do lowly reverence to his person, test^fiing by this
outward ceremony, and gesture, our inward humility, and christian resolution,
and due acknowledgement that the Lord Jesus Christ is the true eternal Son
of God, and only Savior of the World, in whom alone all the mercies, graces,
and promises of God to mankind for this life, and the life to come, are fully
and wholly comprised. In this manner and to this end, in the time of divine
service, to bow to the person of our S^viour in or at his Name Jesus, I said,
was so far from being an Idolatrous ceremony, that to affirm it to be Idolatry
in this sense, was no better then blasphemy, which I proved by this Syllogism.

Whosoever makes Christ an Idol is a Blasphemer.

But he that says, it is Idolatry to bow to Christ's Person in or at his name
Jesus, makes Christ an Idol;

Ergo he that says that bowing to the person of Christ in or at his name Jesus
is Idolizing, is a Blasphemer;

Howsoever, say I had said (which I utterly deny) that it was ignorance and
blasphemy to speak against bowing at the Name of Jesus, the words may very
well be justified. M. (...)


What! will you maintain, that it is ignorance and blasphemy to speak
against bowing at the Name of Jesus? I will maintain it, for thus I frame my
argument. ^y.


To speak against the text of the Holy Ghost is ignorance, and blasphemy.

But bowing in or at the Name of Iosus, is the text of the Holy Ghost. Phil. 2.
10. Ergo speaking against the bowing in or at the Name of Jesus, is ignorance,
and blasphemy.

It is true; that there is some question among learned Divines, concerning the
meaning of the Text, whether it be literal or figurative, whether by bowing we
ought to understand corporal and external bowing of the knee, or inward
bowing of the heart. Et adhuc subjudice lis est.


But all agree in this; that some bowing in or at the Name of Jesus, is here
both warranted and commanded, to speak then against it simply and absolutely,
without any distinction of meaning, or M. was (...)
manner of bowing, is not only gross ignorance, but direct blasphemy against
the divinely inspired text of Scripture. ^d


The second Article.
Whereas the Communion Table did stand in the middle of the Chancell, but is
new removed and is set at the East end of the Chancell, and three ways
compassed about with Railes, the said Table standing diverse steps high, and he
boweth toward the East end of the Chancell: he likewise preaches for the
ceremonies, and calls them innocent ceremonies, and calls the Surplice a
spotless garment, and refuses to give the Sacrament to such as will not come
up and kneel at the Railes.

Answer. For the Communion Table, I never gave order for the (...).
placing or displacing it, it stands as it did when I came first to the
Parish. Only once M. Woodward, when he was Churchwarden, about 20. years
ago, brought it down to the middle of the Chancell, and compassed it about
with a most decent and useful frame at his own charge but the parishioners
(finding the standing of it there to be very inconvenient, partly because it
stopped up the passage from Lees Isle to Hawards Chapel, partly because it
debarred 30. or 40. at least from hearing the Preacher) with public consent
removed it to the place where it first stood time out of mind, and is the
fittest place for it to stand in, that the communicants may best both hear and
see the Minister at the Communion.

For the steps in the Chancell, at a public meeting of all the (...)
parish, it was proved that the Chancell had for above 60. years such an
ascent as now it has, and that by reason of store of corpses lately interred
there, it could not be levelled without great wrong to the dead, and danger to
the living from the stench.

For the frame about the Communion Table. It was made for 3
four reasons especially, 1. That we might come as near as might be to the
example of Christ and his Apostles, who at the first institution of the
Sacrament received it about a table, 2. that the communicants might according
to the Rubric draw near to the holy table, 3. That the Communions might be
with more facility and decent order celebrated and in more convenient time
finished then before they could be, 4. That irreverent abuses might be
prevented, as the coming in of dogs, catching at the consecrated elements, and
ill manner'd peoplesthrowing their hats and cloaks, and sitting upon it. In
these regards, when, upon the receipt of an order from the house of Common
against innovations, I assembled the whole parish together to put in execution
that order, and asked them concerning this frame, they cried all with one
consent, it is no innovation, let it stand, let it stand.

For bowing toward the East. If they mean thereby bowing toward 4
the Communion Table, at coming into the Church, and going out, though some
men of good account in the Church both approve, and use it, yet neither I, nor
my Curate ever do so. But true it is that, as my pew is made, I kneel toward
the East, as in the pulpit I do toward the North, and at the Communion Table
toward the South, but without any manner of superstition; some way I must bow,
and I understand not but that it is as lawful to bow or kneel toward the
East, after the manner of all christians in the primitive Church, as well as
toward the West after the manner of the Jews, ^o it be not done with any
opinion of holiness, or devotion to any part of the heaven, but in honor to
him who made heaven and earth.

For the ceremonies. According to an order made by the House of ^eeres, I have
(as my text led me) sometimes preached for such (...).
decent ceremonies as are established by law, and commanded to be used in the
Rubric of the book of Common Prayer: but for any new popish ceremonies I have
mainly opposed them, and could never be brought, neither by persuasions, nor by
threats, nor by presentiments, ^or citations, from the chancellor of Winton, or
Archdeacon of Surry, or his official to turn the Communion Table Altar-wise.
Nay I preached a Sermon professedly against such changing it, or calling it by
the Name of an Altar.

For the Surplice. I said that it was a decent vest, and had been used 6.
many years before popery crept into the Church or there was a whore of
Babylon, and therefore ought not to be termed her smock.

For refusing to give the Communion. If I had repelled any from the Communion
who refuse to kneel at the receiving that holy 7.
Sacrament, I conceive, with submission to better judgments, that the Rubric
of the book of Common Prayer est^blished by law would bear me out in it,
where we find these formal words, the minister shall deliver the Communion to
the people in their hands kneeling. Yet the truth is, I never repelled any for
not kneeling: only I remember that a prachant youth^ a prentise to Ambrose
Andrews coming to the Railes refused to kneel and when I admonished him
thereof that he should not give scandal to the communicants who were all upon
their knees, but conform himself to the humble gesture prescribed by the
Church, and he notwithstanding would not so much as bow a knee, I passed him
for the present: but when afterward he presented himself again at the same
communion, and I saw tears in his eyes, I came to him and demanded of him
whether he came prepared, and refused to kneel merely upon scruple of
conscience, and when he seriously affirmed that he did so, I gave him the
communion, and wished him to come to me the next day to take away his scruples:
and when he ca^e, because Andrews his wife had said before many, that this
apprentice of hers could make a better Sermon then I; I examined him in points
of Catechism, and sound him tardy and ignorant enough.

The third Article.
He preaches for Organs, showing how necessary they are to be in Churches, and
has preached against prayer ex tempore, and says of such praying, whereas
such were never in, so they are ever out; and the said Doctor preaches but
seld^ ne to his people, having two great livings, yet he pressed hard for 2 s.
9 d. in the pound of his parishioners, until it came near the commencing of a
suit at law to prevent him.

Answ. For Organs. I remember that commenting upon that text (...)
of the Apostle, Col. 3. 16. admonish^ng one another in Psalms and hymns and
spiritual songs, I said that some noted upon the word Psalmoi derived from
(...) tango to touch, that psalms properly signified such songs as were made
to be sung, and played upon the lute, harp, or some such like instrument: and
hereupon inferred the lawful use of isntrumental music, vhich though I
conceived to be no very strong argument, becaused rawne from a mere
etymology: yet for the doctrine it self, I held it very sound and good, that
it is lawful to proise God as well with isntrumental as vocal music. And
for Organs in particular, I said they were not to be accounted popish, for S.
Ambrose and S. Austine commended the use of them in the Church in their time,
and at this day the protestants use them both in the low Countries, and in
England; and for the Pope he has none in his Chapel: yet his Majesty has in
his, as his predecessors had before him. Howsoever I am sure that no man can
testify that ever I undertook to show how necessary Organs be; I do not hold
them necessary, but very lawful, and of good use both in the Kings Chapel,
Cathedral Chutches, Colleges, and elsewhere.

The law forbids them, for the Act of Parliament forbids M. W^
any to use any other form, or manner of Prayer, Service, or Sacraments; then
is there expressed.

I deny your argument, and my reason is, an Organ is no manner ^atley.
or form of singing, or service, but a mere instrument wherewith we stir up
our affections, the more to praise God, and sing more tunable, and
delightfully. As a sword is no form or manner of fighting, a tool is no form
or manner of working, a knife is no form or manner of cutting: so neither is
an Organ, Lute, or Harp, any form or manner of singing, or praising God, but
an instrument only, wherewith we pray or praise, or sing more melodiously
White -plus- the sedtime.
and gracefully; and since it is evident, that no Organ or other musical
instruments are any types of Christ, or parts of the abrogated Law of Moses: I
am yet to learn, why we may not as lawfully use Organs in our Churches, as
King David used them in the Temple; 150. 34
Praise God with the sound of the Trumpet, praise him with the Psal^ery and
Harp, praise him with the Timbrell and Pipe, praise him with the stringed (...)
instruments and Organs.

For praying ex tempore. I never condemned it absolutely, but 2, (...)
contrariwise when I preached at Lambeth, upon these words of the Apostle, The
spirit makes intercession withsighes and groans which cannot be expressed. I
much pressed the use thereof, especially when according to our Saviors
precept, we retire into our closets, and pray to our Father in secret; but I
found fault with some careless preachers in our days, who came into the
Pulpit at public Fasts, and presumed without any premeditation to pray many
hours ex tempore, in which their prayers they used much Battologie and vain
repetitions against the express commandment of our Savior, and excluded his
prayer, which is the perfect pattern of all prayer. The words of my Sermon
transc^ibed verbatim, are these. They expunge the Lords prayer, and do not at
all rehearse before or after it their own, how long soever they make them.
Whereas the Reformed Churches generally conclude their prayers, before Sermon
with the Lords prayer, partly in opposition to Papists, who close up their
devotions with an Ave Maria, partly to supply all the defects and imperfections
of their own these leave out that sanctified form of prayer, in which, it
being the quintessence of all prayer, one drop is more worth, and has in it
more virtue, being powered out in Faith, then an Ocean of their conceived
abortive prayers, in which they are never out, because indeed never in, neither
can they easily make an end, because they never knew how to begin.

For my seldom preaching. Besides ten distinct books, and some of them of no
small volumne, which I have published in the defense of the Orthodox Protest^nt
Religion, against Atheists, Papists, and Arminians, I have been a constant
preacher in England, and in France, for these 32 years at least. This last
year I have preached sometimes twice and sometimes thrice in a week, though
not so often at Lambeth as I used to do, partly by reason of my attendance two
months at Court, by command of the then Lord Chamberlain the Earl of Essex,
partly in reg^rd of a double task recommended to me, from some Members of the
Honorable House of Commons: the former writing annot^tions upon all S. Paul's
Epistles, the latter, an answer to a treatise of a Popish Priest, Entitled, A
safeguard from Shipwreck; the former ready for the Press; the latter Printed
with the approbation of the House. Only this is true, that I have very seldom
or never preached at Lambeth Church this y^are in their hearing; for five of
them have not been at Lambeth Church at divine prayer these 9 mon^ths, for
which their delinquency, I humbly desire that according to the To mot^ Wh^ tur^
dea
Statute they may pay their ^2d to the poor, for every Sunday and Holyday they
have been absent from their Parish Church.

For my two great Li^ings. They were I confess good Livings, if I might have
my (...): but f^rst for rent of houses, and the tenth part of ^he clear gains
of Merchants and Artificers (according to the Statute of K Edward the sixth) I
never received a penny, and for the land in the Parish, whereof there was wont
formerly to be 1000 acres in tillage; t^ere are now not above 120, the
Parishioners turning their a rabble land (the tenth where of was worth at least
4s per acre) into pasture for cow-keeping, for which I receive according to the
custom but 4d per acre, yet out of these I pay to the King and my Curat^, and
other charg^s, 100 l per annum.

For 2s 9 per pound. I never demanded it of any man, nor receive any more from
them who live in the greatest, and fairest houses of Lambeth (and have not land
there) then two pence for their oblation at Easter; so little does the food of
their souls stand them in. Howbeit thus much truth is in the Article, that
when the Minsters and Ci^izens of London referred the great difference between
them concerning Rent of houses to the ^rbitration of his Majesty, and a
proposition was made to all the Suburbs and parts ad oyning, that they should
likewise submit all controversies concerning their tithes to his Majesty, for
the preventing of litigious suits as well in spiritual Courts, as at common
^aw. I being sent to, appeared with the rest, and under my h^nd and seal bound
my self to stand to his Majesti^s Order: but the p^rishioners by the advice of
M. Holbourne, refused to submit to the sa n^, and so nothing was done.

The fourth Article.
The said Doctor in a Sermon preached the 25 of July, 1641, said, that all
those that pull down the Raile^ from the Communion Table, or speak against
the^, and oppose the ceremonies of the Church, are of the seed of the Serpent,
and enemies to God.

Answ. I said no such thing, but describing the seed of the Serpent, I said,
they were his seed, who did the works of the Devil, as our Savior conclude^h
them to be the children of Abraham, who do the works of Abraham: now the
works of the Devil are all manner of works of iniquity, impuritie, or
impiety: iniquity, as exaction, extortion, opp^ession, sacrisedge, etc.
impurity, as whoredom, adultery, incest, etc of impiety, as profaning the
Lords (...), and his Sanctuary, breaking into Churches, and without any
authority from the lawful Magistrate, plucking up P^wes and Railes, and pulli^
down Organs, and defacing all the Ornaments of the Church, and Monuments of
the dead. And for this just reproof of outrages committed in the Church, I
have good warrant, both from the Law of God, and an Ordinance of both Houses of
Parliament. The words here alleged by the accuser, I never spoke in terminis,
prout j^cent: yet, if their testimonies, though not upon Oath, may bear down
my bare negation, let them stand as they do, there is nothing in them, but may
very well be defended. For I speak not of any Popish Ceremonies, but of such
Ceremonies as are established by law in our Church, and are no way repugnant to
the word of God; those who not ignorantly, but ^ilfully oppose such rires and
Ceremonies, and continue in their opposition to the true Church of God, they
are the seed of the Serpent and enemies to God. For Christ commands us to
hold them for heathens and publicans, who refuse to hear the Mat. 17, Lu. 1^
Church, and he says, He who hears you, hears me, and he who hears me,
hears him that sent me: and the Apostle in the Epistle to the Hebrew^s, Obey
them that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for 13. (...)
they watch for your souls as they that must give account, that they may do
it with joy and not with grief, for that is unprofitable for you.

The fifth Article.
The Doctor said in a Sermon, that bowing at the Name of Jesus was used, till
Cartwright that Arch-heretick and those that followed him opposed it, but Q.
Eliz^beth crushed Marprelates brood, and put Penry to death, and Udall in
prison till he dyed: and because they would not bow their knees, she bowed
their backs in the Starchamber. And further said, that the State had sa^e long
and done nothing, but unless something be done, we are all undone; a Foul
that sits long and does not hatch, her eggs are addle; and a woman always
conceiving and never bringing forth, what comfort can she be to her husband?

Answ. Concerning Cartwright, and Penry, etc. and the contents of this whole
Article, they are arrows shot at random, no time or place is expressed where
any such Sermon should be preached by me: and therefore I conceive, under
favor of this Honorable Court, that I am not bound to answer them. But I
would willingly hear from my accusers, what was the Text upon which I
delivered this doctrine, how I divided it, and from what branch or part I made
any such inferences, or uses: if they cannot show this, as I know they cannot
it will evidently appear that these men came to Church, not as Bees to gather
honey, but, as spiders, to suck some juice, which they might turn to poison.

Yet I will not deny, that in some sermon it is possible, I might inveigh
against Cartwright, and Martine Marprelate, and Penry, that Arch-schismaticke,
and Barrow, and some others of their sect, whereof some were deservedly
censured in the Starchamber, and others sentenced to death.

Have you any more to say to this passage? ^te.


Nothing, but that to my best remembrance I used not the word ^ley.
Arch-hereticke, but Arch schismaticke; and for the rest, I never heard it till
now to be criminal, to allege a true story or narration, out of the life of
Q. Elizabeth, and the Chronicles of England.

Here one of the Committee said, but does the Chronicler of England, or the
Writer of the life of Q. Elizabeth, say, that she bowed down their ob^n: (...)
^r, and ^udg sus^y of ^f the ^rs ^s. ^tley.
backs?

He does not say Q. Elizabeth bowed down their backs, but he says, that she
by the Lords of the Starchamber fined them, and imprisoned some of them; and
that by her Judges she condemned Penry and Barrow to death. I spoke therefore
within compass, when I said she bowed down their backs. But whereas it is
objected that I should say the State sat long and had done nothing, it is as
far from truth as common sense; I never uttered any such words, I have by me
the copy of that Sermon, wherein the similitudes of a Foul sitting and never
hatching, and of a woman conceiving and never bringing forth, are to be seen
and read, but nothing that tends that way. The doctrine was general, that
laws served to little purpose without execution, or good intentions (...)
actions, for acta laudantur, and omnis laus virtutis est in action, the
particular application to the State was not mine, but theirs; and if by the
State they meant the Parliament, they deserve the just censure thereof. The
formal words in that Sermon transcribed out of the Original are these: Dictum
Sexti Pompeii, non acta laudantur, if a Hen sits and never hatch, or a woman
be ever breeding and never bring forth, what profit is by the one, or comfort
from the other? Habemus senatus consultum sicut gladium in vagina reconditum,
we have good Laws against Recusants, Brownists, Drunkards, etc. but these Laws
are like a sword locked fast in the scabbard, the Magistrate needs will or
strength to draw it out; execution is the life of the Law, if something be not
done, we are all undone. Howsoever date and non concesso, if one witness in
the affirmative mustsway more then a hundred in the negative, who yet were
present at the sermon, and heard all passages, and remember those very
similitudes of a Hen, and of a woman, and yet not these of the State sitting
long, let it be so. I confidently affirm, that there is no malignity or
offensive matter in the speech, if it betaken with the antecedents and
consequents; for Sextus Pompeius would very feign have had that very act done,
which he spoke of to the Pylot, and a Hen that sits upon her eggs would
hatch them, if it were in her power; and the cause why they come to no good, is
in the eggs, because they are addle, not in the Hen; and questionless a woman
in travail striveth what she is able, and would with all the veins in her
heart be delivered if she could possibly by any means: therefore if I had
spoken those words (which I never did) for neither I, nor any other man, to my
knowledge, calls the Parliament the State, but the assembly of the three
estates) the meaning in that place could be no other then this, that by reason
of the great distractions in the Kingdom, and divisions between the Members
of both Houses, though they had sat long and desired nothing more then to
settle Church and Commonwealth in Peace: yet little hitherto could be done.

The sixth Article.
When the Doctor was demanded what moneys he would give or lend to the King or
Parliament, he used delays in giving an answer, and at last would do nothing;
and further, being demanded by one of his Parish whether it were good to lend;
he answered him, it was not safe for him to give or lend.

Answ. I never denied to give or lend to the King and Parliament, (...)
but it is true, that seeing contrary commands, both published in Print from
His Majesty and the high Court of Parliament; I desired at the first that the
Collectors would repair to the Knights, Ladies, and others of the chief rank
of the Parish, and show me what they gave or lent, which they refused to do:
but when they came a second time unto me, I appointed them to meet me at the
Vestry the Tuesday following, and there I would resolve them, but they never
came unto me, yet certified that I denied to give or lend, and would have
certified also that I dissuaded others; but M. Clay, one of the Collectors,
struck that clause out, saying, there was no reason to certify that as from
me, which they never heard me speak, but only another man, was said, could
affirm as much. To the accusation it self, of not lending money, my answer
is, that when Colonel Urrey was at Action, he lay in my Parsonage house, and
his Soldiers not content with such Corn and H^y as they received from my
Farmer at their own price, demanded the keys of the great Barn, and had them
in their hands for four days; in which time, through the carelessenesse of
one of the Soldiers that lay in the Barn, (if not purposely) the stack of
Corn was set on fire, and the whole B^rne and two stables were burned down to
the ground, the loss thereof estimated by diverse of the Parishioners, was 211
pound at the least. Besides this, when the maimed Soldiers were placed in the
Savoy, my whole stipend was laid out toward the buying of beds for them. In
which consideration, I conceive that this honorable Committee will hold me
excused from any further gift or loan, I being not presently furnished with
money, and having no temporal Living, nor Ecclesiastical Dignity, Deanery,
Archdeaconry, or Prebend.

For that one of the Parish, whom they affirmed I dissuaded 2. (...)
from lending to the King and Parliament, I desire that he may be called face
to face, in the mean while I offer this Certificate under his own hand.

Meeting D. Featley about S. Ma^garets Hill, by and by after M. White, M. Goad,
and some others, were appointed for Lambeth Parish, to see what the Inhabitants
would do upon the Propositions; after other discourse, I demanded of D.
Featley what he thought of it, he replied, that he thought the business would
speed the worse, because they had made choice of such men as were not beloved
in our Parish, nor came to our Church: But whereas it is reported, that D.
Feately should dissuade me, or any other to my knowledge, it is falsely
suggested, for beyond my ability I freely lent 38 li.

per me Neariah Mormay.

The seventh Article.
The said D. said in a Sermon, the 4. December, 1642. are not these resisting
times, wherein authority is trampled upon, Gods true Ministers despised, all
Laws neglected and contemned, the keys taken from the Church, and left them
in such hands as have laid them by until they become rustie and of no use, so
that Sacrilege, Wheredome, Sodomie, Murder, Felony, Pillage, Plunder (and
what not?) i^ daily committed without punishment and is not the whole tenure of
the Gospel against that, which is preached almost in every Pulpit in London,
who do nothing but cry Arm, Arm; Fight, Fight, Blood, Blood, Battle, Battle,
Kill, Kill, and they pretend they fight for Religion, and the privileges of
Parliament, and the right of the Subject; but he said, the wise have lost their
wisdom, and the physician his kill, and the remedy is worse then the disease.

Answ. To speak nothing of the incoherent Nonsense in this Article, where it
is said, the keys were taken from the Church, and (...). Featly.
left them in such hands as have laid them by: I say, that none of the
particulars alleged in this Article are found in that Sermon; true it is, that
in another Sermon preached at a Fast, I inveighed against the great disorders
committed in the Church and Commonwealth, by such. who made advantage of the
present distractions, promising themselves impunity by reason that the keys of
the Church now grew rustie through disuse, and the temporal sword was
otherwise employed. All that I spoke in the Sermon here objected was this.
There is no Ecclesiastical Discipline at all exercised for Lay^mens usurping
upon the Priests function, and handicrafts men's handling the word with their
black and impure hands, for preaching Heretical, Schismatic, and
blasphemous Doctrine, for Adultery, Incest, and filthiness not to be named, no
punishment of Ecclesiastical censure now inflicted: And the tenure of the
Gospel runs thus, fear God and honor the King, speak not evil of the Ruler
of Gods people, curse him not, no not so much as in thy thought; whereas they
publicly in the greatest assemblies speak evil of dignities, and slander the
footsteps of the Lords anointed, and compare our Religious and most gracious
Sovereign, my Master,

Quo nihil immensus mitius orbis habet, to wicked Tyrants and persecuters of
Gods Saints. The Scripture every where exhorts us to peace and reconciliation,
Revenge not your selves, but give place unto wrath, for vengeance is mine, I
will repay it says the Lord; render to no man evil for evil, nor rebuke for
rebuke: be not overcome of evil, but overcome evil with good: seek peace and
ensue it, let righteousness and peace kiss each other, O pray for the peace
of Jerusalem, they shall prosper that love it: if it be possible have peace
with all men: and blessed are the peacemakers, for they shall see God: and
follow after peace and holiness, without which no man shall see God: but their
preaching is nothing but horrentia martis arma, Arm, Arm, Kill, Kill, thunder
with the Cannon, Plunder, etc, And for the last words pretended to be spoken by
me in that Sermon, viz. the wise have lost their wisdom, and the physician
his skill, and the remedy is worse then the disease, they are very unfaithfully
related, for I uttered them not positively, but suppositively, and divisim not
conjunctim. The passage transcribed verbatim out of the original is this.
Though diverse remedies have been applied to the maladies above mentioned, yet
the remedies have hitherto proved, in the event, worse then the diseases; an
evident argument that either the wise physicians fail in their skill, or the
malady is grown incurable, or God gives no blessing to their method of curing.

Concerning the witnesses, and the just exceptions to be taken against them,
let the testimony under the hand of the Clerk of the peace, and the
certificate of the Parish, under the hands of the Churchwardens and Vestry be
read; All which I humbly submit to the wisdom and justice of this Honorable
Committee, preferring a like petition to that which the Roman Orator tendered
for poor Roscius Amerina, that you would be pleased to afford this cause so
noble, gracious and equitable a hearing; that my adversaries who daily
associate themselves with those soldiers, against whom I have strong
presumptions, that they seek not only to deprive me of my Living, but my
life, may never have cause to glory, Eum, quem militum gladiis non potuerunt,
vestris sententiis jugulasse.

At the next sitting of the Committee on Thursday last being the 23 of this
instant month of March, 1642. M. White, whether he thought the other Articles
frivolous and of no con sequence at all, or whether he and the Committee rested
satisfied with the answers formerly given, it is not certainly known, but on
this day he pretermitted diverse of them, instanced only in a branch of the
first, and of the fourth, and two of the fifth, and one of the sixth, and two of
the seventh; and because the D. denied them all, he called in witnesses to
prove them, and required the D. to take legal exceptions against them, if he
had any. To prove that the D. should say it was ignorance and blasphemy to
speak against the bowing at the Name of Jesus; John Goad (and Ambrose
Andrews, were produced: to prove that he said in a sermon the 25 of July 1641,
that all that pull down Railes and oppose the ceremonies of the Church, are the
seed of the Serpent, Edward Searles, and Edmond Rayner, a shipwright, Because
he said, he was as much the Lords anointed as the King.
commonly called the ancient King, were produced: to prove that he called
Cartwright an arch Heretic, and that the state had sat long and done
nothing, and that the keys were taken from the Church, and laid in such hands
as laid them by till they became rusty, and that he inveighed against the
London Preachers, who do nothing but cry arm, arm, fight, fight, etc. Thomas
Sharp and John Clerk were produced, who also both testified to the first
article concerning bowing at the Name of Jesus. Lastly, to the sixth article
only M. Neariah Mormay was produced.

When the witnesses appeared, the D. first proposed some interrogatories to
them, and after took exceptions against them, both in general, and
particular. The interrogatories he propounded to them, by M. White, were these;
First, at what time the Sermon was preached, which is mentioned in the first
Article, and likewise when the Sermon was preached that is mentioned in the
fifth Article. Item, upon what text such sermons were preached, and what they
remembered else in those sermons, to which they all could answer nothing.
Whereupon the D. desired that the Committee would give no credit to such loose
and indefinite testimonies, especially against the original sermons written in
his book, from which, it is well known, he never used to vary. This
authentical original wherein there was no blot, scratch, or rasure in the
places, to which the Articles had reference, the D. exhibited; but M. White
would not look upon it, though in other Courts, and namely the high Commission
and Star Chamber, and Council table, where 'Sermons have been questioned, the
undisproved original has been always preferred before broken notes taken by
ignorant and illiterate men. The exceptions he took against the witnesses in
general, were, that competent witnesses, especially against an ecclesiastial
person and D. of Divinity ought to be men of good rank and quality, at least
without any taint or brand on them, such as are free from all malevolent
affections to their pastors: for the rules of the law concerning witnesses to
be admitted are these: In test attendenda, status, dignitas, fidei puritas, et
morum gravitas; item cujus conditionis, cujus opinionis fuerit, et ne forte
aliquis contra praefatum pastorem inimicitias habuerit: Item testes absque ulla
infamia aut suspitione aut manifesta macula esse debent. That the witnesses
here produced are not so qualified, I desire the certificate of the vestry,
under their hands (which I have here to show, and there are diverse of the said
Vestry here present to make it good) may be read; but M. White said, he would
take no papers (yet he took both the Articles, and other notes, and
informations against the D. from his adversaries) nor would permit the D. to
read it, The certificate was as follows: we the parishioners of the parish of
Lambeth, do certify that John Goad, Ambrose Andrews, alias Glover, Edward
Searles, and Westmall Burrell, of the said parish of Lambeth, are disaffected
persons to the discipline and liturgy of the Church of England established by
Act of Parliament, have openly depraved the book of Common Prayer, some of
them do not come to the Church at all and stand indicted as delinquents at
Sessions and Assizes, and that they are accounted turbulent persons, and sowers
of strise and contention.

This certificate being refused, the D. required that the record he had from
the Sessions might be read and considered of; this, after M. Harper the Church
warden had testified before the Committee, that it was subscribed by the hand
of the Clerk of the Peace, and that he himself saw him write it, was admitted
for an evidence: the record follows.

At the general quarter sessions of this year, for the county of Surry,
holden at Gilford, on Tuesday next after the feast of the translation of Thomas
the Martyr in the 18 year of his Majesty's reign that now is. John Goad of
Lambeth, Ambrose Andrews of the same, Edward Searles of the same and John
Hopkins of the same, were by the Jury of the high Constables of the County
indicted for not repairing to the parish church of Lambeth, to hear divine
service and the common prayers of the Church, by the space of 12 sundays, but
did voluntarily and obstinately absent themselves from the same, contrary to
the statute in that case provided.

Ita testor Tho. Foster, clericus pacis Com. Sur.

In particular, I except against Io. Goad. That he is a man who stands indicted
at the Sessions, ex record, supr. 1.


That he has spoken often, as he cannot deny, much in derogation of the book
of Common Prayer, as namely, against diverse 2.
passages in the Letany, the cross in baptism, and the form of absolution in
the visitation of the sick.

That he is a breaker of the Sabbath himself, and causes his servants to
work upon that day, as he did on the 28 of 3.
November last. To the former two exceptions, Goad could answer nothing; but to
the last, he said, it was in case only of necessity; but the D replied it was
mere covetousness, and no necessity at all, as his neighbor Andrew Bartlet
an ancient vestry man would testify against him, whom the D. earnestly desired
to be called in, he being ready and waiting in the next room, but he could not
obtain it of M. White to have him called.

Item against Ambrose Andrews.

That he stands indicted as is abovesaid. 1.


That he likewise, as Goad, has spoken much in derogation of 2.
the Common Prayer book, and has not come to the prayers and Sacrament at
Lambeth these nine months at least, as the Reader, Clerk, and Sexton, and
Churchwardens also were ready to testify,

That whilst he came to Church (as he did formerly) he frequently 3.
disturbed the Preacher, he usually talked and laughed in the Sermon, jeering
at the Minister, and once when the D. himself preached, spoke aloud in his
sermon, saying; It is time thou had done already, and other such contemptuous
and disgraceful words; for which by the statute 10. Mariae Sess. 2. he is, if
it be proved against him by two witnesses, to be committed without bail or
mainprise to the Goal; the two witnesses, said the D. are here present to
testify it, Richard Hook, and William Chapman. but M. White would not have
them called in.

That when his wife had said before one of the neighbors, that 4.
at Lambeth Church they had nothing but pottage, and that they must go to
London for rostemeat, and that the Church was no better then a barn or stable;
and that neighbor reproved her for it, her husband, the said Ambrose Andrews,
said, he would justify and maintain what his wife had said.

Item, against Edward Searles.

That he stands indicted at the Sessions: ut supra. 1.


That he confessed that the cause of their preferring Articles 2.
against D. Featley, was to stay the prosecution of a bill against him the said
Searles at Sessions, and said, that if the D. would take off the indictment,
the articles against the D. should soon be with-drawne: this is testified by
Tho. Pibus and another.

That this Searles is a Blasphemer of the holy Scripture; say- 3.
(...)

nancy against the Parliament, and the proceedings thereof; saying openly in
his preaching, that our State had sat long and done nothing, comparing themto
a Foul that sits long and hatcheth not, whose eggs be addle, and to a woman
that always conceives and never brings forth, who can be no comfort to her
husband; and has not only not given or lent to the present necessary
preservation of the Kingdom, but declared to others that it is not safe to
give or lend to the Parliament, and has openly preached that these are
resisting times, and that the keys are taken from the Church, and left in such
hands as have laid them by till they be rustie, and that the whole tenure of
the Gospel is against that which is preached commonly in London, where Arm,
Arm, Blood, Blood, Fight, Fight, is commonly preached; and they pretend they
fight for Religion, and privilege of Parliament, and the liberty of the
Subjects, but the wife have lost their wisdom, and the physician his skill,
and the cure is worse than the disease. All which the Commons in Parliament
assembled, taking into consideration, for the provision of a Godly, Learned,
and Orthodox Divine for the said Parish, and for fit maintenance for such an
one, do Order, that the said Church and the profits thereof, be forthwith
Sequestered, etc.

Die Martis, II Iulii, 1643. The Order for sequestring the Parsonage of Lambeth
from D. Featley, being put to the question; It was resolved negatively. H.
Elsinge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Notwithstanding this resolution of the house of Commons, in justification of
D. F. a substitute of M. Whites of Dor^hester, who bears his character in his
name, stretched his Chevarel conscience so far, that to gratify some
Schismatic Separatists at Lambeth, read a Paper upon the 9. of November
last, in the Parish Church of Lambeth on the Lords day, in which D. F. is
charged with the Articles above mentioned, formally in terminis (which were
rejected by the house of Commons, as partly idle and frivolous, partly false
and scandalous, and the D. cleared and acquitted of them all) and they made the
ground of the sentence of Sequestration, pronounced against him September 29.
Now since a Judge cannot justly pronounce different sentences, and give diverse
judgments upon the self same evidence, neither is it possible after a cause
is fully informed and sentenced, that the same party should be both guilty, and
not guilty of the same Delinquencies numero: And forasmuch as the sentence
above mentioned, whereby the D. is cleared, acquitted, and absolved, is upon
Record, and may be seen by any who shall search for it, in the authentical
Register of the Acts of the house of Commons: It follows necessarily and
unavoydably, that D. F. not only remains still Rector of Lambeth (as he is
styled in the very form of Sequestration) but also stands rectus in curia.
As for the Letter to the Primate of Armagh, intercepted, wherewith alone he is
charged in another Declaration, it is answered above: It was no Letter but an
unsealed note drawn from D. F. by a wile, See the Gentle Lash.
it discovers no secrets at all, nor lays any imputation upon the Assembly or
Parliament, and is so far from containing any offensive matter, or subject to
any just exception or censure; that the close Committee who exactly perused it,
and took a Copy of it, sent the true original to the Primate of Armagh at
Oxon, who has it in his keeping.

The Doctors Manifesto and CHALLENGE.
Whereas a false and scandalous report is bruited by the Semi-separatists and
Anabaptists, and readily entertained by diverse Zelots of the new Reformation;
that I, who have preached and printed so much against Popery heretofore, now in
my old days being ready to leave this world, have fallen away from my holy
profession, and am in heart a Papist, there being found very many popish books
in my study. And because I have learned from the mouth of S. ^erome, that
though other wrongs may be put up and answered with silence, committing the
revenge thereof to the righteous Judge, injustissime judicato justissime
judicaturo: yet, that in suspitione haereseos r^eminem oportet silere, that no
man ought to be silent when he is charged with Heresy. I have thought fit to
make known to all whom it may concern, that being chosen Provost of Chelsey
College, I have under the broad Seal of England, a Warrant to buy, have, and
keep, all manner of popish books, and that I never bought or kept any of
them, but to this end and purpose, the better to inform my self to refute
them; and for my judgment and resolution in point of Religion. I profess
before God and his holy Angels, and the whole world, that what I have
heretofore preached, written, and Printed, against the errors, heresies,
Idolatry, and manifold superstitions of the Romish church, is the truth of God,
and that I am most ready and willing, if I be called thereunto, to sign and
seal it with my blood.

And whereas I am certainly informed, that diverse Lecturers and Preachers in
London and the Suburbs, who have entered upon the labors of many worthy
Divines, and reaped their harvest, do in their own Pulpits, after a most
insolent manner, insult upon them; demanding, where are they now that dare
stand up in defend of Church Hierarchy or book of Common Prayer, or any may
oppose or impugn the new intended Reformation, both in doctrine and discipline
of the Church of England? I do here protest, that I do and will maintain by
disputation or writing, against any of them, these three conclusions.

First, that the Articles of Religion, agreed upon in the year 1.
of our Lord, 1562. by both houses of Convocation, and ratified by Q.
Elizabeth, need no alteration at all, but only an Orthodox explication in some
ambiguous phrases, and a vindication against false aspersions.

Secondly, that the Discipline of the Church of England, established 2.
by many laws and Acts of Parliament; that is, the government by Bishops
(removing all late innovations and abuses in the execution thereof) is
agreeable to Gods Word, and a truly, ancient, and Apostolical Institution.

Thirdly, that there ought to be a set form of public prayer, ^3
and that the book of Common Prayer (the Calendar being reformed, in point of
Apochryphill Saints and Chapters, some Rubricks explained, and some expressions
revised, and the whole correctly Printed, with all the Psalms, Chapters, and
allegations out of the old and new Testament, according to the last
translation) is the most complete, perfect, and exact Liturgy now extant in
the Christian world.

DANIEL FEATLEY.

FINIS.

