Die Sabbathi, 22. October. 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons House of Parliament: That none other
besides Mr. Nicholas Bourne Stationer, or whom he shall appoint, shall upon any
pretense whatsoever, presume to Print the Book called, A Safeguard from
Shipwreck, to a Prudent Catholic, with Animadversions upon the same by Dr.
Featley, called Virtumnus Romanus, Ordered to be Printed and published by the
said House.

H. Elsing Cler. Parl. D. Com.

Vertumnus Romanus, OR, A DISCOVRSE PENNED BY A ROMISH Priest, wherein he
endeavors to prove that it is lawful for a Papist in England to go to the
Protestant Church, to receive the Communion, and to take the Oaths both of
Allegiance and Supremacy.

To which are adjoined Animadversions in the in the margin by way of Antidote
against those places where the rankest poison is couched.

By Daniel Featley Dr. in Divinity.

2 Cor. 11 13 14. Such are false Apostles, deceitful workers, transforming
themselves into the Apostles of Christ. And no marvel, for Satan himself is
transformed into an Angel of light.

Horat. Ep. Quo teneam vultus mutantem Protea nodo?

Tertul. in apol. Nefas est ulli de sua religione mentiri; ex eo enim quod
aliud a se coli fingit quam colit, negat quod colit, etiam non colit quod
negavit.

LONDON, Imprinted by I. L. for Nicholas Bourne, and John Bartlet: and are to
be sold at the South entrance at the Royal Exchange, and at the gilt Cup near
Austins Gate, in Paul's Churchyard. 1642.

AN ADVERTISEMENT TO the Reader, touching the Author and the Argument of the
ensuing Discourse, AND THE REASONS FOR WHICH it is thought fit to be published
to the view of the world.
AS the ignorance of good is evil: so the knowledge even of evil is good; for
knowledge is nothing but the light and irradiation of the understanding by the
beams of truth: which herein resemble the rays of the Sun that neither defile
any thing nor can themselves be defiled. Set aside curiosity and all kinds of
vicious affection and indirect ends, and you shall find that the knowledge
even of sinful impuritie, is clean, of natural corruption, is sound; of
worldly vanities, serious; and of all kind of maladies of the mind and body
healthful. And as it is the depth of Satan's malice, e bono malum elicere, to
draw evil out of good (as the Spider sucks poison out of sweet flowers and
wholesome herbs) so it is a high point of Gods goodness, e malo bonum elicere,
to draw good out of evil, light out of darkness, and order out of confusion
it self. Where it not for this, that God who is the Sovereign and Omnipotent
Good, knows that it more redoundeth to the glory of his infinite wisdom and
power to work good out of evil, then quite to take it away; there never had
been, there never should be, any evil in the world, as St. Augustine piously
argues the case. There could be no evil in the world if God suffered it not,
Encarid ad Lauren: miro and ineffabili modo non fit praeter Dei v^luntatem,
quod etiam contra ejus voluntatem fit: ^uia nec fier^t nisi sineret, nec u^ique
nolens sed vole^s, nec ^inere^ bon^^ f^^r^ male nisi omnip^t^ns etiam de malo
f^c^re pos^^t b^n^.
and he suffers it not against his will but with his will, neither would he
which is so good, nay, rather goodness it self willingly suffer any evil to
be, but that by his omnipotency he can and does extract much good out of all
sorts of evil. This work of Divine providence, Gregory Nyssen, fitly
terms, (...) the abuse of evil: for what is a^-uti to abuse a thing, but to
use it contrary to the nature and condition thereof which if it be good, such
an use is an abusive use: if it be evil, such use thereof is an useful and
commendable abuse; as when a Gramarian makes a rule of Anomalas, a Rhetoritian
a figure of a Solaecisme, a Musician an harmony of discord, a Logitian a true
use of fallacies, and a Physician a wholesome treacle of poison. Such a use
(Christian Reader) thou may make of the unchristian Treatise ensuing Wherein
the Author thereof (now in bold) endeavors to show all Roman Catholics a
way to escape not only all bonds, and imprisonment, but all other penalties of
the law against Popish Recusants, by making their religion and conscience, a
leade^ and lesbian rule to comply with the religion professed by the Sta^^
wheresoever they live.

This Book together with the Author thereof was sent to the Honorable House
of Commmos by the care of some members of that House, employed in a Committee
near Portsmouth, and it has been thought fit to be published for sundry
reasons.

First, to discover the craft of the Jesuits in procuring upon unjust grounds,
and by indirect means a ^ull from the Pope, prohibiting all Roman Catholics
to resort to the protestant Churches, in ^ngland under pain of his Holiness
curse, and dreadful thunderbolt of excommunication: whereby as this Priest
affirms they gained to themselves more disciples, more money, and more
Colleges: For be thou pleased (Christian Reader) to take notice, that in the
reign of King Edward the sixth of blessed memory, and during the space of the
first ten years of Queen Elizabeth (the Phoenix of her sex and age) the
Papists in England did usually go to Church, and there was no such thing as
Popish Recusancie heard of. But after the ^ame soldier Ignatius Loyola with
his new regiment, began to outrun all other orders, and rancks of Monks, and
the Jesuits name was up, and many Colleges built for them beyond the Seas, the
English Jesuits began to lay about, how their Colleges and Seminaries might be
maintained and furnished by those of the Romish party in England, and they
find this the ready way to offer to the richer sort of them the education of
their children, they paying a good round rate for it: but because the parents
then repairing to the Protestant Church might breed up their children at a
far easier rate in our Schools of England, the secular Priests (willingly
undertaking the care and tuition of them) the Jesuits were never quiet till
they had obtained from the Pope upon such suggestions as they thought would
most take with his Holiness, the Bull above mentioned which frighted all
Romish Catholics from our Churches. See here the beginning and original of
Popish Recusancie in England, and the depth of the Mine which has since
enriched their English Colleges beyond the Sea. See page 64.
No wonder if the name of an Author, called Diana (often cited in the ensuing
Discourse) be in great request. The benefit accruing to those of the Society
of Jesus by the Recusancie of Romish Catholics in England, necessitated by
them, is a Diana which has brought no small gain to these craftsmen.
Demetrius with his fellow artificers cry out for many hours great is Diana of
the Ephesians, not so much honor to that heathenish Deity, but because they
knocked and hammered out their living out of the silver shrines they made for
her. Sirs, know ye not, Acts 25.^5.
says Demetrius, that by this craft we have our wealth? And in like manner the
Jesuits stickle mainly for Recusancie not out of any zeal to the Catholic
cause, as this Author in his Preface clearly demonstrateth: but because they
sucked out of this forced Recusancie no small advantage. For the transporting of
the children of Romish Recusants beyond the Seas ensuing thereupon, both filled
their Colleges with Scholars, and their coffers with money. Ierom. ^.
And in this respect these Jesuits may rightly be called Suits (as Ieconias in
the Prophet is called in disgrace Conias) not only in respect of their swinish
and Epicurean lives in their Styes beyond the Seas, ^

Epig. l. 1.

^cta gravi ferro ^^nfossaque vulne^^ matter, S^^ pariter vitam perdidit (...)
dedi^. Pluri^us illa more (...) sa^cia tel^^, Omnibus ut natis ^^iste pateret
iter.


but because their society herein resembles that Sow in Martial which
farrowed in the Theater by a wound there received: so this Order by the wound
received from the State (I mean the penalties inflicted upon Romish Catholics
for Recusancie) has grown fruitful and exceedingly multiplied. But in the
mean while, are not Jesuits consciences seared with a hot iron, who every
where in their Printed Pamphlets, and Libels most bitterly exclaim against the
State for inflicting penalties upon Papists in England for Recusancie, whereof
they themselves have not only been the Authors but chief Actors therein to
enforce it by the rescript of his Holiness procured by them merely for their
advantage, as this Author shows.

Secondly, to detect likewise the craft of the Secular Priests, vere seculares
true worldlings, who for their own advantage counterplot against the Jesuits
and endeavor by subtle fetches and strains of conscience, to evacuate and
frustrate their opposites designs: Sic ars eluditur art. The Jesuits out of
pretended zeal to the Roman faith, and religion, mainely contend for
Recusancie, fearfully adiuring all English Papists with whom they have any
power, that by no means either themselves resort to our public service, or
send their children to any Protestant Churches or Schools: on the contrary the
secular Priests out of pretended care and love to those of their religion,
persuade them to make no scruple of repairing to our Churches or Schools: that
so they may save both the mulct of the law, and great charges by sending their
children beyond the Seas there to be brought up in the Colleges and Schools
of the Jesuits. As for instructing them in the principles of their Catholic
religion, that they will take care of, if the parents be pleased to commend
them to their tuition. Thus both make religion a stalking horse to their
worldly ends: the Jesuit is for Recusancie, the secular Priest for Conformity;
neither of them truly to gain souls to Christ, but to draw toll to their own
mill. If there be no necessity of Recusancie, the Jesuits may shut up their
shops beyond the Seas, and if their be a necessity of Recusancie, the Secular
Priests may shut up their shops in England. And what care the Jesuits though
many Families of Romish Catholics in England sensibly decay in their estates,
partly by reason of the penalty of the law inflicted upon them for Recusancie,
and partly in respect of the great expense they are at in the education of
their children and transportation beyond the Sea, so long as the Jesuits
Colleges by this means thrive and flourish? and what care the Secular Priests
though their proselytes run a hazard of their souls, by frequenting the
Churches and Schools of those they account quite out of the way of salvation,
so long as they themselves are well paid for the education of their children,
and a good amends is made by the Masters temporal gain for the danger of the
Scholars spiritual loss. When I read this Authors Preface and Discourse
evidently discovering the Jesuits myning and the Secular Priests
counter-myning: me thinks I see Pseudolus and Simias in the Poet, out-vying one
the other in crafty fetches, deceitful subtilties practiced by them with
dissembling, lies and periuries.

Thirdly to lay open to the view of the world the detestable and damnable
doctrine of Romish Priests, and Jesuits who strain and weaken the strongest
sinew which holds the members of all Ecclesiastical and Politic Bodies
together: who cancel that bond which being made on earth is Registered in the
high Court of Heaven, and the three Persons in the blessed Trinity are called
as witnesses thereunto. The Jesuits teach, that a man may without scruple of
conscience or guilt of sin affirm that upon oath in words, which he knows
to be false, and deny upon oath that which he knows to be true, so he be sure
to have some clause in his mind, which added thereunto in his inward
intention, though not uttered, may make what he says true in a sense: And this
Priest here in his last Chapter teaches it to be lawful to forge, and fasten
a meaning to the words of an Oath clean contrary to the meaning of the
Lawgivers, who first made the Oath, and the Magistrate who lawfully requires
that Oath of them, as I will make it evidently appear, when I come to scan his
last Chapter. Now what is this else then to use the name of the God of truth in
taking public and solemn Oaths to confirm a lie, either in words or
meaning? what is it else then to mock with Religion, and play fast and loose
with the most sacred bonds of Piety and Loyalty. Verily if Religion be
derived a religando from binding the conscience, or our faith to God or man; he
should not slander these men, who says, they have no Religion. For the surest
and strongest bonds of Religion can no more tie them then the green withes
could Sampson which he brake at pleasure. Let there be an Oath advisedly
penned, in terms most express and significant, with all the cautions that
the wit of man can devise against all manner of evasions, and backed with never
so many direful imprecations and anathema maranathaes upon the soul of him
that shall by any slight, cunning, falsehood or perjury either violate or
invalidate and evacuate this Oath: yet these men can with a wet finger either
loosen it by a forged and forced interpretation, or untie the knot by a mental
reservation, or cut it asunder by Papal dispensation, o ubi estis fontes
lachrymarum? Suppose a Romish Priest or Jesuit be brought before a Magistrate
to be examined: if the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy be tendered unto him,
thereby to discover who he is, he will take them both in his own sense though
neither in the sense of him who ministers these Oaths, nor in the sense of
the Parliament which appointed them. If he farther demand of him upon Oath,
whether he be a Priest or no, he will say he is not: reserving in his mind,
(of Apollo) if he question him further, whether he lately came from beyond the
Seas: he will forswear it, reserving in his mind (the red or dead Sea) if he
farther require of him whether he have received holy Orders from a Romish
Bishop: he will deny it reserving in his mind (without a Miter) if the
Examiner ask him further whether he had any speech with any English Nun at
Li^borne, he will make no bones to deny it, reserving in his mind^ (chaste).
Lastly, if the Judge or Justice charge him to use no equivocation or mental
reservation, he will say and swear he uses none, reserving in his mind (to
tell you) and so he slips all knots and it may be truly said of him what
Pseudolus in the Poet spoke of Ballio non potest pietate obsisti huic ut res
sunt caeterae, Plautus in Pseud.
this man is oath proof. All heretics and miscreants deliver mendacia
doctrinarum, lies of doctrine: but these only doctrinam mendaciorum, a doctrine
of lies sodered by mental reservation* these only define doctrinally the
lawfulness of a lie, so that which is untrue in words, be salved up with a
mental reservation. This is the strange monstrous brat of the Jesuits like a
child half in half out of the mothers womb for so is their mixed proposition
half uttered, and half concealed or reserved to themselves. This is conceived
to be the invention of a Jesuit at the first, and therefore is termed by those
who have learnedly impugned it, the Jesuits new art of lying, and true it is if
we peruse the Catalogues of heretics drawn by Epiphanius, Augustine,
Philastrius, together with Alfonsus a Castro, and Ambrosius de Rusconibus, you
shall light upon no heretic who doctrinally maintained such a kind of
equivocation, especially in matter of oath to be taken before a lawful
Magistrate. It is true the Priscillianists held it to be lawful to lie and
forswear, Aug. de haerasib. c. 70. habent Ebar verba juxta Poeta, Imur^
perjura secretum pr^der^ noli and lib. 1. Retract. cap. 60. Priscillianista
^aresin suam non s^lum negando a^que mentiendo verum ettam pejerando
existimabant ^eculendam, and ibid. Visum est quibus^a^ Cath^lic^s
Priscillianistas se debere simulare, ut ^orum latebra^ penetrarint.
and some Catholics in St. Austines time to feign themselves
Priscillianists, that they might the better entrap them and discover them: but
this was fraudulent simulation, not mental reservation: the Arch-hereticke
Arius, when he was demanded whether he had subscribed or would to the Orthodox
faith concerning the consubstantialitie of the son, answered, he had or
would, pointing to a paper in his bosom, in which he had written his belief
touching that point: but this was a fraudulent gesture, and false significatiin
of his mind not a mental reservation. Give therefore the Devil his due, this
quaint kind of lie was his prime invention as we may see in the Poet. When the
Devil required of the Pagan King who was about to sacrifice unto him; Cut me
off a head, Numa instructed by his familiar appearing to him in the likeness
of the Nymph Oegeria answered, I will do it, Ovid fast. lib. 3. Coede caput
dixit, cui rex, parebimus inquit, Cadenda est h^rtis ^ruta (cepa) mei^: Addidit
hi^ hominis sumes, ait ^lle (cap. (...)) pestulat hic animam cui. Num^ (^isc^^)
ait risit and his inquit facit^ me^ t^la procures, ^ vi^ coll^qui^ non ^big^nd^
Deum.
adding by aequivocation (of an Onion) when the Devil added: nay, but thou
shall take of a man's, Numa says he will, but adds what he reserved in his
mind, (hairs) when the Devil yet farther replied, nay I will have the soul
or life, you shall says the King, adding what he reserved in his mind, (of a
fish) and so plowing with the Devil his own heifer, resolved all diabolical
riddles. See here the prototypon of Jesuitical equivocation by addition and
mental reservation and after what copy either Garnet, or Valentia, or
Navarrus, or any other of the like sect wrote who first in our age published in
writing, and after in print the doctrine of equivocation by mental reservation.

Fourthly, to descrie to those that sit at the stern in Church and Common
wealth, the maine scope and mark, at which this Romish Priest and his
associates ^ime, in persuading all Romish Catholics within this Realm, to
resort to our Churches, and take the Oaths both of Allegiance and Supremacy.
It is as be professes not so much for their indempni^i^ from penal Statutes,
as to qualify them for other preferments, ^ee page ^3
and even votes in Parliament; to the indangering of our Religion, and
government. For what should hinder them whose parts, estate, and friends are
able to raise them, from attaining their desires herein, since their Religion is
now made no bar unto them, and these Oaths (he mentions) now serve no more
for a partition Wall bet^eene loyal Protestants and disl^yall Papists: Now the
Ephraimites have learned to speak Shiboleth as plain as the Gileadites, ^eog.
1 (...) 6.
whereas before they could but lispe Siboleth. And if these Ephraimites by this
slight come to be admitted to places of greatest trust in this Kingdom, and as
their birth and Baronies entitle diverse of them to the House of Peers: so they
should be chosen indifferently to the House of Commons; what a loose end all
things would be at? How suddenly might we be cheated of our Religion,
Liberties, Laws, yea and lives to? Wherefore it were to be humbly desired of
those that love the truth in sincerity, even with bended knees, that his
Majesty and the high Court of Parliament would make some more certain
distinctive sign between Papists and Protestants then monthly coming to
Church, and taking the Oaths above mention^d. This Author points at such a
thing while he speaks of some Articles of their faith, which it is not lawful
for them in any case to deny. If therefore it should seem good to the wisdom
of the State to prescribe such a Confession of faith to be drawn, wherein all
or the most fundamental points of their Trent faith are renounced, and by name
the twelve new Articles added to the Apostles Creed in the Bull of Pope Pius
the fourth, we should either soon see certainly who were Papists, and who
were not, or at least give the Romish Religion a smarter blow then it ever yet
received. For though this Author speak of a Fox craft to be used by Prudent
Catholics, Vulpiza^^ cum vulp^bus.
and though the Priests and Jesuits and the cunningest heads among the Papists
would set their wits on the rack to find out some Eshapatoir or evasion
whereby they might go beyond the State: yet they must then be enforced to
deny their Religion to save it, and to alter the tenets which have hitherto
been held for current, both among their School Divines, and Casuists, namely,
that it is a damnable sin to equivocate when a man is called to give an
account of his faith. For this cannot be denied to be a plain denial of
Christ, and in their own sense, whosoever so denies him before men, shall be
denied by him before his Father in heaven.

Lastly, to show the great strength of truth and the clear evidence of the
Protestant Religion, which convinces the conscience of most obstinate Papists.
For this Author a man of learning and well versed in the book cases of the
Romanists, though in some places he jeares at our Preachers, and scoffs at our
Religion: yet in other where he is most serious, he lets fall those passages
from him which are worthy the taking up, namely page 6. Recusancie was first
brought a^ong Catholics into England by a certain company of men for
temporal ends, procured covertly and by indirect means from twelve Fathers of
the Council of Trent, and certain Popes upon false suggestions. The false
suggestions page 7. et deinceps were these* viz. That the Protestants of
England were idolatrous and blasphemous heretics, hating God and his Church;
that the commerce with them, especially at Church, would be an occasion of the
subversion and ruin of their souls, page 19. In the Protestant Church there
is neither id^latrie committed nor hurt done, page 22. Why should we not
communicate with Protestants where there can be no danger of sin? and in page
23. Protestants are not to be called properly formal heretics, page 41. In
going to the Protestant Church there is no moral malignitie at all, in so much
that scarce the weakest man can invent how to sin by any thing that is there
done, it being of its own nature so indifferent and to a good intention good,
that a part rei, there is no appearance of evil therein, page 48. I never yet
could find any idolatry committed at Protestant Churches as often as I have
frequented the same, page 52. Protestants are not properly and in rigor
formal heretics. If Protestants are not formal heretics it follows
necessarily that they are no heretics at all; for forma dat nomen et esse. If
it be a false suggestion that Protestants are blasphemous heretics hating God
and his Church, then the truth is, they are neither blasphemous heretics, nor
haters of God nor his Church; but lovers of both. If there be no idolatry
committed in Protestant Churches then God is there purely worshipped in spirit
and truth. If there be no hurt done in Protestant Churches no danger of sin,
nor so much as any appearance of evil, then are all Papists justly to be
punished who refuse to come to our Church, and they are guilty of grievous
sin in disobeying the commands of King and State, and have no pretense at all
for their recusancie. Thus as Virgil when he read the obsolete writings of
Ennius said, he sought for aurum instercore: so may thou find here gold in a
dunghill: I have washed away the filth by Animadversions inserted in convenient
places; make thou use of the gold to enrich thy knowledge, and confirm thy
assurance of the doctrine of the Gospel purely taught, and sincerely professed
in the Church of England.

October. 1. 1642.
A TABLE OF THE SPECIAL CONTENTS.
LOcks that are scrued with letters are most troublesome to unlocke if we know
not the particular letters by the setting whereof together the wards fly open:
such is the ensuing discourse, consisting of very many heads doubling or
trebling the Alphabet as appear by the marginall notes, yet, without any
summaary contents premised or directorie Titles serving in stead of signal
letters to open the several parts and Sections thereof, It was thought
therefore requisite to supply that defect in the Romish Author by this table
wherein the Reader may readily and easily find those remarkable points which
either are professedly handled, or occasionally touched therein.

First in the Preface, page 3. Secondly in the Treatise, page 16. Sect. 1. page
26. Sect. 2. page 57. Sect. 3. page 82.
Thirdly in the Appendix, page 143.
First in the Preface. The original of Recusancie in England, page 6. The
Rescripts of seven Popes in the case all erroneous. page 7. The determination of
general Councels of great authority, yet not infallible, page 12.
Secondly in the Treatise. The state of the question touching going to Church
with men of a different religion, explicated. page 16. Naamans fact bowing in
the temple of Rimmon ^iscussed. page 17. The words of the Prophet, 2 Kings
5.19. go in peace diversely expounded. page 18. None may dissemble his
Religion, no not in fear of death. page 21. The res^lution ^f the Sorbon
Doctors in the case of Recusancie. page 24. SECT. 1.
The definition of scandal, page 26. Several divisions of Scandal, page 27.
The distinction of venial and mortal sin refuted, page 28. Evangelicall
Councels as they call them, are not distinct from precepts, page 29. Poverty
in it self is not scandalous, page 31 Whether our Liturgy be any part of the
Missall, page 33. Prayers ought to be made in a known tongue, page 34. What is
meant by appearance of evil, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. page 35. In what case the eating
meats offered unto Idols is forbidden by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8. page 39. The
definition of an heretic, page 51. That the faith of Protestants is no way
defective, page 53. The Romish Clergy is grossly ignorant, page 54 The
Protestants manner of preaching in many respects to be preferred before the
Romish. page 55.
SECT. 2.
Recusancie is no distinctive sign between a Papist and a Protestant. page
57. The Protestants Sacrament is not a bare sign; nor the holy Eucharist
common bread, page 60. The body and blood of Christ is truly given in the
Sacrament. page 61. The popish carnal manner of eating Christ's flesh with the
mouth, is repugnant to faith, reason and common sense. page 62. The Apostle by
the Lords Supper, 1 Cor. 11.20. means not the Agapae or Love Feasts, page 64.
A foul practice and high misdemeanour of Davenport, alias a Sancta Clara, in
procuring a surreptitious Bull against Day the Franciscan, page 75.
SECT. 3.
That Papists attribute religious worship to images themselves, page 85. That a
man being questioned of his faith, though before an incompetent Judge is bound
to answer the truth, page 98. That we may not dissemble with dissemblers, nor
play the Fox with Foxes, page 99. That Papists trust in their own merits,
though some at their death have renounced them, page 104. The Oath of
Allegiance divided into eight branches and every branch justified by Papists
themselves, page 109. The Oath of Supremacy divided into four branches, page
114. In what sense Protestants teach the King to be Head of the Church, page
115. Who are meant by forreiners in the Statute, page 120. That no Papist can
take the Oath of Supremacy, but that he must renounce a fundamental point of
his Religion, page 138.

Thirdly, in the Appendix. 1. A form of Recantation enjoined the Lollards in
the 19. year of King Richard the second taken out of the Records in the Tower,
page 143. The Resolutions of the Fathers in the Council of Trent, page 145.
The Oaths of Supremacy Enacted 35. Hen. 8. and 1 Elizabeth, page 148.150. A
proviso for Expounding the Oath, 5. Elizabeth, page 151. The Admonition annexed
to the Injunctions, Elizabeth. 1. page 152. The Conclusion of the Author of
the Animadversions to the Reader, page 154.

Errata sic corrige,
P. 7. in marg. state r. flat. p. 8. lin. 11. p. 7. r. 12. p. 15. l. 9.
Ignorattia r. ignorantia p. 22. l. 22. the r. they p. 28. l. 15. dele the p.
42. l. 17. rejoice r. rejoyne p. 54 l. 35. proposition r. praeposition p. 64.
l. 14. Apollorum r. Apostolorum p. 76. l. 6. add (...) p. 85. l. 12. sede r.
sede p. 97. marg. l. 6. does r. do p. 99. l. 11. marg. adeo r. add l. 12. r.
wizards p. 140. marg. l. 6. d the appendix.

A Nay rather a Babylonish Merchant putting away a good conscience concerning
faith making shipwrack^, 1 Timothy 1.19. For this book with the title thereof
resembles the Apothecaries boxes, quorum tituli remediae habe^t, pyxides
(...). Lactant. divin. institut. l. 3. c. 14.
SAFEGUARD FROM SHIPWRECK, TO A According to that prudence which Saint James
brandeth with those three marks* Earthly, sensual, and devilish Iam. 3.15.
PRVDENT CATHOLIC.

Wherein is PROOVED THAT A By Catholic, he means a Papist, begging after
their manner, that which is indeed the maine question between us, namely,
whether Papists are Catholics: For if he take Catholics in that sense in
which the word is used by the ancient Fathers, for a right believer or Orthodox
Christian in opposition to all heretics and schismatikes; neither are
Romanists such Catholics: and such Catholics living within his Majesty's
Dominions, not only may but ought to come to our Protestant Churches* and take
the Oaths both of Allegiance and Supremacy, when they are legally tendered
unto them.
Catholic may go to the Protestant Church, And Take both the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy.

Matthew. 10.16. Be ye wise as Serpents, and If the author had not here rubd his
forehead, he would never have set this text in the frontispice of his book,
for whether we translate the Greek word (...) innocent or simple, in neither
sense it befitteth either the person of the Author and his Associates, or the
argument of his book. How innocent Papists are, it is sufficiently known to all
the world by the Massacre at Paris, Powder plot in England, and the present
Rebellion in Ireland. As for their simplicity, let the Jesuits manifold
Apologies of Equivocation speak, and this Priests Treatise in hand, wherein he
endeavors through the whole to prove it to be lawful to double in point of
Gods worship, and juggle in matter of most sacred and solemn oaths.
Simple as Doves.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Nicholas Bourne at the South entrance to the
Royal Exchange, 1642.

A Preface to the Reader.
Gentle Reader,
I Am to write of a point of Controversy, wherein I know, that I shall
undergo the Rubet auditor eui frigida men's est; criminibus tacita su^dant
praecordia culpa. It seems the Authors heart smote him, and his conscience
misgave him, and his ink turned red, when he set his pen to paper to apologize
for hollow hearted newtralitie, and halting between two religions. If we
divide his Pamphlet into two parts, we shall find the first part spent in
proof and justification of simulation, the second of dissimulation: in the
former part he persuades the Papists of England to make show of what they are
not, by frequently resorting to our Church and Communion Table, in the second
to deny what they are, by taking the two Oaths: wherein both the temporal and
the spiritual power and jurisdiction of the Pope, within these kingdoms are
renounced.
censure of diverse sorts of people; yea, amaze some at the strangeness of the
thing. Yet my intention being good, as tending to the safeguard, as well How
the ensuing Treatise tends to the Safeguard of the bodies and estates of
Papists, by declining the penalties of the laws, every intelligent Reader may
perceive, but how this way of dissimulation tends to the safeguard of souls, I
cannot understand, since the Savior of our souls, who is the Way, the Truth,
Truth, and the Life, teaches us in express words, Mark 8.35. Whosoever will
save his life shall loose it, but whosoever shall loose his life for my sake
and the Gospel shall find it. verse. 38. Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed
of me and of my words in this adulterous and sinful generation, of him also
shall the Son of man be ashamed, when he comes in the glory of his Father,
with his holy Angels, and Matthew. 10.32, 33. Whosoever shall confess me before
men, him will I confess also before my Father which is in heaven: but
whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father which
is in heaven. But I subsume, to make profession of communion with misbeleevers
or schismatics, is not to confess Christ, and to deny any part of our
Christian Faith, with what art of words, or pretense of good intention soever,
is upon the matter, to deny Christ, and to be ashamed of him and his Doctrine.
of souls as bodies of all: and I my self being constrained by a kind of
natural necessity thereto; as suffering much, not only by the You may thank
Pope Pius his seditious Bull against Q. Elizabeth, wherein he not only
excommunicateth her but exposes her life and kingdom for a prey, and the
treasonable practices of Jesuits and Iesuited Papists for the severitie of our
laws, not indeed against your Religion, but rather irreligion and disloyalty,
medicum severum intemperans aeger fa^it.
severitie of the Laws for my Religion (which is the least:) but likewise both
spiritually and temporally, by the malice and treachery of some evil spirits,
instigating others to take advantage by Religion: do hope to find approbation
therein (at least) of the wiser sort. Although I cannot see, but why in reason
(not pretending the least prejudice to Religion, but rather the good of Gods
Church, as I shall make appear) the weakest sort of Catholics should not be
likewise pleased therewith. For although Religion, as it is taken for Christian
belief, ought of every man to be professed, according to St. Thomas Aquinas
and other Doctors, 2a. 2ae. q. 3. at two particular times, viz. when, and as
often as the glory of God shall conduce thereunto, or the spiritual good of our
neighbor shall be either conserved, or augmented thereby, grounding
themselves, upon the words of our Savior, Matthew. 10.32. Qui me confessus
fuerit coram hominibus, confitebor and ego eum coram patre meo qui in caelis
est. Every one that shall confess me before men, I also will confess him
before my Father which is in heaven. Yet it is not necessary to salvation, that
any man at all times, and in all places do confess his Religion without Hoc
veru^ est priusquam Theognis nasceretur; This is an extreme verity as the
French speak, that it is not necessary to confess a man's Religion without
necessity, as if he should say, it is not profitable for a man to drive a a
Trade without profit, or not pleasant to recreate himself without pleasure, or
not wholesome to take Physic, which conduces not to his health. But if this
were in him l^psus linguae or calami. I am sure his inference hereupon, is
deliquium mentis, and argues a defect in his rational faculty: for at this
issue he drives, because it is not necessary at all times and in all places to
confess Religion, (no more then to go out into the Market place and cry I am
a Roman Catholic, or to write upon the frontispice of his house here lies a
Papist,) that therefore a man may sometimes make an outward profession of a
contrary Religion, by joining with them publicly in their Service and
Sacraments. If he had staid longer at school he would have perfectly learned
(which he fumbleth at) this lesson from the School Divines, (which looseneth
the sinews of this his argument) that affirmative precepts, obligant semper,
sed non ad semper, but negative, semper and ad semper. A man is not bound
always to exhibit cultum latriae, to God by adoration, or prayer, but he is
bound never to exhibit Divine worship to a creature: he is not bound always
to offer unto God, or to give to the Church; but he is bound never
sacrilegiously to take away from God or his Church: in like manner, he is not
bound at all times, and in all places to profess his faith, but he is always
bound, not to deny his Faith and Religion, either by word or deed. A man is
not bound always to speak a truth, but he is bound never to lie, feign, or
play the hypocrite.
necessity. Whence if a man should go out, into the Market place, and cry
himself to be of such and such a Religion, or should write upon the
frontispice of his house (in a country contrary to his Religion) here lives a
Christian, a Protestant or Catholic, his act would be thought so far from
virtue or religion, as that it would be rather deemed presumption, or the
height of indiscretion. Hence it is, that although a Catholic be bound under
pain of damnation to profess his religion in the twice before assigned, yet
he is not bound to profess a Recusancy of a thing of its own nature
indifferent, thereby at all times, and in all places to discover his Religion:
for this were as much in effect, as to cry himself, over the whole kingdom,
or to write over his door, that he were A Catholic, or at least some Sectary.
For (as I shall hereafter say:) Recusancy is common both to Catholics,
Brownists and other Sectaries, different in opinion from Protestants) which
would be an occasion to call himself in question for the Religion he
professes; whence I may rightly describe the Recusancy of Catholics no
otherwise, then to be, an indiscreet discovery of a man's Religion without
necessity or obligation: whereby he makes himself liable to the penal laws
of England for not going to Church, Which was brought first amongst them into
England, by a certain company of men, for See the Advertisement to the Reader.
The Apostle says, Godliness is great gain; if a man be contented with what he
has: but by the confession of this Priest, gain is the Jesuits godliness;
the zeal of Gods house eats not them up, but their zeal devoureth the houses
of the welthiest Recusants in England. What care they though Recusants sink in
England, so long as they swim in abundance beyond the Sea? what thought take
they for the parents mulcts and taxes by the state, so long as their Pupils
scores are paid in their Colleges?
temporal ends procured covertly, and by indirect means from twelve Fathers of
the Council of Trent, and certain Popes upon false suggestions to the ruin
of many men: That I prove what I have said, it is necessary, that I relate the
manner, how it was brought in.

In the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, and the alteration of Religion in
England, Catholics went to Church to conform themselves to the State, as they
did in K. Edward the sixths time; yet privately kept to themselves the exercise
of their own Religion. Which some Priests, perceiving not convenient, for the
propagation of their own family, then newly hatched: wrought in the Council of
Trent, that twelve Fathers of the said Council (not all Bishops, yet favorers
of the said family) might be selected, to declare to English Catholics upon
these suggestions following, viz. that the Protestants of England were
idolatrous and blasphemous heretics, hating God and his Church: that their
commerce, especially at Church, would be an occasion of the subversion and
ruin of their souls; denying and betraying of the true faith; giving of
scandal to men of tender conscience, as breaking that sign which was
distinctive between the people of God and not his people; that it was
altogether unlawful for them to go any longer to the Protestant Church, as
appears by the words of the said declaration, which if I had by me, I would
willingly have here inserted. This declaration being thus obtained, they
possessed If seven Popes one after another swallowed the same State gudgeons,
and after the swallowing of them sub annulo piscatoris, sent rescripts into
England forbidding all Catholics under pain of mortal sin, to repair to
Protestant Churches, which this Author acknowledges to be an error in those
Popes, what becomes of the infallible assistance of the holy Spirit annexed to
Peter's chair? if so many Popes might be deceived by false suggestions, why not
by false arguments, and objections? if they may be deceived in matter of fact,
why not in matter of faith, which often depends upon matter of fact? and
there being more need of inerrabilitie in a visible head for matter of fact,
then matter of faith, the later so far as it is necessary to salvation being
plainly set down in Scripture. If they may be deceived as men, why not as
Popes? surely if the Pope do any thing as Pope* it is sending forth his Bulls
and Rescripts, whereby he governs and instructs the Pseudo-Catholike
Church, and decides cases of conscience; and if in such he be subject to error
and mistaking, even in a matter of as great weight as any was agitated in the
Council of Trent, as this Priest affirms, page 7. upon what a sandy
foundation is the Romish Babell built? and how loose and weak is the maine
ground of a Papists faith?
certain Popes (to wit: Paul the fourth, Pius the the fifth, the two last
Gregory's, Sixtus, Clement, and Paul the fifth) so strongly with the same, and
the aforesaid suggestions; that the said Popes likewise declared as it is said
by certain rescripts which I never yet could see their going to Church to be
likewise unlawful. Which said suggestions had they been, or were they true, I
should likewise say and grant it unlawful; but not being true, as I shall
hereafter show: the It cannot be the common opinion of Divines that it is
lawful for a man to go to Church and communicate with those who are of a
different Religion. For seven Popes alleged by him, two Cardinals, Bellarmine
and Baronius, twelve Fathers of the Council of Trent, R. P. and other Jesuits
for the Roman party, and of the Protestant belief, George Abbot Archbishop of
Canterbury, in his Lectures at Oxford, Calvine in his tract adversus
Pseudo-Nicodemitas, and the Doctors of the reformed Churches generally in their
expositions upon the second Commandment, and in their commentaries upon the
second of the Corinthians 6. Chapter, 15, 16, 17. ver. determine the contrary.
common opinion of Divines in this point is to be followed; to wit: that it is
a thing indifferent and therefore may be lawful to frequent the Churches of
Schismatics.

Now to prove what I have said; that it was first brought in, by a certain
company of men. It is evident in it self by the carriage of the business; for
it is altogether improbable, that one man's authority (to wit, Doctor Sanders
who is named to be the only Agent herein, a man always ill relished in our
state, and therefore in this point to be esteemed partial) could select so
many Fathers out of the said Council, in a matter of such importance, upon his
own bare suggestion; or that the said Fathers would, or ought to have declared
the same; unless they had been made believe, that the aforesaid suggestions
were true, in the common opinion of most of the Priests then in our kingdom.

That it was wrought for temporal ends by the said company, the event shows
the same: for there is none that have got, or do get thereby, but only the
said company; as appears by their abundant treasure, and rich Colleges: for
Recusancie begets persecution, and persecution alms deeds, that God may assist
the afflicted in their distresses. And by this Recusancie great men's children
can get no learning or science within this kingdom; but must be sent beyond
the Seas, each at twenty five, or thirty pound per annum. by which, their
said family was and is propagated, and their heap increased.

Further, the political invention of recusancie was so sweet and pleasing, by
reason of the great gain which it brought; that one of the said company
(Author of the answer to the libell of Justice) all besmeared with wonted
piety, so much delights in tribulation, which arises by this recusancie;
that he would not a toleration of Catholic religion in England, if he might.
Although in his answer to the Author of the said libell he says (as knowing
him not able to procure of Queen Elizabeth and the State, a toleration for
Catholics) that upon certain conditions of his, he would accept of the same:
but when he speaks from his heart of the thing it self, he says in his said
Book, cap. 9. page 216. That it is such, as to ask it of God, were to ask, we
know not what; for that persecution is better.

That the said declaration and Popes rescripts were got by the aforesaid
suggestions, appears by the writings themselves as they are cited, and further
by one R. P. of the same family, who wrote a book printed Anno 1607. Contra
Anonymum, against a man without name: (Doctor Wright) that it was not lawful
to frequent Churches of heretics: where promiscuously he relates all the
aforesaid suggestions, as the ground of his opinion; and brings Cardinal
Bellarmine and Baronius with eight others, most of them of the same School for
the approbation of his case. Which case as he puts it, I think any man living
would likewise have approved.

That these men above others, were so laborious and serious, for this
recusancie appears, in that, whosoever would oppose them, were presently
blasted for heretics, or at least fallen men, insomuch that Azorius who wrote
that it was lawful for a Catholic to go to the Church of Schismatics was so
troubled by the importunity of these suggestions, that he was constrained
through fear that that part of his family, should have suffered some great
temporal detriment by his judicious writing (as they say) to recant his
opinion, and hold it not lawful in our case of England. See the said book
page 106. by all which any man may easily perceive, that the aforesaid company
were the busybodies: and that for their own ends (as I have said) upon the
aforesaid grounds: otherwise why should they, more then others, have been so
importune as to persuade, yea compel Azorius, who (not perceiving (under the
species of piety their rare political drift) wrote a common opinion to the
whole world, to deny that common opinion to have place in England?

That the foresaid Suggestions were and are false, it is certain by experience
to any, that know the state of the Protestant Church of England: and that to
the ruin of souls as shall be proved in the question following.

That it was procured covertly, and by indirect means; appears in that only
twelve Fathers were chosen, and the whole Corpse of the Council left out, and
amongst the rest, the Bishop of Worcester there then present; who knowing
better the State and affairs of our Country, then all the rest, it seems to
me that he might have been one of the twelve, whose authority would have
given more satisfaction to this point, to our country: then all the other
selected. But it should seem, that it was declared without any debate, as a
matter of no great importance, although it seems to my weakness a matter of
as great weight, as any that was then agitated in the said Council: and
therefore to leave a whole Council, in so weighty a matter, that concerned the
affairs of a whole Kingdom in point of Religion, and where we might have had
an infallibility No infallibility in any general Council since the days of
the Apostles, much less in the Council of Trent, which was neither a general
Council, nor lawfully called, nor free, nor at all an assembly of Catholic
Bishops, but of Images, moved like the statues of Dedalus by the sinews of
others. See the history of the Council of Trent written in Italian by Petro
Soave Polano, and the Epistle Dudith quinque Eccles. ad Maximilianum, 2. Caes.
But were the Council of Trent a general Council lawfully called, consisting of
eminent Doctors and Pastors as it were stars of the first magnitude, yet
they could not without horrible presumption arrogate to that their Synod
infallibility: for that not only Provincial but even oecumenicall Councels
may err, and be foully mistaken, and that in matter of faith may thus be
demonstrated.

First, every assemby which consists of members subject to error may be
seduced, and deceived, but general Councels are assemblies consisting of
members subject to error; for all men are so, Romans 3.4. Therefore general
Councels may be seduced and deceived. This reason is strongly backed by the
authority of the most judicious of all the Fathers, Saint Augustine and that
in many places, namely, Ep. 112. c. 1. Si Divinarum scripturarum, earum
scilicet quae canonicae in Ecclesia nominantur, perspicua firmatur autoritate,
sine ulla Dub. tation^ credendum est: ali^s vero testibus vel testimonies
quibus aliquid credendum esse suadetur tibi credere vel non credere liceat;
quantum ea momenti ad faciendam fidem vel habere vel non habere perpenderis: If
any thing be confirmed by clear and evident authority of Canonical Scripture
that must be beleeeved without all doubting: but for other witnesses and
testimonies whereby ye are persuaded to believe any thing you may give credit
unto them, or not, as you see cause: and de natura et great. cont. Pelag. c. 61.
solis canonicis debeo sine ulla recusatione consensum. In the writing of any
such men I hold my self at liberty (namely to give my assent unto them or
not) for I owe consent without any stay or staggering to the Canonical
Scriptures alone: therefore not to the Popes Rescripts, or Decrees of general
Councels. And in his second book, De bapt* cont. Donat. c. 3. Quis nesciat
scripturam canonicam omnibus posterioribus Episcoporum literis ita praeponi; ut
de illa omnino dubitari et disceptari non possit utrum vel verum rectum sit
quicquid in ea scriptum esse constiterit. Episcoporum autem literas quae post
confirmatum canonem vel scriptae sunt, vel scribuntur, et per sermonem forte
sapientiorem cuiuslibet in ea re peritioris et per aliorum Episcoporum
graviorem authoritatem, doctioremque prudentiam et per concilia licere
reprehendi, si quid in eis forte a veritate deviatum est. Et ipsa concilia quae
per singulas regiones vel provincias fiunt, plenariorum conciliorum
authoritati, quae fiunt ex universo orb christiano, sine ullis ambagibus
cedere: ipsaque plenaria saepe priora posterioribus emendari, cum aliquo
experimento rerum aperitur quod clausum erat, et cognoscitur quod latebat. Who
knows not that the canonical Scriptures are so far to be preferred above
the latterr letters of Bishops, that whatsoever is found written in it may
neither be doubted nor disputed of whether it be true or right: but the letters
of Bishops may not only be disputed of, but censured by Bishops that are more
wise and learned then they, if any thing in their writings swerve from the
truth: or by Provincial Synods, and these also must give place to plenarie and
general Councels, and even plenarie and general Councels may be amended, the
former by the latter, and it is to be noted that he speaks of error in
matter of faith. For these words are part of his answer to an Objection of the
Donatists out of the letters of Saint Cyprian, concerning the point of
rebaptizing.

Secondly, If the determinations of general Councels were infallible, all
Christians were necessarily bound to stand unto them, and to submit to their
authority: but this Saint Augustine peremptorily denies, l. 3. Cont. Maxim. c.
14. Nec ego Nicenum nec tu debes Ariminense, tanquam preiudicaturus, proferre
concilium; nec ego huius authoritate nec tu illius detineris. Neither ought I
to allege the Council of Nice, nor thou the Council of Ariminum in prejudice
to either part. For neither am I bound to the authority of the one, nor thou
to the authority of the other; and it is worth the observation that Saint
Augustine speaks of the first most famous Council of Nice, whose authority
was greater and held more sacred and venerable then any Council since, and if
that Council concluded not Saint Augustine, shall the authority of a late
Conveticle at Trent conclude all Christians?

Thirdly, If general Councels may contradict one the other, they may certainly
err. For it is impossible that both parts of a contradiction should be true.
But general Councels contradict one the other. Ergo. For the Council held at
Ariminum contradicts the first general Council held at Nice in the point of
consubstantialitie of the Son with the Father. The general Council held at
Chalcedon, contradicts the general Council held at Ephesus in the point of
Eutychianisme. The general Council at Frankeford, contradicts your second
general Council held at Nice in the point of Image worship. Your general
Council held at Lateran under Leo the tenth, contradicts your Council of
Constance in the point of the Councels superiority above the Pope.

Fourthly, Cuivis contingere potest quod cuiquam potest, that which has
befallen some general Councels, may befall any other, unless they can
allege some special privilege to the contrary; but diverse general Councels
have erred. A general Council of Prophets, 1 Kings 22.12. erred, saying, The
Lord shall deliver Ramoth Gilead into the Kings hand; a general Council of
Priests, Matthew 26.65. erred damnably in condemning Christ for a blasphemer
guilty of death. The general Council held at Arminum erred, denying the
Sons equality with the Father, at Ephesus, confounding the two natures in
Christ: at Nice under Irene, decreeing that Angels are to be painted, because
they are of a corporeal nature: at Constance, denying the Laity to be bound
to receive the communion in both kinds against the express precept of Christ,
Matthew. 26.28. and John 6.53. And of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.28. At Florence, and
after at Trent, defining that the effect of the Sacrament depends upon the
intention of the Priest or Bishop, who administreth it. Which if it were true,
no man in the Roman Church could ever be assured either of his baptism, or of
his confirmation, or of his absolution, or of his ordination, or of the
validity of his matrimony, or of his safe adoration of the Host, or of the
virtue of his extreme unction. For how can he certainly know the intention of
the Bishop or Priest who administered unto him these rites, all which they
account sacraments? Neither can they evade by saying that these Councels might
err because they were not confirmed by the Pope; for the Popes were present at
all these later, either in person or by their Legates, and it is for certain
that their second Council at Nice, was confirmed by Pope Adrian; at Constance
by Pope Martine, at Florence by Pope Eugenius, at Trent by diverse Popes.
Lastly, if Councels had an immunitie from error, the prayer which they made at
their Councels registered by Gregory the Great, l. 7. Epist. were a mere
mockery. The prayer was conceived in this form: Quia conscientia remordente
tabescimus ne aut ignorattia nos traxerit in errorem aut praeceps forsitan
voluntas impulerit a iustitia declinare, ob hoc te poscimus, te rogamus ut si
quid offensionis in hac concilii celebritate attraximus, condonare et
remissibile facere digneris. Because we pine away through remorse of
conscience, fearing lest either ignorance have drawn us into error, or a headie
will driven us to swerve from justice, for this we pray thee, we beseech thee
that if we have done any thing amiss in this great and famous assembly, thou
would vouchsafe to pardon it. I conclude therefore with the words of Leo in
his Epistle to Anatolius, who lightly phillips off the authority of the
general Council held at Ephesus, in which there were above 600. Fathers. In
one word, Tanquam refutari nequeat, quod illicite voluerit multitudo. as if
that could not be refuted which a multitude has unlawfully determined; giving
withal most wholesome conusell to all Councels, nulla sibi de multiplicitate
congregationis concilia blandiantur. Let no Councels flatter themselves with
the great multitude of persons assembled in them, as if that might privilege
them from error.


; and to adhere to twelve men fallible by suggestion without any debate or
dispute; in my judgment cannot be without great suspicion of sinister
proceedings. Partly therefore supposing and partly intending further to prove
the foresaid suggestions to be false, and consequently the said Council, and
Popes to h^ve been abused: he will endeavor to examine the truth of the matter
it self, according to the principles of Divinity within the bounds of the
Catholic Church, who wishes all happiness and prosperity, as well to the
said Church, as to all the distressed members of the same, with as much
brevitie, as may be, in the ensuing question.

A SAFEGUARD FROM Shipwreck to a Prudent Catholic.
Question. Whether it be lawful Here least the Reader should before he be
aware; be bitten by a snake lying under the grass, I hold it necessary to
distinguish between two questions, which may seem to be a like, but indeed are
very different. The first, whether Papists may go to Protestant Churches. The
second, whether a Protestant may go to a Popish Church. He that shall give the
same solution to both these questions, shall give a greater wound to the
Protestant cause, in the latter, then his plaster will salve in the former.
The Protestants and Papists in this stand not upon even terms: for there is
nothing in the Protestant Liturgy or Service, which the Romanists do, or by
their own Rules can except at; The Confession, form of Absolution, Prayers,
Hymns, Collects, Lessons, Epistles and Gospels, are either such as the Papists
themselves use, or at least such as they dislike not; whereas it is far
otherwise in the Roman Missall. For there is sprinkling, exorcised water,
censing books, and pictures, worshipping images, invocation of Saints, prayers
for the dead, intercession by the prayers and merits of souls departed, and
which is the height of all idolatry adoration of their Host or breaden God, and
all this service performed in an unknown tongue contrary to the express order
of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 14. all which the Reformed Churches condemn and
abhor, and whereas this Author alleges, there can be no text of Scripture
brought, forbidding Papists to come to our Church: I believe him, but on the
other side there are many express Texts of holy Scripture from whence it may
be strongly inferred, that no Protestant whose conscience is convinced of the
manifold idolatries and superstitions, wherewith the Romish Liturgy is
polluted, can with a safe conscience go to Mass, as namely, Psalm. 26.4. I
have not sat with vain persons, neither will I go in with dissemblers, I
have hated the congregation of evil doers, and will not sit with the wicked, 1
Cor. 10.7. Neither be ye idolaters as were some of them, verse. 14. Wherefore my
dearly beloved flee from idolatry, 1 Ioh. 5.21. Keep your selves from idols,
2. Cor. 6.14. What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, or
what communion has light with darkness, verse. 16 What agreement has the
Temple of God with idols? verse. 17. Wherefore come out from among them and be
ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing, and I will
receive you.
for a Catholic to go to the Protestant Church.
I Answer it to be lawful for him, who does it without a doubtful conscience:
or thought of sin, which I say, because if a man should do that, which in it
self is lawful; doubting, or not being satisfied, whether it be lawful or
no; he would sin in doing the same: because he would put himself in hazard or
danger of sin; and as the Wise man says: Eccles. 3. Qui amat periculum peribit
in eo: He that loves danger shall perish in the same. So he that thinks a
thing, which in it self is indifferent, to be sin, and does the same,
sins: because such a man has a will to do the thing, although it were sin;
and by reason of his sinful will commits sin. Otherwise as I have said before,
it is lawful. Which I prove first. The thing in it self is not forbidden by
any Law: either by the Law of God, or the Church. Not by the Law of God; for no
place of holy Scripture can be showed, by which it is forbidden. Nor by the Law
of the Church: for no Council or Canon of the Church can be produced for the
prohibition of the same. Ergo, it is lawful.

It is secondly prooved by an example of holy Scripture, Lib. 4. Reg. cap. 5.
where Although I have no meaning to drive away Papists from our Churches, nor
purpose to enervate the kindly, and right arguments which this Priest brings
to persuade them thereunto: yet I cannot let pass this, wherewith true
Professors may be very much scandalized. For what religious heart does not
tremble to think of going in, and bowing in the temple of an ^doll, in which
as the (Apostle teaches) the service that is done, and the sacrifice that is
offered, is to devils, 1 Cor. 10.20. and no better was this Rimmon the Syrian
idol. I answer therefore (1) that the case of conscience Naaman put, was not
whether he might go with his Master into the house of Rimm^n, and offer
sacrifice with him unto the idol: but whether he might not wait upon his
Master thither, and perform a civil (for the bowing spoken of was as C^i^tan
well notes, genuflexio obsequii, non imitativa, a bowing to the King not to
the Idol) o^^ice to him or make an obeisance, whilst the King leaned on his
hand: and yet his heart smote him for this, and his conscience misgave him,
that the Lord would be displeased with him for it: for so much his prayer
imports. The Lord pardon thy servant in this thing. Secondly, the words of
the Prophet Elisha; Go in peace, do not necessarily import an approbation, or
permission of that which Naaman pro^ounded: but either a mere form of
valediction, as if he had said in our language adieu, or farewell. 3. Or the
meaning of them may be, that which Trem^lius and Iunius, by comparing this
text. 2 Kings 5.19. with the 1 Samuel 1.17. collect, Quieto anim^ esto and ne
sis sollicitus de istis rebus quae nihil ad pacem conscientiae tuae faciunt,
sed potius ill^m turbaturae sint, and Deum in te provocaturae, Be at peace, and
take no thought of these things, which will nothing conduct to the peace of thy
conscience, but rather trouble it and provoke the wrath of God against thee:
(...) fourthly, the words may carry this sense, now thou ha^t that thou ^^^nest
for, thou art cleansed of thy l^prosie, Go home in peace, God send thee a
prosperous journey for the thing thou w^ttest of, shall never (...) thee, for
thy Master shall never requi^e any such service of thee as to wait on him to
his Chapel to worship Rimmon. And fifthly, what if there be an ^nallage
temporis very usual, in the Hebrew. A^l mists of obscurity be taken away, if
we translate the words thus, The Lord be merciful to thy servant, for that
when my Master went into the house of Rimmon and leaned on my hand, I bowe^ my
self in the house of Rimmon. Howsoever the Prophets valediction, Go ^n peace,
no more prooveth any approbation of Naamans bowing in the house of Rimmon, then
of his other demand, verse. 17. namely, Of two Mules load of the earth of the
land of Israel, and whatsoever Naamans conceit was in i^, whether he imagined
there were any holiness or virtue in that earth, as the inhabitants of
Colubraria (as Pomponius Mela writes) believed, that the earth of the
neighbor Island Ebusitana, was a sovereigne remedy against those serpents
wherewith they were infested, or whether he meant to make an altar of that
earth, it is not likely the Prophet would encourage him by his approbation, to
load his Mules with that earth, the former reason being superstitious, the
latter unwarrantable, for they were to sacrifice only in the place which the
Lord God should appoint, and if the Prophets words carry no approbation, but
have some other meaning, the edge of the Priests argument for assistance at
Idol worship is quite dulled.
Naaman the Syrian Prince is permitted to go to the Idolatrous Temple Rimmon,
to wait upon the Syrian King, there offering sacrifice. Ergo, a man may be
permitted to go to the Protestant Churches; where neither Idolatry is committed
or any hurt done.

Again, by the examples of Joseph of Arimathea and Nicodemus, Joh. 19.38, 39.
who although they went to the Synagogue of Jews, and so not apparent disciples
of our Savior, yet they were his disciples in secret. For it is there said:
that after the death of our Savior, Joseph of Arimathea, because he was a
disciple of Jesus, but secret, for fear of the Jews, desired Pilate, etc.
Nicodemus also came, he that at the first, came to Jesus by night, etc. by
which appears, that the Jews knew not of their Religion. It is manifest
likewise, that all the Apostles as freely conversed in the Synagogues of Jews,
as out of the same: when thereby they could best exercise their function and
mission. For the Rhemists in their annotations upon the 20 Chapter of the Acts
verse. 16. Confess that notwithstanding the festivitie of Pentecost was
established among Christians; yet Saint Paul might hasten to the festivitie of
the Jews. Therefore as these holy men, might go to the Synagoue, and reserve
their Religion to themselves: so may a Catholic to the Protestant Churches.
And indeed, it is an essential ingredient to the Mission of all Apostolical
men, to treat and converse with all men concerning salvation, in all places
best for their purpose.

It is prooved, thirdly by Azorius, tom. 1. lib. 8. institut. moral. cap. 11.
and 27 punct^, 2.4. and 5. who says: It is lawful for Catholics to pr^y
together with Protestants, to hear their Service, and go to their Sermons.
And for this opinion he cites, Navarr. lib. 5. Con. 10. and 12. de haeret. who
as all men know was a pious Divine, and a man of a tender conscience. Again,
the said Azorius says, in the said cap. 27. puncto 5. That if an heretical
Prince commands his Subjects that are Catholics to go to Church upon pain
of death or loss of goods, if he do this only because he will have his laws
obeyed, and not to make it Symbolum hereticae pravitatis, nor have a purpose to
discern thereby Catholics from Heretics, they may obey it. Gregory Martin
(one of the translators of the Bible into English) cited by the said R. P. in
his book aforesaid, page 101. and 109. Diana 5. part. tract. de scandal. page
191. resol. 33. where he says: a man may use the habit and ceremonies So
indeed Hurtado de Mendoza and others by him cited. But as the Scriptures says
of Nabal, a fool is his name, and folly is in him; so we may truly say here,
that Mendoza is Mendosus, and Mendax too, both faulty, and false; for Christ
who is the truth himself teaches us, that our life is better lost to save it,
then saved to loss: Matthew. 16.25. he saves it to loss, who saves it by
denying his Savior, and he loses it to his advantage, who loses it for the
testimony of the Gospel, for he shall exchange the loss of a miserable
temporal life, with blessed immortality or immortal bliss. If men when they
are in danger of death may dissemble their Religion, what shall become of the
glory of Confessors, and crown of Martyrs. At such a time to use the habit
and ceremonies of a false law (say of Mahomets, or the Persians, or the
Brachmans, or the West Indians; who do all their devotions professedly to the
Devil himself, whom they take to be God) is it not to deny Christ in our
habit, and in our actions, though not in our words and professions?
of a false law, being in danger of death. See Hurtado de Mendoza, and others
by him cited. And Paulus Comitolius, Resp. moral. lib. 1. q. 47. when he comes
to handle the question: whether a Professor of the Roman faith, being sent
into those parts where the Greek Church observes other rites, may go to their
service; he allows it, and builds upon this reason. That by the Law of God and
nature, it is lawful, and the precepts of the Church (if any there were that
forbid this) do not bind Christians, in cases of great detriment to the life,
or soul, or honor, or fame, or outward things. See Azor. above cited, for
going to the Schismatic Church of the Greeks, where he says, that a
Catholic hearing Mass in a Schismatic Church, there on a Sunday,
fulfilleth the precept of the Church commanding the same. See further the
Decree of the Council of Constans. and Martin the 5. which begins. In super
ad evitanda scandala, etc. for the communicating with heretics, as well in
service as otherways. Which Decree extends it self further then to our
purpose. For by the same we may communicate with Heretics fallen in a
Catholic country, if it be not in point of heresy. Yea, receive the
Sacraments of Priests excommunicated either by law, or any sentence of man, so
they be tolerated, and not by name excommunicated. See Diana, page 175. col. 1.
and the said Hurtado whom he cit^th. If then we may communicate with such men,
where there may be some danger of sin; why should we not communicate with
Protestants where there can be no danger of sin, as shall be hereafter
prooved?

It is fourthly proved, by the practice of all Catholics in foreign
Countries: for Germany; (See for Germany and France, Navarr. lib. 5. Consil.
12. de Heret.) and see the foresaid Author of the answer, his words are these,
cap. 9. page 216. And indeed if the German Catholics had been so restrained,
persecuted Surely the Roman Catholics in England must needs be thought to
suffer grievous persecution, when as the author of the answer to the libell of
justice cited by this Priest, page 9. and 10. so much delights in it that he
would not have a toleration of Catholics in England if he might, and to ask
it of God (says he) were to ask we know not what, for that persecution is
better. O medicina gravis! The truth is, the little finger of Queen Mary was
heavier against Protestants then Queen Elizabeth her whole loins against
Popish Recusants. Neither in her reign, no^ in the reign of King James, nor
of our present Sovereigne, was any Papist put to death merely for his
conscience: but either for some treasonable p^actise, or violation of some
Statute Law, the penalty whereof is Death. See page 4. G.
and put to death, as the English have been these years; and had not gone by
halfes with the Protestants as in some places the have done: they had had
perhaps far more Catholics at this day, and them more zealous; and their
whole Nation perchance, reduced ere this. Thus he. Where is to be noted, that
his (perhaps and perchance) are nothing worth. For by their going to Church (as
he terms it) by halfes with the Protestants, their country became Catholic
long since; whereas his zeal of persecution, has not converted ours yet,
neither is yet like to do. For Scotland, it is confessed by the said R. P.
page 69. with his judgment of their misery ins^ing thereby, (but the truth of
the misery I shall show hereafter) who yet in plain terms does not deny my
assertion, but here and there grants that some learned discreet man, where
there is no scandal, and in whom there is no danger of subversion, may go to
the Church of heretics, and hear their Sermons. Much more (say I) then to
the Church of Protestants; most of whom, are not to be called properly formal
heretics: for to heresy (as it is a sin against faith, and makes a formal
heretic) is required obstinacy or pertinacie against the doctrine,
declaration and sense of the Church. See Saint Thomas of Aquin. 2^. ^ae. q. 11.
ar. 2o. Cajetan, Bannes idem Aragona art. 1o. Suares disput. 19. de fide sect.
3. Now what obstinacy can Protestants be said to have in their opinions with
relation to a Church, they know not? for they know none other but their own:
so that although they believe amiss, (whereby they may suffer in the next
world) and speak heretical propositions; yet because they proceed not from an
heretical mind, or consent, they are not perfectly heretics.

Add that I my self in Germany with other Catholics of the same country,
have gone to a Synagogue of Jews, without any scandal or having been judged
to have done amiss. Ergo, I and others may go to a Church of Protestants
without any scandal, or being judged in reason to have done amiss. And I can
assure my self (whatsoever others may think of my assurance) that the
lawfulness of going to Church is the common opinion of all foreign Divines
that ever I conversed with, in any University. Which in part may be proved by
the fact of a certain Catholic Lady, who going to Church in England, sent
her Priest to Paris, to have this case resolved by the Sorbon Doctors, who all
Subscribed, That a Catholic in England might lawfully go to the Protestant
Church. That this is true, it may be justified by some persons of great
quality yet alive.

If any English Scholar shall answer, that we went to the Synagogue of Jews
out of curiosity and when they did not exercise their rites and ceremonies. I
reply, that to choose, we would have gone (if we might have had private
conveniencie unknown to them) to have seen their rites and ceremonies;
neither do we set down our intention of going: for if it may be done with any
intention lawfully, especially where the whole matter of all their rites and
ceremonies is always conserved: (to wit, a burning lamp with oil for the
souls departed, now as they conceive, in Limbo patrum: a place where the
oblation of oil to that purpose is always kept: the ten Commandments
placed in veneration: a number of linen rolls or bands wrote with Hebrew
letters, wherewith they bind the ten Commandments according to their
distinction of feasts: the knife of Circumcision and the like). Which may be
stumbling blocks to some weak Christians, although the men to perform these
rites should not be present, why should we not go to the Protestant Church
with some intention lawfully? where there are only men within bare walls saying
some Catholic service by them pieced up together without any Catholic
form, not to the possible hurt of any but themselves: and whether I went to
the said Synagogue out of curiosity, or out of the love of science, to reason
with them about their tenets (as then and there I did) the more to abhor
them, yet I will assure you, that with neither of these intentions do I go to
the Church of Protestants, and yet lawfully.

It is lastly proved by reason: to go to Protestant Churches is not of its
own nature evil (according to the opinion of the above cited Authors, or so
much as per accidens evil, as our case now stands which will be hereafter
proved) but a thing indifferent; so that by a good intention it may be made
good, as by an evil intention made evil. For the intention and object makes
the act good or bad. But a man may with a good intention do a thing
indifferent. Ergo, a man may with a good intention go to Church.

Again, if it be unlawful to go to the aforesaid Church; it is either because
of Scandal, or because it is a distinctive sign between Catholics and
heretics; or because there is danger of subversion or blasphemy committed.
But neither of these things there occur. Ergo, it is not unlawful to go.

The Minor I will prove in the three following paragraphs.

1o. That Scandal makes it not unlawful to go to the Protestant Church.
Scandal is defined by St. Thomas 2a. 2ae. q. 43. ar. 48. and other Divines
(out of St. Hierom. in cap. 15. and 18. Matthew. To be a word or deed less right
(or less good) giving occasion to another of Spiritual ruin or falling into
sin. Neither do they take the adverb (less) comparatively, but negatively
for that, which is not good; that is: with hic and nunc in regard of some
particular circumstance of time, place, or persons, wants some moral
rectitude or goodness. This Scandal may be divided into Active and Passive.
Active is in him that gives it; Passive in him that takes it; both expressed in
the holy Scritures by the verbes Active and Passive: to scandalize, and to be
scandalized, Matthew. 15.17.18. Active may be subdivided into per se and per
accideus. Active per se is, when a man with an express and certain intention
gives his neighbor occasion of sinning by some word or deed, either
intrinsecally or extrinsecally evil. Active per accidens is, when besides the
intention of the doer, and nature of the act done, being extrinsecally evil,
or at leastwise, having some species or show of evil; by which occasion is
taken, to the spiritual ruin of another. Passive scandal is also subdivided,
into passive scandal given, and Passive scandal taken. The first proceeds
from Active scandal either per se or per accidens, given and received by an
other. Such was the scandal forbidden by our Savior, Mat. 18. ver. 6. He that
shall scandalize one of these little ones that beleve in me, it is expedient
for him that a millstone be hanged about his neck, and that he be drowned in
the depth of the sea. And this is called Scandal of the weak or little ones
to whom it belongs (as Saint Bernard says) to be ignorant and moved through
weakness, and so be scandalized. For the perfect (as Saint Hierome says in
the place before cited) are not scandalized. Passive scandal taken is, when a
man out of envy and malice takes occasion of sin by another words or deeds
ill interpreted and misunderstood without any lawful or probable cause. And
this is called the scandal of Pharisees, which is a sin only to themselves,
and not to be regarded of the speaker or doer; as appears by the answer of our
Savior, Matt. 15. ver. 14. Sinite illos, caeci sunt et duces caecorum. Let
them alone, blind they are, and guides of the blind.

Hence Divines with St. Thomas do infer first, that sometime Passive
scandal may be without active, as it was in the scandal of the Pharisees.
Sometimes active scandal may be without Passive: as when one by his bad word
or deed, or ill example, does scandalize and gives occasion to others of
falling into sin; and yet none are scandalized, or take the occasion given,
to sin thereby. And sometimes they may be both together, as when one by his
bad example gives, and another takes thereby occasion to sin.

Secondly, they infer, that no good works which are necessary, as is the
observing of precepts, can give occasion of sinning to any man; and therefore
not to be omitted, to avoid the the Passive scandal, even of the weak ones,
as well observes Alfonsus Tostatus: Because that were to sin The distinction
of venial and mortal sins Tostatus (learned in Peter Lumbards school, not
in Christ's) may teach, but not truly. For although some sins may be termed
venial comparate, in respect of others that are of a deeper die, and so less
in their own nature pardonable and excuseable: or not at all (as the sin
against the holy Ghost: and though all sins of the ^le^t are venial through
grace, or quo ad eventum: yet there are no sins which in their own nature
are not mortal. For all sins are transgressions of the eternal law, and in
them the infinite Majesty of God is some ways slig^ted: and therefore Saint
Hieromes general conclusion is true, ep. ad Celantiam, omne quod agimus, omne
quod loquimur, aut de angusta via est, quae tendit ad vitam, aut de lata qua
imus ad mortem: What soever we do, whatsoever we speak, either appertains to
the narrow Way wh^reby we enter into life, or to the broad way which is the
road to death: and in his second book against the Pelagians, si ira et
sermonis iniuria atque interdum iocus iudicio concilioque et gehennae ignibus
delegatur, quid merebitur turpium rerum appetitio? if unadvised anger and a
contumelious word bring us in danger of a judgment, and a council, and hell
fire: what shall the desire of filthy things deserve? and who can say his heart
is clean from all these? To make light of sin aggravateth our conscience,
even those Naevuli and leves aspergines, and pulviseuli, and prolapsiunculae,
and peccadili^es, (as the Romanis^s style venial sins) either are
transgressions of the law of God or not: if they are not transgressions of the
law, they are no sins at all: for (...), all sin is the transgression of
the law, 1 John 3.4. or as the Schools ^ut of Saint Augustine define, peccatum
est dictum, factum vel concupitum contra legem aeternam, every sin is a
desire, word or deed against the eternal law: and if venial sins be
transgressions of this law, their punishment is death. For the soul that
sins shall die, Ezech. 18.4. and the sting of death is sin, 1 Cor. 15.56.
and the wages of sin is death, Romans 6.23. These clear and evident Texts of
holy Sc^ipture so dazzled the eyes of three of their sharp sighted Schoolmen,
that they not only left the common tract of other popish Divines (as
Bellarmine minceth the matter, l. 1. de amiss. great. et stat. pec. c. 4. ( non
nihil a communi theologorum sententia deflexerunt) but went in the direct way
of the reformed Doctors: these School men are Gerson 3. part. Theolog. tract.
de vit. spirit. sect. 1a Iacobus Almaine Opusc. tract. 3. c. 20. and Johannes
Episcopus Roffensis in refut. 32. artic. Luth. Gersons words are (with whom
Almaine accords) peccatu^ mortale et veniale in esse tali non distinguuntur
intrinsece et essentialiter sed solum per respectum ad divinam gratiam quae
peccatum istud imputat: mortal and venial sins are not distinguished in
their intrinsicall essence, but only with a relation to the divine grace which
imputes the sin, etc. Roffenfis speaks to the same purpose, peccatum
veniale solum ex Dei misericordia veniale est: venial sin is only venial
by the mere mercy of God: not therefore in its own nature.
mortally. (See Bellar. de script Ecclesiast, and Possevin. in verbo. Alfonsus
Tostatus. Which for no cause any man ought to do; but if they be He means by
counsels, according to the doctrine of his Romish Church, such supposed good
works as are not commanded of God, by the performance whereof yet they believe
that they cannot only merit at Gods hands, but supererogate. An assertion, as
far from Theological truth, as Christian modesty. For first, the law of God
is perfect, Psalm. 19.7. and consequently commands all good, and forbids
all evil: else were it not a perfect but a scantive and defective rule of
good. Secondly, though there may be many good works which the law of God
commands not, to all persons, at all times, and in all places, in every
manner and measure; yet neither is there any good work nor can be, which is
not comprised within that great and large Commandment of loving the Lord with
all our heart, and all our soul, and all our might: Deuteronomy. 6.5. Matthew. 22.37.
Luke 10.27. For it implies a contradiction, to say that we can love God more
then with all our might, and strength, and we see that all is required by this
commandment. Thirdly, the aspiring to perfection it self, so far as it is
attainable by us in this life, falls under the express commandment of our
Savior, Matthew. 5.48. Be ye therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is
perfect. How can there be any counsels of perfection over and above the law,
when the law of Christ requires perfection it self? What good work is there
or can there be tending to Christian perfection, which Saint Paul's Whatsoever
carries not, Phil. 4.8. Finally brethren, whatsoever things are true,
whatsoever things are honest, whatsosoever things are just, whatsoever things
are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report:
if there be any virtue, if there be any praise, think on these things.
Fourthly, dato et non concesso, admitting for arguments sake, that in some one
particular or other, that a man might do more then God commands: yet in other
things the best man that is, comes short of the law. For in many things we
offend all, James 4.2. and even such a righteous man as Job was cannot answer
one of a thousand, Job 9.3. What then becomes of works of supererogation, when
a man's stock or treasure of good works cannot hold out to pay his own debts?
Fifthly, though we strive to the uttermost to walk exactly before God, and
abstain from all known sins, so far as humane frailty permits in this
life, and fulfill all righteousness in doing all the commandments of God with
all our might: may we then superarrogate any thing to our selves, or
supererogate to others? No our Savior teaches us a contrary lesson, When you
shall have done all these things which are commanded you, say we are
unprofitable servants, for we have done that which was our duty to do, Luke
17.10. We are unprofitable servants, therefore not deserving of our Master, and
we do but that which is our duty to do, and therefore not more then we are
bound to do.
counsels which are not of necessity to be done, or things indifferent of
themselves, yet necessary to be done, for the safeguard of a man's life, or
goods. Then the scandal that arises to some by this, that others do them:
either proceeds from malice; and then that is a scandal of Pharisees, and to
be contemned; and no spiritual or temporal good is to be omitted for the same.
Or it proceeds from infirmity or ignorance, and it is the aforesaid scandal
of weakness. And for this scandal we must refrain for a time (according to
the example of our Savior, Matthew. 17. Who to avoid He foully mistaketh the
matter, it was no scandal to Christ to be poor that he might make us rich,
no more then to be abased, to exalt us; to be stripped, to cloth us; to take the
form of a servant, to make us free; to be condemned, to acquit us; to be in an
agony, to comfort us; and to die, to restore us to life. The viler he became
for our sakes, the more highly ought we to esteem of him. Neither did Christ
go any way about to conceal his poverty, nay he openly proclaimed it: The
foxes have holes, and fowls of heaven neasts, but the Son of man has not
where to lay his head, Matthew. 8.20. But the cause why at that time being
destitute of money, he wrought a miracle, was (as the text says) Matthew. 17.27.
That he might not offend them, who questioned him about tribute, by not paying
it. For though he was free, yet the Jews not taking notice of that freedom,
in probability would have inferred from his not paying, that he had denied
that tribute ought to be paid to Caesar, and consequently had denied Caesar's
authority and soverainty. See Luke 20.20. But if poverty be scandalous, why do
the Friars by a vow of perfection, as they term it, undertake this scandalous
poverty?
the scandal of the Jews concerning his poverty, bid Saint Peter go to the
Sea, etc.) even from the works of Evangelicall counsels and things otherwise
indifferent, although necessary to be done. Or we must do them secretly, lest
the ignorant, whose mind is weak be troubled. This must be done, until
having yielded a reason of our actions, and showed them to be good, or of
themselves indifferent, and necessary to be done for safeguard of life or
fortunes: and so the scandal cease, which proceeded from ignorance. But if
after a reason be yielded, the scandal shall not cease, it is not to be
esteemed a scandal proceeding from ignorance, but from malice, and to be
contemned. Neither ought we then to refrain from any the aforesaid actions to
avoid this scandal. Thus Abulensis in cap. 18. Matthew. q. 51. Salmeron, tom. 7.
tract. 29. Estius in cap. 8. ad Cor. 1. v. 13. Diana 5. part tract. 7o. de
scand. p. 186. who expressly teaches: that a man is not bound to loose his
goods and temporal fortunes to avoid the scandal of weak ones after an
admonition and reason (for the lawful doing of the act) be yielded. Lorca in
22. q. 43. ar. 8. n. 11. and diverse others cited by the said Diana. But if the
great ones (such as are Priests and Teachers) take this scandal, and the
doctrine, or action be profitable; they are not to be regarded, for they are
incurable, because they are blind; that is: they will not see and understand
what both God and reason dictates to them. And he that is weak (says Estius)
may be sufficiently instructed and taught, that his brother does well, and that
he ought not to be offended by his fact. After which sufficient and full
instructions, if he persevere in scandal; it will be the Scandal of Pharisees
as is aforesaid.

Now to prove the assertion, which is the first branch of the Minor. Scandal,
is a word or deed less right, apt to give occasion to another of spiritual
ruin. ^ut to go to Church is no deed less right (but prudently and chiefly
right) all circumstances considered.) Ergo, to go to Church is no scandal,
and consequenter, to go to Church can yield no occasion to my neighbor of
spiritual ruin; but rather an occasion of both his temporal and spiritual
conservation and edification. This Minor I prove. To go to hear a piece of a
Mass in English, is no deed less right. But to go to Church, is to go to
hear a I answer that the Mass being rightly understood our Liturgy ought not
to be called a piece of the Mass. For though there are some passages alike in
both: yet they tend not to the same end, nor are retained upon the same ground.
Every part of any thing has a reference to the whole, and consequently every
part of the Romish service to their Mass, as a preparatory or an appertenance,
or immediate part thereof; whereas no part of our service tends at all to
that end, nay we are so far from intending the sacrifice of the Mass in our
service, that we disclaim and abominate it and hold it no better then a Mass
of superstitions and contradictions; superstitions in the manner, and
contradictions in the matter thereof. For they teach it to be a sacrifice
properly so called, yet nothing therein is properly sacrificed: not the bread
and wine: for they are transubstantiated before the sacrifice; not Christ's
body, for no living thing can properly be sacrificed, unless it be slain, but
Christ as the Apostle teaches us, being once dead dies no more. Secondly,
they teach it, to be an external and sensible sacrifice, and yet Christ there
appears to no sense; but is as they teach, couched and concealed under the
accidents of bread and wine. Thirdly, they teach that it is an unbloody
sacrifice, and yet Christ's blood is there truly and really shed and drunk by
the communicants with the mouth. Fourthly, that it is a perfect and
all-sufficient sacrifice, and yet they repeat it and reiterate it daily.
Fifthly, Christ's body is there with his humane dimensions, and yet is whole in
the whole and whole in every smallest part and point of the Host. Secondly, I
say, that Christ indeed forbids us to cast pearl before swine, but no where to
take a pearl though out of a swines snout, if we find any such there.
Thirdly, I answer, that it cannot be prooved that any part or parcel of our
Service book, was originally taken out of the Mas^e. For though there are some
of the same Co^lects and Prayers in it, yet they ought not to be said to be
taken out of Missals as their original Fountain, since the most of them if not
all might be gathered out of more ancient Liturgies. For which. See Biblioth
Patru to 1. And if it be so, then it may be said; That the mud of Popery fell
into them, but they sprang not from Popery, but from purer fountains.
piece of a Mass in English. Ergo, to go to Church is no deed less right.
The Major I prove thus: to go to hear a whole Mass in English (the nature of
the thing considered, and abstracting from the constitution of the Church) is
not evil. For the diversity of the language takes nothing from the goodness
of the thing. As is manifest in the Greek Church, where Mass is always said
in Greek. So that if it be not evil in it self, to go to hear a whole
Mass in English, it is not evil, to go to hear a piece of a Mass in
English. And consequently not to go to Church.

Add that in the whole Latin Church; where it is not lawful to say Mass in
any other language then in Latin (because of the long It has been I confess,
a long custom in the Latin Church, ever since Pope Vitalian to celebrate the
Church Service in the Latin tongue, but it was never the custom of the
Catholic or Universal so to do. The Greek and Syrian, and African, and
other Churches had from the beginning, and have at this day their Service in
their own languages. Neither is the reason the Priest alleges here of any
force, namely, That
custom of the Church, kept always on foot for this reason: that as the
Catholic Religion as the Catholic Religion is universal, so it should be
exercised in an universal language which he will have to be the Latin. For
first there is no necessity that the Catholic Religion which is universal
should be exercised in an universal language, but rather in all languages.
Secondly, since the division of tongues at the tower of Babell, there was no
language universal in all the world, the Greek was for a time the furthest
spread, and after the Roman: but neither of them, nor any other, was spoken or
understood by all Christians, and at this day if we may believe travelers, no
language is so generally known and spoken as the Slavonian. Thirdly, the unity
of language makes nothing to the unity of Religion or the Church, neither
does the Apostle require that the Divine Service be performed in any one
tongue, but that it be done in a known tongue, to the edification of the
Church, 1 Cor. 14.4.12.14.16. And to that end, among others, was the gift of
tongues given.
is universal, so should it be exercised in an universal language) yet it is
lawful, and in use to say a piece of the Mass (as Collects, Prayers, Psalms,
Epistles, and Gospels) in any Language of any Country whatsoever within the
said Church.

It may be here objected first, that although to go to Church, be of its own
nature a thing indifferent, yet hic and nunc, it is evil. For considering the
circumstances of time and place, it has a show and appearance of evil, apt to
occasion sin in another. From which we are commanded to abstain by St. Paul, 1 Thessalonians. 5.22. saying, From all show of evil refrain your selves. To which I
answer, first: That all the appearance of evil, which, going to Church has,
is, that in England above other countries, Priests have not been freely left to
the Principles of Divinity or Laymen to their Christian liberty; but it has
been procured to have bin declared unlawful upon false suggestions, and
continued thus thought unlawful by some erroneous judgments. Which my
neighbor likewise phantasing erroneously apprehends it a species cast from
going to Church, which indeed is not so; nor otherwise, then if a man with a
blood-shotten eye should behold glass, and say it were red; when a part rei,
it were white. It were very hard, if I eating fish in the lent, and one
purblind seeing me eat, and apprehending it flesh, because he goes away
scandalized, as thinking me to have eaten flesh, by reason of his false eyes;
that I should be said to have given him scandal. So it would seem likewise as
hard, if a broken fancy, or an erring mind should conceive evil species
from mine actions, which a part rei are no species at all of them, but quite
contrary to their species; that I should thereby be judged to give scandal to
little ones. No: I hope as the erroneous eyes shall bear their own
imperfections; so the erroneous judgment shall bear its own mistake; and
neither shall accuse me before God of the scandal of little ones.

Hence I answer, secondly, to the place of the Apostle before objected, tha^
the appearance or show of evil, is to be understood; first that it proceeds
really from the act done, and that it be not only a conjecturall appearance,
but morally certain. That no man play Tom-foole in striking him that stands
next him without a cause. Secondly, that the appearance proceeds not from a
deed to be done of necessity, either by the Law of God, or nature. Otherwise
we might infer the Apostle to command contradictories, to refrain and not to
refrain from such a deed, whence proceeds the appearance. For if the thing be
commanded by the Law of God, it must necessarily be done, or otherwise sin.
And if it were to be done by the Law of Nature; the blessed Apostle was not so
unreasonable, as to bid us refrain from a thing in its own nature lawful,
and of necessity to be done; without admittance of some way to avoid scandal.
Although by reason of some circumstance, place or person, it might have a show
of evil, and so for some time be suspended, as some things of natural
necessity; yea, the Evangelicall counsels may have. But in such cases we are
to instruct and admonish the weak (as I by these presents do) that although
it should seem to them to be evil, or to have some show of evil, yet in very
deed it is not evil, but good. And I am constrained under pain of death to do
the same. After which instruction and admonition, if they still persist in
their scandal; it is not a scandal of little ones, but of Pharisees and great
ones. Neither does it proceed from infirmity or ignorance, but from malice:
and is not to be regarded. So that it seems a thing unreasonable, and in the
strength of judgment against nature, that a man shall more regard the trouble
of his neighbors conscience at a thing lawful, then the hazard of his own
life, and ruin of his own family and fortunes in the execution of the same.
See Diana for this Doctrine and all the Authors by him above cited.

If any shall here reply to my first answer of the objection, that the show of
evil is really in the act of going to Church, and not as falsely imagined: and
that this show of evil appears not only to weak and ignorant people, but to
men of understanding of all sorts; and not only to Catholics, but likewise to
Schismatics of all sorts: who in going to Church to save their goods, confess
that they do it against their conscience, as conceiving it to be unlawful by
reason of the aforesaid Declaration of the twelve Fathers in the Council of
Trent, and the foresaid Popes; which whether it were gotten by false
suggestions or no, they discern not, neither do they dispute, but simply
obey. To make up the rhyme in reason, the more simple they. For reason may teach
great ones, and men seeming of understanding that are Schismatics or
Lay-Catholiques the contrary; (because nothing is done at Church which is
either evil or hurtful:) and both reason and learning Priests. And therefore
I rejoice with Aristotle: Propter illorum cogitare, nihil mutatur in re, and
say, that the show of evil proceeds not from the act of going to Church. For
in all King Edwards time, and the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's time, until
the thirteenth year of her Reign, when all Catholics did or might go to
Church, going to Church by Catholics then being in fashion; none took
scandal thereby: because there was then, no show of evil. And why should
there be now more show of evil in the act, then at that time? If ye answer by
reason of the aforesaid Declaration. I reply that then the species of evil,
ought to be in the said Declaration, as gotten upon false grounds, and not in
the act of going to Church; which any man might easily perceive, considering
the nature of the act it self. And the experience of our distressed country
teaches us, that those indirect proceedings are more apt to generate scandal,
then the act of going to Church, which of its own nature is lawful, and has
been lawfully practiced and approved by the common opinion of all Divines of
any indifferency in other countries, and so might have been in ours, had it
not been for turbulent people, who for their own ends have more troubled the
Church in procuring of breves and rescripts then all other nations besides of
our condition.

To Schismatics, I say they sin not, in simply going to Church, but in going
to Church with an ill conscience, as thinking that to be sin, and doing the
same; which indeed is not so: and the ground of their error, they have had
from the misunderstanding of Catholics.

To weak ones I answer, desiring them to be satisfied, because I have and
shall prove the thing in it self to be lawful, and that I am (as I have said)
in danger and hazard of my life, in not doing the same. So that by a natural
necessity I am bound to it. Which necessity if it were not; I might
peradventure rest in the common Maxim of Philosophers. Frustra fit per plura,
quod potest fieri per pauciora. It is in vain done by more, that may be done by
less.

It may be objected secondly, that it is as much scandal to go to Church, as
it was to eat of those meats offered to Idols. Of which Saint Paul speaks, 1
Cor. 8. the eating of which in it self considered, although the Apostle
thought no sin in Wise men, or great ones; because they did eat the same
without any relation at all to the Idol, as he seems to intimate, verse, 4.
yet because some ignorant Christians (seeing the said Wise men eat) did
likewise eat the same meats with conscience and devotion, as if the said meats
had received some virtue or sanctification from the Idol. Saint Paul exhorted
the Wise men, to abstain from eating the said flesh; for that out of mistake
and misunderstanding of their eating: the aforesaid Christians, then newly
converted did take offense and sin. Whereupon in great zeal he said, verse. 13.
If meat scandalize my brother, I will never eat flesh, lest I scandalize my
brother. So that one would think, that the blessed Apostle would rather have
chosen to die (as the aforesaid words may import) then by eating the said meats
or any flesh to have scandalized his brother. And St. Augustine in express
terms, lib. de bon. conjugali cap. 16. says: It was far better to have
dyed, then to have eaten of those meats so offered to Idols, conformable to
himself elsewhere: who likewise says. That a man may not commit (or occasion)
so much as a See page 28. Letter r.
venial sin, to gain the whole world. Which he that gives scandal, must
needs at the least commit. Therefore what the said Apostle and St. Augustine
said and thought of the eating of the said meats; the same ought every
Catholic to take as said of the act of going to Church.

I answer, denying the consequence: and say that there is a great disparitie
between the said meats offered to Idols, and eaten in the temple with
Infidels: and the act of going to Church. First, because in the meats so
offered, there was not only a show and appearance of evil, but a moral
malignitie therein, as well to great, as to little ones. Which although the
wise did take away, that the said malignitie touched not them; yet the weak
neither did, or had understanding so to do. Whence the Apostle said, verse. the
7. that there was not knowledge in all. For the moral malignitie; that was in
those meats to all, was a profanation and impuritie in them, as being things
dedicated to the Idol or the Devil. So that as a man receives good by holy?
bread or things sanctified; so he receives evil by a thing: profaned or
maligned. Which moral malignitie the Wise taking away (as I have said) by
blessing the said meats to the use of their bodies, and conceiving both them,
and the Idol as they were in themselves, mere creatures, both created for the
use of man, did eat what was useful to eat without sin. Whereas the weak,
not so much as considering the profaneness of the meats, but (seeing the
Wiser eat) with error of judgment conceived virtue and sanctification in the
same: as being eaten in the temple and offered to the Idol by Infidels, and so
with conscience and devotion they received the same: and were (as the Apostle
says, in the said seventh verse.) polluted thereby. Now in going to Church,
their is no moral malignitie at all; in so much, that scarce the weakest man
can invent how to sin by any thing that is there done. It being of its own
nature so indifferent, and to a good intention, good, that a part rei their is
no appearance of evil therein.

If any one say that there is appearance of evil, and scandal by reason of
disobedience, in that, the act is done contrary to the declaration of the said
twelve Fathers, and certain Popes. I answer, that the declaration is, as if it
were not; because gotten upon most false suggestions, as I have and shall say;
and consequently the minds of the said Fathers and wills of the said Popes is to
us in this matter as yet unknown: and the species or show of evil from thence
proceeding, rather to be lamented then regarded. If the reply be made as
before, that the suggestions are not examined, but the will of the aforesaid
Superiors has always been held, as declaring that which has been best for
the soul, and dehorting from going to Church, and that so by reason and virtue
hereof, there results a certain show of evil, in doing the same, which makes
it appear to most men unlawful, and consequently scandalous. I rejoice as
before, that the instruction and admonition of the indifferency and necessity
of the act, ought to take away all scandal howsoever apprehended: and that
such as apprehend it unlawful, and will not be satisfied, cannot do it. And
lastly such as will not be satisfied, but scandalized, are not to be regarded,
as I have said before.

Add out of Navar Man. c. 23. n. 38. That it is not a sin in a man, not to
obey his superior, when he has probable reasons to think, that his superior
was deceived in so commanding, or that he would not have given such a command,
if he had known the truth. And if any show of evil result, or scandal arise
in that he is not obeyed, the necessity of doing the contrary act, being in
danger of death, must excuse and take away all scandal, for in such a case no
humane laws bind as I shall hereafter say. I answer to this Objection
secondly, that there is a disparitie between the said meats, and going to
Church, in that the said meats were not to be eaten of necessity: that is,
there was neither hazard of life or goods in abstaining; or more gain then
prejudice of souls in eating. And therefore it was more requisite, that the
wise should abstain in a matter of so little moment or necessity where there
was scandal, then that the weak should have been instructed and admonished,
that it might have been done without sin, which is not so, in going to
Church. For in abstaining from thence, there is both hazard of life and
fortunes, and as I shall hereafter say, loss of souls: and therefore of
necessity, the weak are to be admonished and instructed, that there is no
sin in the act: neither is going to Church prejudicial, but advantageous to
souls, as experience teaches.

Add that if there were any humane law or Ecclesiastical law forbidding going
to Church, it were not to be fulfilled with hazard of life or goods (as all
Casuists hold) See Azorius and Navarr. consil. de haeret. above cited: if
otherwise it does not appear forbidden by the law of God. For all humane laws
tend to the preservation and conservation of the whole man, even in the
greatest state of perfection: and where by reason of keeping a law; disjuncture
either of soul or body may probably follow; there that law is for the time to
be suspended: as appears in the law forbidding to eat flesh in the Lent,
saying the divine office, with danger of being apprehended and the like: where
the weak ones are rather to be instructed of the necessity of suspending the
law, then the body to perish by keeping the same: the same say in our case. And
I do with reason persuade my self, considering the Apostles whole discourse
in the aforesaid 8. Chapter to the Corinthians, that notwithstanding his words,
verse the 13. if there had been no other food to have been gotten for him, to
have preserved him from famine, then the said flesh so offered to Idols, that
he would rather have persuaded the weak ones, that there had been no sin in
it, if with due circumstances they had eaten, and how, and in what manner they
might safely have eaten, and so have prevented his sinning against the
brethren, verse 12. and striking their weak consciences, then by abstaining
from that (and as is supposed wanting all other food) have perished through
hunger.

It may be objected thirdly, that those famous Doctors of Rhemes, William Allen
(afterward Cardinal) Richard Bristoe, William Reynolds, and the aforesaid
Gregory Martin; who translated the whole Bible into English with annotations
upon the same, in many places, as well of the Old Testament, as of the new,
held it unlawful for any Catholic to go to the Protestant Church. Ergo, It
is unlawful and scandalous to go to the same. To the antecedent I answer,
that the said Doctors were reverend and learned men, and their work renowned:
but because they would have the same go forth with more l^stre, as pleasing
the Pope; and to avoid all opposition of the aforesaid suggestors, they
forsook the common opinion of Divines in two points then agitated: the one,
that the Pope could not depose Kings of their temporal dominions. And the
other, that Catholics might frequent the Churches of Schismatics. Which they
might well do for their ends, being Doct^rs, and giving some seeming probable
reas^ns for the same; the contrary opinions not being condemned by the Church,
but left under dispute. Yet hence the consequence does not appear true. For if
the aforesaid Doctors had spoken from their hearts, grounding themselves upon
the Church or reason; their interpretation of Scriptures with notes, would with
me in these points have had great authority; and the conclusion have stood
good. Whereas now one of the said four, to wit: Gregory Martin having
delivered his opinion that it was lawful for a Catholic to go to Church, as
appears by the said book of R. P. page 109. and 110. it seems they did not
speak in that point their minds freely: peradventure because it was not
expedient for all sorts of people: which I confess to be the best reason. Yet
for Gods sake let us speak the truth in these troublesome times to men (at
leastwise) of reason and understanding. Again the very reasons they give in
their annotations upon the fifth Chapter and 19. verse of the 4. book of Kings
do show, that they did intend but seeming reason, and not wholly convincing;
for whereas for our opinion is, and always has been usually brought the
example of See the letter o. page 17.
Naaman the Syrian, permitted (as I have said before) by the Prophet Elizeus,
to go to the Idolatrous temple Rimmon; which is most proper to our case; the
aforesaid good Doctors reject the said example as nothing like to the same.

1. The first reason is, because of the time, for since the preaching of
Christ's Gospel (say they) we are more strictly commanded to profess our faith,
then in Naamans time. Which reason I conceive under favor to be impertinent as
well to Naamans case as to ours: for the doing of an act indifferent, may
neither be a profession or a denial of faith, but a mean between both, viz.
a not discovery of the same. Neither was it more lawful in Naamans time to
deny God, then now.

2. The second Reason is, because of the place: For that the Noblemans religion
was not practiced in the Country where he went to the temple: and so there
could no scandal arise thereby. This reason is in my judgment besides the
purpose: for no more is Catholic religion practiced in this Country where we
go to Church. Again, it proves not Naamans case hereby more lawful, then the
going to Church; for there may be scandal, where a thing of its own nature
may be lawfully done: as there might have been scandal in our Saviors
poverty, Matthew. 17. if he had not prevented it. And there may be no scandal,
and yet the act unlawful. Therefore if it were lawful abstracting from
scandal, that being in our case easily avoided, or taken away, the thing may
still remain lawful. For if he that goes to Church be a known Catholic,
the weak are to be admonished of the indifferency of the thing, and the
urgent necessity he has, to do it; and so scandal is avoided. If he be not
known; how can he give more scandal, then Naaman did? or to whom?

3. The third reason is, because of the difference of persons, in that Naaman
had an Office to serve the King in the temple, and therefore he might go, lest
otherwise the King should have thought himself disdained. This reason seems
to me very strange: that a man may go to Church to serve his King, and may not
go to Church to serve himself (when as charity always begins at home:
and if a man be naught in or to himself, to whom can he be good?) or that
fear of displeasure through apprehended disdain, can excuse a man from doing
that which were otherwise unlawful; as though a man were not bound, rather to
suffer the displeasure of his King, with loss of his life, then suffer wrack
of his own conscience: and if fear of displeasure did excuse Naaman, why
should not the danger of death, loss of fortunes, ruin of posterity, and the
like, excuse Catholics?

4. The fourth reason, and most especial difference is (say they) that Naaman
made a promise before the Prophet and his own train, that he would from thence
forth serve only the true God: and to that purpose carried earth with him to
make an Altar for sacrifice. Whereas those that go to the Protestant Church,
do not renounce all heresies, nor profess to frequent Mass, etc. But (pray
give me leave to say) they do; and that herein, there is no difference at all.
For Catholics that go to Church are known to their Confessaries, and their
mind and intention is likewise to him known, as Naamans was to the Prophet.
And if they be known Catholics, their belief is likewise known, at
leastwise to their train, if not to others, by their communion with the Sea of
Rome; so that herein there is no disparitie at all. And if they be not known;
it is prudence to keep themselves so, more then to their Confessaries; which
is a sufficient protestation in these troublesome times. For I wonder by what
law a m^n is bound to make any other Protestation of his belief for the doing
of a thing indifferent?

So that (as I have said) for the said four reasons, and likewise because
there is Idolatry committed at Protestant Churches, (which I never yet could
find, as often as I have frequented the same, and do hope to prove the
contrary) the aforesaid Doctors make it unlawful and scandalous to go to
Church; and our case different from Naamans. Hence they liken it to that of
Eleazarus and the other Maccabees, 2 Mac. 6.7. who were commanded by eating
Swines flesh to depart from the law of God, and their fathers. Which (say they)
by no means was lawful to do, or to make show of doing the same: And a man
may swear it true. For Swines flesh being forbidden by the law, they were
bound under sin, to abstain from the same. And if they should have made
their brethren believe in words, that they had eaten, they would have told an
untruth, with dissimulation in a matter forbidden by the law, both which were
See the letter R page 28.
mortal sins: which is as far different from our case, as light from
darkness. For we contend that to go to a Protestant Church, is by no law
forbidden, but a thing indifferent, and by a good intention may be made really
good without any dissembling. And they bring us an example of a thing, which in
doing, many sins are committed: so that for the reasons which I have given, I
conceive that the authority of the said rewoned Doctors concludes nothing
against our assertion; unless the Protestants were an assembly of fallen
heretics, where there were danger of sin by subversion or the like, which
can never be proved.

It may be fourthly objected, that it is the common opinion of men, that to go
to Church is scandalous, because it is a sign of heretical falsehood, and a
man so doing is reputed as fallen, both of Catholics and Protestants. I
answer, that it is false; and experience teaches us the contrary. For who made
it such a sign? and Schismatics that go to Church with an ill conscience,
only to save their goods, notwithstanding in this, they are accounted to hurt
only themselves, yet of all Catholics they are trusted and esteemed as
honest men, and of Protestants they are esteemed no other. And they sin not
(as I have said) in going to Church, but in going with an ill conscience, and
being barred of simple Priests from other means of salvation, and in doing so,
give scandal. But you will say: they deny their faith in this act. I deny
that. They deny only recusancie with an ill conscience, and not religion. Yet
I grant that such Schismatics profess no faith at all. And if there be any
other opinion of men concerning them, it is malicious and pharisaical,
generated by the craft and deceit of others, under the species of pretended
piety, making people believe, that there is sin and scandal in the act, when
there is none; and if any Protestant thinks otherwise of this; they have it
from the erroneous customary opinion of some Catholics revealing the same.

It may be objected fifthly. To communicate with heretics is sin, and
scandal: but to go to Church, is to communicate with heretics. Ergo. It is
sin and scandal. To which I answer, first distinguishing the Major: to
communicate with heretics publicly, and particularly denounced to be such, or
in their heresy. I grant the Major, but deny the Minor in the same sense; but
to communicate with heretics not denounced such, not in point of heresy, to
be sin: that is most false: for then we should neither eat, drink, buy or
sell, with Protestants which is most absurd. Which absurdity to take away, and
all scruple rising from thence by communicating with heretics as well in
service as otherways, was the before mentioned constitution of Martin the
fifth, prudently made.

Add that if we may not communicate with Protestants in going to Church, we
must communicate with Brownists in refraining the Church, and so be thought the
same with them, or else every one must be bound to get himself convicted for a
Popish Recusant, that so Protestants may know him to be a Catholic and no
Brownist; and so to avoid water he must run into the fire. If you answer,
that so he goes not to Church it makes no matter what Protestants think of
him, for Catholics know what he is. I reply then by the same reason, that if
he go to Church, it makes no matter what Protestants think of him, for
Catholics may likewise know what he is.

I answer secondly, that the Major supposes what is not granted. viz. That
Protestants with whom I go to Church are formal heretics: which I desire to
be first proved. For an heretic is he that obstinately denies any article
This definition of an heretic is both defective and redundant: defective, for
every obstinate denial of an article of faith makes not an heretic, unless
his conscience be clearly convinced of his error out of the word of God, it
is redundant also, for a man may be an heretic by denying any article of
faith, though that article be not proposed to him by the Catholic Church to be
believed; though but his pastor, or any other, religious Christian out of Gods
word clearly propound it to him and prove, it or it be read by himself in the
Scripture: if he obstinately persist in the denial thereof after his
conscience is convinced, he becomes an heretic.
of faith proposed by the Catholic Church to be believed. How can a
Protestant be said obstinately (which includes a known infallibility rejected)
to deny an article proposed by the Catholic Church (as I have said before)
when he believes The Protestants of England know other Churches besides their
own, and some have learnedly discoursed of all the Churches in the Christian
world, as Purchase, Brierwood, Mocket, Mr. Paget, and others: (...) true it is,
they acknowledge no infallibility in the Roman or any particular Church, nor
receive any Church for true and Orthodoxe, which consents not with them in
all points of faith either expressly set down, or by clear and necessary
consequence deduced from holy Scriptures.
none other Church, but his own? For although Protestants hold diverse tenets
contrary to the Catholic The Protestants hold nothing contrary to the
Catholic Church, though they hold many things contrary to the present Roman
Church, which is neither the Catholic Church, nor a sound member thereof, as
is proved invincibly by John Reynolds praefat. thesium, Sect. 12. and These. ss.
27. and Apol. 5.23. And Bilsons answer to Cardinal Allen, part. 4. And Abbot
against Bishop, in a Treatise entitled The true ancient Roman Catholic, to
which none answer has yet been given, nor sufficient can be.
Church; which have been justly condemned in their Authors as heretics. Yet
whether obstinately held in them (the contrary not being sufficiently proposed
at leastwise to most of them) I much doubt. For as Diana says, 5a. part page
240. col. 1a. A man speaking heresy, that is, a proposition condemned by the
Church, without an heretical consent, is no heretic: neither in curreth
excommunication denounced against heretics; so that although they be
incredulous With what face can he say that the Protestants are incredulous and
believe not the truth? Who entirely believe the whole doctrine of the
Scriptures, together with the three Creeds; that which bears the name of the
Apostles, the Nicene, and that of Athanasius, together with the four first
general Councels; in which time the Church most flourished: as also the joint
Doctrine and unanimous consent of all the Fathers both of the Greek and Latin
Church for five hundred years after Christ our Lord came into the flesh. Let
this traducer of the reformed Churches answer punctually, whether he believes
that the learned Doctors, Confessors, and Martyrs who lived and died within
the first 500. years, held the entire Catholic faith necessary to salvation
or no? If they held it not, how were they saved, upon what good ground or
warrant are so many of them canonized for Saints even by the Roman Church? but
on the other side, if they believed all things necessary to salvation, how can
we be esteemed incredulous, or defective in our faith, who believes all that
can be proved to have been jointly believed, and unanimously professed by them.
, and believe not the truth; yet they are not properly, and in rigor formal
heritiques.

Add that there is no more sin, to go to the Protestant Church, then to go
to them to dinner, or to go with them to a play, or other sports. And I for my
part had rather give twelve Is this the holy Roman Religion, to make a
May Game of Religion? and to go to Sermons as to a play to make themselves
merry, and dispell a Melancholy dumpe? Besides their own third commandment
enjoynes them to keep Holy Days, and their own Casuists allow the Lords day
to be a day that is holy. And is this a piece of holiness to go on such days
to a play? yet neither do I believe that he can readily name the man, much
less many men that spoke fustian with gravity in our Pulpits, but I am sure he
who patched up this Safeguard out of rags of Religion and falsehood speaks
Linsewoolsey through his whole Discourse, and contrary to the law ploweth with
an Ox and an Ass. The later of which here brayeth irrationally and unjustly
against the generality of Protestant Preachers and Sermons. Forsooth, we are
silly weak and ignorant men, but they are all profound Gamaliels, nay
Angelical and Seraphicall Doctors. Whereunto I answer, as Saint Paul did to
the calumnies of the false Apostles, 2 Cor. 10.12. We dare not make our selves
of the number to compare our selves with them that commend themselves, but they
measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves amongst themselves
understand not. The Catholics he says, are Hounds (blood Hounds I grant) and
our Ministers timorous Hares, they dare not encounter the weakest Roman
Catholic, they neither understand the controversies of Religion, nor dare
meddle with any in their Sermons. If this were true which all our hearers know
to be most false: yet me thinks Iuv^nal speaks very good reason, Loripedem
rectus derideat, Aethiopem albus. And what great Clarks (I pray) were those of
whom Boniface Bishop of (...) ^p^ke in his time; heretofore we had wooden
Chalices and golden Priests, ^ut now we have golden Chalices and wooden
Priests; what great Gamaliels were they of whom Bonaventure complains; Quidam
sacerdotum, ^lavem habent (he speaks of the Key of knowledge) quidam
claviculam quidam nullam; what was he upon whom Sir Thomas Moore thus plays in
his ^pigr^m, tu been cavisti ne te ulla occidere possit litera, nam nulla est
l^tera nota tibi: Be not frighted at the words of the Apostle the letter
kills, thou have taken good order that it shall not kill thee, for thou
know not a lett^^. What was he of whom Poggius writes, that after he had
said Mass, bidding the Feast of Epiphanie, he spoke to the honest rusticks on
this wise; My good neighbors, to morrow you are to keep good cheer and
celebrate a high feast, the feast of Saint Epiphanie, a most holy wight, but
whether Epiphanie were male or female, a he Saint or a she Saint, I find it
not in my books. What was he that Christened a child with this form of words:
Ego baptizo te in nomine Patria, Filia, and Spiritua Sancta What was he, who
reading in the Gospel of Saint John, invenimus Messiam, lept out of his skin
for joy, saying, Now to the confusion of all Hugonots, I have found the Mass
in the new Testament. What was he, who reading in the Epistle, Melchisedec Rex
Salem panem and vinum protulit, translated it thus; King Melchisedec brought
forth salt, bread and wine. What was he, who in a dispute about putting
heretics to death, most Clarke like prooved his conclusion, that heretics
ought to suffer death, because the Apostle says; Hereticum post unam aut
alteram admoni^ionem devita. 1 Titus 3.10 (...), that is, shun or avoid but
this silly animal mistook the ver^e devita, for a proposition and a nowne, as
if the Apostle had said; de vita, out of life with him. Neither does Pope
Siricius better argue against P^iests marriage. Men in holy Orders must not
contract Matrimony, because the Apostle says, They that are in the flesh
cannot please God; neither Innocentius against Laymens reading Scripture: The
beast that touched the Mount, was to be thrust through with a dart. Ergo. The
people must not meddle with the Scripture. As for their manner of preaching*
who so much scorn and deride ours, let all travelers speak, whether it be
not thus. A Parish Priest, or some Monk or Friar, gets up into a spacious
Pulpit, and there runs himself out of breath, from one side to the other;
before his hour glass be half run, of whom a man might well demand, as some
one did in Tully of a declaimer. Quot millia pass^um declamasti? When this
shaveling between whose head and heaven, there is not a hair first appears
to the people, he crosses himself (as their manner is, when they are afraid
of evil spirits) then reads the Gospel of the day in Latin, whereof the
people understand not a word: and after he has spent some time in translating
it, and scored out his way, he conveighes a prayer into a parenthesis,
concluding it with an Ave Maria. After this, resuming the words of his Text, in
the handling of them, he robs and deplumes the late written pos^ils upon that
^ospell, and like the Crow in the Poet Clothes his Discourse with the choicest
of their feathers, in the end sticks two or three gaudy feathers out of the
Peacock^ tail: I mean the golden Legend, telling them how St. Domin^ck spying
the Devil sitting in the Church like a Sparrow, called him to him, plucked off
all his feathers, and put him to a great reproach: or how St. Dunstane took
the Devil by the nose with a pair of tongs fire hot: Or how St. Bernard ^lest
good Ale, and giving the same to certain lewd persons, caused divine grace to
enter into them. And here if the Author and his Consorts please to be merry at
Sermons, spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici: But if any more ingenuous
Papists like Lodovicus Vives, condemn the Author of your golden Legend, for a
man of a brazen face, and leaden heart, and bring better stuff; yet even these
come far short of the Preachers of the Reformed Churches, in many remarkable
particulars. First, all the Popish Preachers take their text out of the Gospel
or ^pistle of the Day: but the Protestants confine themselves not to those
parcels of Scripture, but make choice as God shall direct them, for the most
profit of their flock; of any part of the Canonical Scripture to expound it.
Again, the Protestant Preachers in their translation follow the originals, the
Greek and Hebrew: the Papists as they are bound under pain of a curse, follow
the corrupt vulgar Latin, which they may not upon any pretense reject. The
Protestants deliver no Doctrine of faith, for which they bring not Gods word.
The Papists ground many of their Doctrines upon unwritten Traditions or Decrees
of Popes, or Councels. The Protestants build upon the true foundation, gold,
silver, and precious stones, that is* heavenly, solid and precious Doctrine,
conformable to holy Scriptures. The Papists hay and stubble, as namely, the
putting Thrones and Dominations, with Archangels, Angels, Cherubins and
Seraphins, in rank and file; a Geographical^ description of four Regions
under the earth, Hell, Purgatory, Limbus Patrum, and Limbus Infantum; an
imaginary treasury of super-abundant satisfactions to be dispensed by the Pope,
hallowing of Water, Salt, Cream, etc. Christening Bells, Singing Dirges, and
Trentals, Pilgrimages, Whippings, Masses, without Communicants, dry Communions,
censing Pictures, Invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, with Relics,
and such like trash.
pence to hear a Sermon, then take five shillings to see a play. For there is
no such sport as to hear a weak fellow speak fustian with gravitie, or tell
a fable of the whore of Babylon, or De te fabula narratur, unless you can
substantially refute Vigniers his Theater of Popes, or Plessis his Historia
Papatus, or Abbot, and Down. and Powell, and infinite others accurate and
elaborate Treatises, De Antichristo, you must ask blessing of the whore of
Babylon as your mother.
Babylonians (for so now they term Catholics) with erected eyes in earnest.
Or why should it be more lawful to see a play where most commonly intercedes
scurrilitie and obscene gestures, and the end of which, is nothing, but
vanity: then to hear a Sermon, where perhaps in some places or by some simple
men, their may be some untruth told of the Pope to please their Auditory;
although most commonly nothing but morality, which is the end and intention of
the same? I pray resolve me!

2. It is not unlawful to go to Church, because Recusancie is a distinctive
sign. Which is the second branch of the Minor.
THat Recusancy is a distinctive sign of a Catholic from a Protestant is most
false. Which is thus proved. If Recusancie be a distinctive sign, it is a
sign natural or by institution; but neither can be said. Ergo, it is no
sign. The Minor is proved. Not natural, for as Hurtado above cited well
observes. Actions and things are not of their own nature significant: but have
natural and political uses independent of any signification. For a bush hung
out at a Tavern door does naturally signify no more wine to be sold, then
any other creature whatsoever. Nor does the habit of a Bishop naturally
signify a Bishop more then a Judge: and so of other things. No more do
naturally the actions of men.

But admit that Recusancy were improperly said a natural sign, yet it would
naturally signify no more a Catholic then a Brownist (for he refuses
likewise to go to Church) or any other Sectary. Although a posteriori it might
be thought by discourse to signify some one displeased with the Protestant
Church, but why, or wherefore, it would never signify.

Not by institution: for if so, who instituted the same? God, or man? Not man;
for it is out of his power, to sign the people of God, from not his people. It
is only the owner of the flock, that must sign the sheep, and none other;
unless, it be by special order from him. Hence when God would sign his
people in the old Testament, from the people of other Nations; he himself
instituted Circumcision, Gen 17. as a distinctive sign between them and
others: that whosoever had that sign, should be of his people; and who so had
it not, was to be rejected. Neither was it sufficient that any man had
accidentally, and by the institution of Abraham, any other sign, by which he
might be known from others: because he was not thought sufficiently marked,
nor accounted any one of Gods people, by any other sign then Circumcision.
Which was the sole mark of God, saying: All the male kind of you shall be
Circumcised. And this is consonant to reason. For one man may get a distinctive
sign of another man's institution; shall God therefore own him? Brownists (as I
have said) have Recusancie, does it therefore follow, that they are likewise
Catholics? If a sheep in my neighbors flock should tear an ear in a
bramble, or bush, or accidentally break an horn; this sheep is hereby
distinct from the rest; yet the owner, does not own it by that mark: but by a
mark of his own institution and ruddle. So it is in the present.

That God did not institute the same, it is so evident, that it needs no
proof. For where may we find his institution? Unless we should run to the
all-knowing spirit of heretics. Hence it follows that Recusancie is no
distinctive sign.

If you ask me, what is then the sign to know a Catholic from any other
Sectary? I answer. His belief of the Creed of the Catholic Church, and his
l^fe at all times in communion with the Sea Apostolic. So Stratford, lib. 2.
de Eccles. cap. 6. page 188.

It may be here objected, first the common opinion of Divines (as the said R.
P. says) 2a. 2ae. q. 3. To use a distinctive sign of a false religion, that
properly is such, is a denial of faith, and evil in it self. But the Service
said in a Protestant Church is such. Ergo. I grant the Major. For if the sign
be proper of a people rejected of God as (since the promulgation of the Gospel)
Circumcision is to a Jew, the Major must needs be true. But if the sign be
garments or the like, used to the worship and ceremonies of a false law, which
some fondly call a proper sign, then the Major, meaning the use of such a
sign to be a denial of faith is false according to Diana resol. 34. page 191.
above cited, Azorius, Sanches, and many others there. Because such signs being
natural things, may be lawfully used (as I have said before) independent of
any such signification; and so not properly signs (whatsoever R. P. says to
the contrary upon his own bare word). The Minor proposition I deny. For who
instituted that service to be such a sign? not God, as all Catholics will
confess; but rather the contrary, it being Catholic. Not themselves; for it
would savor too much weakness, to think that they would institute to
themselves, a sign of a false religion. And if it be taken for a sign
naturally (although improperly) signifying: then I say of its own nature, it
signifies no more a false Religion in a Protestant, then a pious ceremony in a
Catholic. For Catholics say the Will you call it the same wine which was
powered out into two cups, whereof one has store of ratsbane in it? See page
16. letter ^. and page 33. letteru
same service. Catholics preach morality, and each There was never such a
profane gamster heard of as this Mass Priest, who plays not only with the
word of God, and prayers, but with Sacraments here, and most solemn oaths
hereafter? what horrible prophannesse, what detestable hypocrisy is it? I will
not say for a Lay Papist, but a Romish Priest, not only to be at our Service,
but to stay at the Communion, to hear the Ministers exhortation out of the
Apostle, to all persons that come to the holy Table, Diligently to try and
examine themselves, before they presume to eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup: for as the benefit is great, if with a true penitent heart and lively
faith, we receive that holy Sacrament (for then we spiritually eat the flesh
of Christ, and drink his blood; then we dwell in Christ, and Christ in us; we
be one with Christ and Christ with us) so is the danger great, if we receive
the same unworthily; for then we be guilty of the body and blood of Christ our
Savior, we eat and drink our own damnation, not considering the Lords body,
we kindle Gods wrath against us, when we provoke him to plague us with diverse
diseases, and sundry kinds of death. Nay more, if he join with the whole
congregation in the rehearsal of the words of the institution, and the
consecratory prayer, will he present himself on his knees (for he excepts no
Ceremonies) and receive the consecrated elements, delivered to him with these
words; The body of our Lord Jesus Christ, which was given for thee preserve thy
body and soul unto eternal life; and yet all this while, never think of
receiving the Sacrament; but only of eating a piece of bread, and drinking a
draught of wine, which shall be better done with the remembrance of Christ then
without it. He will say, that our Sacrament is nothing but common bread and
wine, and that naught else is to be received a^ our Communion Table. The Lord
rebuke thee, thou false tongue! What* because we believe not that the bread and
wine is transubstantiated into Christ's body and blood; must it therefore be
nothing but common bread and bare wine. By the same reason he might say, that
because the water in Baptism is not transubstantiated into Christ's blood, that
therefore it is nothing but fair water; and he may in a jesting manner wash a
child in remembrance of Christ's washing us with his blood. It is true, we
teach with Theodoret, Dial. 2. That the sacred symbols after consecration,
depart not out of their own nature, but still remain, (...), in their former
substance shape and figure: but withal we teach, that they remain not the
same in use, signification and supernatural efficacy; by virtue of Christ's
promise to all that worthily partake of the same. Neither could this profane
scoffer be ignorant hereof, for he says, He has often been at our Service,
where we profess, that all, who with a lively faith receive the holy Sacrament
spiritually, eat the flesh of Christ and drink his blood. He also makes
mention in this Pamphlet of the 39. Articles, which he will have to be the
definition of a Protestant, and in those Articles, he could not but read, Art.
28. Christ's body is given, received and eaten in the Supper, but only after a
heavenly and spiritual manner; And in the Apology of the Church of England,
part. 2. cap. 14. The Supper of the Lord, is not only a sign of the love that
Christians ought to bear amongst themselves, one to the other, but rather it
is a Sacrament of our Redemption by Christ's death, in so much, that to such as
rightly, worthily, and with faith receive the same, the bread which we break,
is the partaking of the body of Christ, and likewise the cup of blessing, is a
partaking of the blood of Christ. With which confession of ours, fully
accords the Helvetian, the French, the Belgicke, the Augustane, and the
Swevick: as he that has an ear may hear in the Harmony of Confessions,
Printed, 1581. cap. 21. De sacra coena Domini. What should I need for further
proof hereof, either to allege the testimony of Calvin. Epist. 31. Non modo
figuratur in coenae communio quam habemus cum Christo, sed etiam exhibetur:
neque verba illic nobis dantur a Domino, sed veritas ac res constat cum verbis.
Haec porro communio non imaginaria est, sed qua in unum corpus unamque
substantiam cum capite nostro coalescimus: There is not only figured in the
Supper, that communion which we have with Christ, but it is also exhibited;
neither does our Lord deceive us, but the truth of the thing is correspondent
to his words; neither is the communion we speak of, an imaginary, but such a
real one, whereby we grow into one body, and one substance with Christ, our
head; or the testimony of Bucer. Epist. ad Italos addit, hoc est corpus meum,
hic sanguis meus, id credamus nec dubitemus haec dari nobis his ipsis symbolis,
and dari in cibum and potum vitae aeternae ut magis magisque vivamus in
Christo, and habeamus illum manentem in nobis: He adds this is my body, this
is my blood; let us believe it and no way doubt, but that these things are
given unto us by or with these very symbols, and that they are given unto us
for the food and drink of eternal life, that we may more and more live in
Christ, and have him living in us. It never came into the thought of any
professor of the Gospel, to celebrate the Supper of the Lord, without the
Lord, as Bucer speaks in this Epistle, or exclude him from his own Table. We
teach he is there truly present, and is truly received by all worthy
communicants but spiritually by faith, not carnally with the mouth according to
the gross Capernaitical conceit of Romanists. For first our Savior in the
sixth of John, where he commands all, to eat his flesh, and drink his
blood, verse. 53. affirming that his flesh is meat indeed, and his blood is
drink indeed; perceiving that some were offended thereat, saying, verse. 60.
this is a hard saying, who can bear it; thus he declares his own meaning,
verse. 63. The words which I speak unto you, they are spirit and they are life,
that is, spiritually to be understood, not carnally and grossly. Secondly, the
Orthodox Fathers disclaim this carnal eating with the mouth: St. Cyril in his
Anathems denies the Sacrament to be hominis comestionem, An Anthropophagie or
man eating, St. Chrysostom says, it is mensa aquilarum, not graculorum: and
St. Austine, that it is cibus mentis, not ventris or dentis; the food of the
soul, not of the tooth or belly: Tract 20. in Johan. Vt quid paras dentes and
ventrem creed and manducasti: Why do thou prepare thy teeth and thy belly,
believe and thou have eaten: and St. Cyprian, de coena Dom. haec quoties agimus
non, dentes ad manducondum acuimus, sed fide sincera panem sanctum frangimus:
As often as we do these things, we do not wh^t our teeth to eat, but with
sincere faith we break that holy bread. Thirdly, Christ never instituted any
Sacramental action, but it was profitable to the soul; but the eating of
Christ's flesh with the mouth, and swallowing it down in the stomach, does no
way at all profit the soul. Fourthly, Christ never wrought any miracle
outwardly upon the creature; but the truth thereof appeared, even to sense, when
he turned the water into wine, Ioh. 2. The change was discovered by the taste,
verse. 9, 10. When the Ruler of the feast had tasted it, he said to the
Bridegroom thou have kept the good wine till now: In like manner when Christ
multiplied the five Barley loaves and the two fishes, both the taste and the
stomach, and the eyes of all that were present gave testimony to the truth of
this miracle. For they did all eat and were satisfied, and saw twelve bask^ts
remaining full of the fragments or broken meat which remained to them that had
eaten. Neither can it be showed, that ever Christ the Author of truth deluded
the sense. If therefore the bread had been truly and really turned into the
substance of flesh either the sight, or the taste, or the touch would have
discerned this change, which yet as themselves confess, discover nothing but
the whiteness, the roundnesse, the taste, and other accidents of bread.
Fifthly, If the flesh of Christ may be eaten with the mouth without faith, not
only infidels and reprobates, but even rats and mice might sometimes through
the negligence of Priests gnaw upon the consecrated Host, and eat the flesh of
the Son of God, which were horrid to imagine and blasphemous to utter. Sixthly,
if the Romish Priests undoubtedly believe this doctrine of transubstantiation,
as they do other Articles of their faith: why did Garnet and other Popish
Priests when they were required to say these or the like words; if after I have
consecrated and pronounced the words, this is my body, there be not in stead of
the bread the very flesh of Christ let me have no part in heaven, they refused
so to do this profession being demanded of them, but a day or two before their
deaths, when if ever, men will clearly discharge their conscience and utter
whatsoever is in their very heart, it being the last time they are like ever to
confess with the mouth unto salvation. Seventhly, if the bread be
transubstantiated into Christ's body, and his body truly really, and properly
taken from the hand of the Priest put into the mouth, chawed with the teeth,
and swallowed down into the stomach of all communicants: either Christ of
necessity must have two bodies, one visible, another invisible, one with the
full dimensions of a man, the other of a wafer, one passible, the other
impassible, one residing in one place, the other filling a million of places:
or at least the self same body of Christ must at the same time be visible at
the right hand of his Father, and invisible in the Host: with the dimensions of
a man in heaven, and of a wafer on earth: with distinction of organs in heaven,
and inorganicall upon earth: resting in heaven, and moved on earth from the
hand to the mouth, and from the mouth to the stomach of millions of
communicants. Lastly, I demand of this Priest and his pew-fellows, what becomes
of Christ's body after it is conveyed into the stomach, does it remain there
after the form and accidents of bread are changed or does it some ways,
remove out of the stomach, or is it there converted into any other substance:
they dare not pitch upon any of these three, nothing therefore remains but an
annihilation or corruption in the stomach and so the holy one of God whom God
would never suffer to see corruption, no not in the grave; shall now after his
glorification suffer corruption in the stomach of all Romish Capernaits.
may if he please, receive bread and wine once in a day, in a week, or a
month, in remembrance that Christ dyed for him; and this shall be better done,
then to eat bread and wine, without such remembrance: For receiving bread and
wine: See that deduced out of Azorius, tom. 1. lib. 8. instit. moral. c. 11.
and Navar. consil. 15. de haeret. number. 2. Which were, but to renew (in an
urgent point of necessity) the old custom in the Apostles time, as appears by
the Corinthian Christians in Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 11. who did eat and drink in
the Church, besides what they received of Christ's institution as his true and
real body and blood. For after the Sacrifice and Eucharist was ended, there
were kept Church feasts for the relief of the poor, upon the common charges
and charity of the rich. By which the charity and unity of all sorts were
much preserved: for which cause the said feasts were called Charities of the
ancient Fathers; and of Saint Paul, verse. 20. they were called Coenae The
Apostle in that place speaks not of Suppers in the plural number, but the
Lords Supper in the singular, and verse. 23. delivers the right manner of
administering it according to Christ's institution, and so St. Cyprian in his
Tract. de caena Domini, and the most approved interpreters both ancient and
modern understand the word, and not of love feasts. As for the reason this
author alleges for this his exposition, it is very frivolous. For if the
love feasts must therefore be tearm^d coena Dominicae our Lords Suppers, because
they were made in the Churches which were then called Dominicae, by the same
reason the Homilies and Catechisings, and Songs should be called Dominicae,
because they were made said or sung in the Churches which were then called
Dominicae.
dominicae, our Lords Suppers: because they were made in the Churches, which
then were called Dominicae, that is, our Lords houses: in which feasts, because
there happened, some foul abuses (which the Apostle rebuking, verse. 22. Why have
ye not houses to eat and drink in? or contemn ye the house of our Lord,
etc.) they were taken away. See Con. Gang. 11. Con. 3. Laod. can. 27.28.
Apollorum, can. 39. Clemens Alex. S^. Just. S^. August contra Faustum, lib. 20.
cap. 20. St. Chrysostom. hom. 27. in 1 Cor. and St. Ambrose upon this same place:
by which it appears no new thing for Catholics to take some thing with a
good intention, besides, what was instituted by Christ.

Here some may ask, whether it belongs to me out of my authority to institute
or renew this pious ceremony in taking bread and wine in remembrance of the
death of Christ, generally for the prudent Catholics of England? I answer no.
God forbid that I should presume to institute or renew any ceremony in the
Catholic Church: but I do only in compassion of their miseries, present to
their necessity (if any be in danger of death, loss of fortunes, or ruin of
posterity, and cannot expect leave from the supreme Pastor of our souls) the
doctrine of Claudius Carinnus de vi and pot. leg. human. c. 10: that even in
laws, every particular man has power to interpret the same to his advantage,
and to dispense with himself therein, if there occur a sudden case of
necessity, and there be no open way and recourse to the Superior, much more
then, said I, in a pious ceremony against which there is no law forbidding the
same.

And if you reply that this is taken in a strange Church. I answer, That in
case of necessity, the pl^ce is impertinent to the thing. For Saint
Bonaventure, that great and pious Doctor using much jaculatory prayers, and
being upon the place of natural necessity, and there uttering some of the
said prayers, the Devil asked him, Whether that were a place to pray in? to
whom he answered, in opusc. Hic et ubique meum licet orare Deum. That it was
lawful to praise God in all places: and to receive bread and wine in a
Protestant Church from a Minister, or to receive the same in a Tavern from a
Vintners boy: the godly only know the difference.

If you reply again, that so we may offer Incense to an Idol in a temple
(because we may burn perfume, and the Idol we know to be nothing) I deny that:
and the disparity is in this, that in offering Incense, the act and show there
tends to the honor and worship of the Devil. For the place being dedicated to
him, whatsoever is therein done as an usual ceremony is taken (whatsoever the
intention be) as done to his honor. Which act as it is unlawful in it self
to be done, because pretended Idolatry, wherein Gods worship is given to the
Devil, at least in outward show: so it is unlawful to feign in words the act
to be done, because it is dissembling (the object it self being likewise
forbidden by the law of God) both which are great sins, and apt to cause
great scandal: which I shall make appear, not to be in our case, where I
contend, there is no sin in the act, nor yet dissembling, nor the object
forbidden.

If you reply thirdly, that there is dissembling in going to Church (as going
two ways in Religion contrary to the Scripture) for thereby I seem to be
otherwise then I am: the reply is false, for I profess but one religion which
is Catholic, and at Church I do but observe the picture of true religion ill
formed, which is but a humane act not hurtful, but by a pious intention may be
made good, by which all hypocrisy and dissimulation may be avoided. And if I
seem to Protestants to be a Protestant; what am I the worse for that? I never
yet could find any law, to ground an action against the censures of men. If
they censure me to be a Protestant, I am not under their scourge for religion,
unless they will on purpose make an Act of Parliament to cut off my head,
which shall be no president for any other Judges or Justices: and then I must
set up my rest with a Noble man, saying, Contra potentiam non est resistentia.
There is no resistance against power. But continuing always loyal both to my
King and Country, and obedient to God and his Church, and in so doing, giving
both God and Caesar their due, and that without either sin or dissembling. I
had rather they censure me unjustly (yet according to the laws established,
for I always stand pro Rege and Lege) and so miss their aim by an Ignoramus,
then I loose my life by a pure might. But hence it does not follow, for all
their censure, that I am a Protestant: for to be so, I must believe the 39.
Articles of the Church of England, which is the definition of a Protestant.
Which Articles or any other tenants of theirs I meddle not with: for if I must
do all things contrary to Protestants, lest I should be thought so* when they
eat, I must fast; and when they sleep, I must wake; which is ridiculous. As
for their thinking me a Protestant, it proceeds from want of knowledge: for
they or most of them neither He means a Roman Catholic or Papist, which
indeed can hardly be known to be a true Catholic. See page 1. letter c. But
does he think that we know not what a Papist is? Let them remember what
Polycarp did answer when Marcion accoasting him said, Nosti me? Do thou know
me? Yes says Polycarp. Novi primogenitum diaboli. I know the first begotten of
the devil. We know you qua tales, to be the natural issue of the man of
sin, and whore of Babylon: and in this double and dissembling way it is hard
to say of what religion you are, or whether of any at all?
knowing what a Protestant, or Catholic indeed is (if Catholics went to
Church, they would not know how to distinguish, or persecute them; it being
lawful among them, for every one to believe A lewd slander, it is not lawful
among us for every one to believe what he pleases, but this Priest thinks
it lawful for him to speak what he pleases; though against common sense and
his own conscience. For within ten lines of these words he makes mention of
the 39 Articles of the Church of England, to which we all are bound to give our
assent and consent; and in case any Parson or Vi^ar do not read these
Articles and publicly testify his approbation of them within a month after
his induction into his Benefice* he lapseth his Living. Besides it is the
known doctrine of all Protestants that the Scripture is the sole and perfect
rule of faith, and that as we may not believe any thing contrary unto it; so
neither any doctrine as necessary to salvation which cannot be evidently
proved out of it. Of what brass then was the brow of this slanderer made, who
affirms it to be lawful among Protestants, for every man to believe what he
pleases.
what he pleases) may easily think amiss of me. And for me to take benefit
of their ignorance, and to hide my self in persecution, until either the
glory of God, or good of my neighbor shall urge me to discover my self: I
cannot yet find my self by any law forbidden.

It may be objected secondly, that there were diverse Statutes made upon the
alteration of Religion, in the 2.5. and 6. years of Edward the sixth; and 1.
and 23. of Q^eene Elizabeth in hatred of God and his Church, as that the Mass
should be abrogated, and all the Kings subjects should come to Church to hear
such Service as was then o^dained, to distinguish between Catholics and
Protestants; and that whosoever should say, or hear Mass afterward, should
incur certain penalties, as by the said Statutes appears. But no man could
obey these commands without sin. Ergo. I answer, that I know not much to what
purpose this objection can serve R. P. that made it. For all Divines as well
Catholics as Protestants know: that all humane laws bind in conscience no
^urther, then they are consonant and conformable to the divine law. And as
far as they command lawful unity and uniformitie to the good of the common
wealth (which is the chief thing that States men aim at, men's consciences
being left to themselves) they may be obeyed, as I h^ve said out of Azorius
tom. 1o. lib. 8. instit. moral. cap. 27. puncto. 5o. And for as much as
concerned the abrogation of Mass ( which by the law of God was unlawful) they
did consequenter to the State government then; for having rejected the
authority ^f the Pope, they likewise rejected the Mass; as knowing that there
could be no Mass without Priests, nor Priests without the Pope. And therefore
taking as much of the Mass, as would serve for their Service, and to be
independent of the Pope, they left the rest. But that they did it in hatred of
God and his Church: or for any distinction sake, it is altogether improbable.
For what would a man get, by hating of God? or the Church, of which himself
must be a member, to be saved? or how could they make a distinction of that
they knew not; for the Protestant Church was not then known, or scarce
established. And therefore without wholly granting the Major, or distinguishing
the Minor. I answer, that every one ought under pain of damnation to obey his
temporal Prince in matters lawful. Yet to suffer for his religion, and
(abstracting from all obedience either to Statute or Resc^ipt) not for
Recusancie.

It may be objected thirdly, that of S. Paul to the Romans 10.10. With the
heart we believe unto justice: but with the mouth confession is made to
salvation. Ergo, No man can go to Church. I deny the sequel, and to the
Antecedent I answer, that according to Divines; a man is bound to confess his
religion Semper, sed non ad semper: always, but not at all ways: that is, not
at all times, and in all places: but as I have said before out of Saint Thomas
of Aquin in the said two cases, viz. as often as the honor and glory of God
requires the same, or the spiritual profit of our neighbor shall exact it, as
likely to be impaired by silence: which to be requisite I have before granted.
Yet hence it does not follow, that I am bound to go into the Market place and
cry out; I am a Catholic, who will punish me? or before I am called to publish
my religion, to make my self be called; or to live and converse to the same
time, as having a settled being, and not going to Church. I read that Saint
Faelix going to martyrdom, S. Adauc^us, came to the Officers that led him
thither, and said to them, that he lived in the same law with Saint Faelix, and
therefore that they should likewise put him to death. Yet I conceive that he
had a special revelation for the same; and that it is no warrant for our
indiscretion.

If it be replied, that so a man shall profess no religion. I answer the
inference to be naught* for suppose a man's recusancie were never discovered,
this man professes some religion; for he does not live a heathen. Why then
recusancie being rejected, should he not profess the same?

If it be said, that it is written, that no man can serve two masters rightly.
Yet a man may serve one Master, and have a servant to serve him, or he may
serve one master, and keep or use that Masters picture, howsoever ill it be
drawn.

It may be objected fourthly, that the Rescript of Pope Paul the fifth, in
which he writes to the Catholics of England, declares, that they ought not
to go to the Churches of Heretics, or hear their Sermons without detriment
of the divine worship, and their own salvation. To which I answer, that the
said Pope wrote both piously, fatherly, and Apostolically, according to the
aforesaid suggestions by him received: and if he had had the truth of the state
of England, I believe he would have written as piously the contrary. For put
the case, that those zealous suggestors had presented to the consideration of
the Council of Trent, or the Pope himself the truth and lawfulness of
Catholics going to Church, with these seven reasons following: supposing an
absolute necessity.

1. First that there is no evil or harm done or said in the Protestant
Churches to the prejudice of any Catholic soul, that may not either be
hindered, or prevented very well, by the instruction of Priests; for they preach
not against any notable point of doctrine held in the Catholic Church
(although See page 53. Letter E.
some simple Minister for want of matter may glance at some of our tenets by
halfes understood: or in these days to please his auditorie may rail against
the Pope, which he does so irrationally, that few Protestants of any judgment
do believe him) for if he should seriously preach controversies as insisting
seriously upon the true doctrine of both sides, his Auditors (or at lest some
of them) would be apt to doubt, and so to search and dive further into the
truth: for as Saint Augustine says, doubt begets science, which might be an
occasion of somes falling from him, which fearing, he is silent in doctrine,
and only teaches morality: which why a man may not hear in urgent extremity
from any man, I cannot conceive.

2. Secondly, that their going to Church, would be a conservation and a
preservation of their lands and goods, with a prevention of ruin to the family
and posterity.

3. That it would be a means to obtain and purchase the love of their
neighbors; and a means of their conversion by an affable conversation; by
which likewise they might bear the greatest Offices in the common wealth: and
become See the Advertisement to the Reader.
Parliament men as well as others: of whom and whose power and force in matters
of Religion, these days can somewhat declare.

4. Fourthly, that it would be a means, that whereas Priests leave their
Colleges, and now live in private men's houses, to the benefit of one or two,
and to the great danger of themselves and their Patrons; they might by this
means more freely converse with all sorts of people after an Apostolical
manner, and convert many to the honor of God, the increase of his Church, and
good of their own souls. Whereas now they do little good out of that private
house, unless maintain some decayed gentlewomen in good clothes to gossip up
and down; and like bells to ring their praises, that they may fish one in a
year to the disparagement of their function, and great prejudice of their
Mission.

5. Fifthly, that diverse Schismatics that now go to Church with an ill
conscience, and think themselves in state of damnation, do suffer spiritual
detriment, and oftentimes being prevented with sudden death everlastingly
perish.

6. Sixthly, many thousands that are very moral and well affected Protestants,
were it not for the stop of Recusancie would become Catholics. Which, rather
then they will undo themselves and Family, now will not hear of it.

7. Seventhly, that no poor Catholic that is not able to give twenty pound
per annum with their children to some College beyond the Seas, can bring them
up, either in science or any other art or trade by reason of Recusancie: and
this, to the ruin of all poor people: many having a very great charge, and
small revenues; and part of that likewise taken away for Recusancie.

Again, if the aforesaid suggestions had presented to their consideration, the
means and ways of Conversions of kingdoms in general, as that they ought to
be done either by miracles, war, or policy. And have reasoned, that for
miracles, they were not to be expected; for that those, God ordinari^y granted
but to Infidels, and where by secondary causes, they were not probably fezible:
that by war they could not be done, without a great deal of bloodshed,
which ought to be avoided; and most commonly with a great deal of rebellion
and treachery, which were utterly unlawful. And that they were fezible in
policy, by civilly conversing, intermingling and insinuating themselves by
degrees into the conversation of all sorts of people. So that in time a good
effect might have been wrought: would not this discourse have been more
consonant to truth and charity, and less displeasing or odious to our State
of England, then to suggest that they are Idolatrous heretics, blasphemers of
God and his Church, professors (as indeed they are not because they know the
true and sincere profess it) of a false religion, subverters of souls (but
poor ones God wot), abominable scandalous people, etc. and that it was a
scandal for good people to converse with them in things indifferent, and
therefore desire that it might be declared unlawful, and commanded that no
Catholic might converse with them, as in Christian liberty otherwise he might
lawfully do? thereby to introduce for their own ends, our now goodly
distinctive sign of recusancie? I appeal to any wise man's judgment. And
whether the aforesaid rescript and other briefs were not gotten by mere
suggestion (the case being truly set down by me as it is) I appeal likewise to
the Pope himself: who, to mine own knowledge has been likewise lately
notably abused in the like manner. Ann. 1639. one Francis Damport, alias a
Sancta Clara. We are as much beholding to the sti^c^er up of this Safeguard for
the Relation herein closed as the Church of Rome has little cause to con him
thank for it. For hence we learn first, what credit is to be given to the
Popes briefes which may be so easily procured by false suggestions, to the
wrong and prejudice of those that deserve well of the Roman cause. A clear
evidence hereof we have in Day the Franciscan who never so much as appearing
before his Holiness to answer for himself, is censured by the Popes Bull, and
that for doing a pious and religious act. Secondly, what a silly Consistory the
Papal is at this day, the Pope himself as fallible a man as any other, and
the Cardinals slight and weak fellows never a skillful Pilot, sitting at the
Stern of Peter's ship. Thirdly, what charity there is between Romish Priests
and Jesuits, and how they heap coals of hell fire one upon another head.
Davenport otherwise Franciscus a Sancta Clara procures a Bull like to Phalaris
his brazen Bull with fire in the belly of it, to torment Day the Franciscan
without his fault, or knowledge: and this Priest here condemns Sancta Clara to
black darkness for ever: pallentes umbras erebi noct^mque profundam, this man
says he is descending to Lucifer who will presume to be copartn^r with the
holy Ghost, and thus leaving him (the said a Sancta Clara) to him that will,
have him, etc. tantaene animis caelestibus irae? are they Friars secular
Priests, or Devils that thus spit fire one at another? Let Davenport have the
day of Day at Rome, what has Sancta Clara done that in the charita^le censure
of this Priest Lucifer must have him? He took upon him to draw some Rules out
of Scriptures and the writings of the ancient Fathers; For the direction of
general Councels in declaring matters of faith: A capital crime no doubt: but
what else has this Priest against him? this Sancta Clara has Paraphrased upon
the Articles of Religion established in the Church of England, and shows in
what sense and how a good Roman Catholic may with a sa^e conscience
subscribe to them all, though eighteen at least of them shoot point blancke at
their Trent faith and pierce it through and through. Aggravate th^s fact of his
to the height, does this Priest himself do less? who Paraphraseth upon the
Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy, and shows in what sense a Roman
Catholic may take both, though the former directly renounce the Popes
temporal, and the latter his spiritual power and jurisdiction. Now I see what
the matter is -- (...). there is and always will be emulation between
Artificers that work at the same Trade, this Priest and Sancta Clara are (...)
of the same Craft or Trade they both deal in like Commodities, equivocations
and mental reservations and witty devices to elude oaths, subscriptions to
articles of Religion, and religious obligations. Not to dissemble with either
of them, they both teach, with the Helcesaites, Eusebius. hist. lib. 6. cap. 31.
(...), dissimulation in point of Religion, and cunning fetches to deceive
Chri^tian Magistrates when they are convented before them and unless they both
repent their doom is set down, Apoc. 22.25. Without are Dogs and Idolaters and
whosoever loves and makes a lie. I know well they pretend by this doctrine to
keep men from perjury and lying: but they do just as Lycurgus the Lawgiver
of the Lacedaemonians did who to prevent adultery enacted community of wives.
For equivocation is no better then an artificial and made lie as the Bishop of
Duresme, and Mr. Henry Mason prove in their Treatises of this Argument.
being at London, and having written a book (called Deus, Natura, Gratia)
which being disliked by one Day a Franciscan, and through the same dislike at
Rome, being there called into the Inquisition, was so much displeased both with
his Holiness and the said Day; that he publicly ^eered the Pope: saying*
that whereas before he thought him infallible (which he never thought to my
knowledge) now he saw that he was fallible as other men were. And endeavoring
revenge against the said Day, substituted a most ignorant and lewd man one
George Perrott (his ordinary Broker in seditious matters) to go with the s^id
a Sancta Clara his instructions to Signior Gregory Pauzana then the Popes Agent
in London; accusing the said Day with much zealous hypocrisy, that he had put
forth certain pictures to the hurt of Gods Church, and infinite scandal of
Protestants. After went a Sancta Clara cum tanta gravitate, seconding with an
abominable deal of zeal and authority (having then got himself to be
Provincial) the complaint of the said Perrot. Hereupon the said Signior with
the said a Sancta Clara's solicitor, Luke Wadding an Irishman in Rome
complains to the Pope: and obtaines upon the former men's suggestions, a
terrible Bull against the said Day being never cited to answer, admonished, or
knowing any thing thereof. The Bull being come to the said a Sancta Clara his
lodging in Fleetstreet and safe in his deske, he did me the honor to show me
the same. Which I read, and asking the said a Sacta Clara why he procured it,
he told me, for the said Day his putting forth of the said pictures, who
likewise said, that the said Day knew nothing of the same: and therefore
desired me to be silent. At which, I was much astonished, and knowing very
certainly the ground of the whole business to be false; and therefore that
both the said Day, the Popes Agent, and the Pope himself were most horribly
abused; I thought that if the said a Sancta Clara were permitted in this manner
to abuse men; the best men living might be censured, excommunicated, degraded;
and what not without ever being heard? Which is no practice among Heathens. As
for the setting forth of the said pictures, the matter in them contained, as
being from my purpose, I omit, Yet thus much will I speak that it was a thing
approved of, through the whole Catholic Church: the said pictures themselves
liked, yea desired of the said Day his superiors: who to this day do
acknowledge their approbation of the same, countenanced by the said a Sancta
Clara, Perrott, and all others ever after they were put forth, for the space of
above ten years before, to mine own knowledge. A book at the same time (of a
Sancta Clara his complaint) printed at Doway in defense of the same, never
proved by oath that any of the said pictures ever came to the hands of any one
Protestant. Neither do I think that any one Protestant (unless it might be
such, as a Sancta Clara had suborned for his own revenge to speak against the
same) ever saw any of them: and therefore there could be no indiscretion or
scandal by them proved. Nay, the said pictures being made for some particular
friends devotion, not so much as one Catholic to an hundred had or knew of
them: but contrariwise some that had them from the said Perrott, were
scandalized through weakness by the said a Sancta Clara his questioning of
them in this manner, as though that should be set forth for their devotion,
that in it self was false. Yet notwithstanding all this, the malicious
suggestions of the said a Sancta Clara against this man's doings, did so far
prevail, that Days innocence was thought worthy to be condemned by the said
Bull for doing a pious and a religious act. This indeed I must say, that the
said a Sancta Clara when he had him at his mercy, through the remorse and sting
of his own conscience, durst not promulgate the said Bull, but kept it dead in
his deske, for fear that those who otherwise honor the Popes Bulls honestly
and lawfully gotten, would have called him to the Kings Bench Bar for
bringing in of this. And had he not taken the benefit of the Proclamation of
banishment (notwithstanding his ambitious and seditious wit) he would have been
not only questioned for this Bull, but likewise for other matters of a far
fouler nature, which made it high time for him to run. Let any man now judge,
whether the Popes Holiness does not suffer much by hypocritical suggestions:
whether he that so notoriously abused him in words, did not likewise do it in
deeds. For about the same time, when the said Bull came over, his said book
likewise came out of the Inquisition: at which news the said a Sancta Clara
again grudging that his said book should be so questioned, and yet pass
(although by her Majesty's Servants means, if a Sancta Clara himself may be
believed) unblemished; told diverse persons seriously speaking, that there was
never an able man in Rome. To which some replying, yes: The Pope, and Court of
Cardinals: in faith (quoth he) no; (making a sign of contempt with his hand)
they are slight and weak fellows. Here is a fellow to get Bulls! here is one
that got himself made the Popes Protonotary, and bound himself by oath, to
reveal whatsoever he heard or saw done evilly against the Pope! yet he is as
ready as any to abuse him. I wonder what account he can give to the Pope of
this his office: but it should seem, that he did except himself in his oath,
that he might evilly entreat him at his pleasure. That this is true, it will be
deposed upon oath by diverse witnesses, whenever his Holiness will be pleased
to exact the same. And further the said a Sancta Clara added, that he was
writing a book (conceiving as it should seem, the whole Church to be weak,
and to want his help) wherein he would show, what Rules general Councels
ought to observe in declaring matters of faith; which rules (as he said) not
observed, the Council should not be held lawful. Oh abominable presumption
and ambition! let any man judge, whether this man be not descending to Lucifer,
who will presume to be copartner with the holy Ghost, in directing and ^eaching
his Church? If this man live, we may perchance in time have broached a
quaternitie in divinis; but I hope that God will prevent his heretical humor.
And thus leaving the said a Sancta Clara to him that will have him: my intent
here is, only to show upon what unjust grounds by suggestion a Bull may be
gotten from Rome. And whether the aforesaid suggestors for Recusancy, who lived
at the Popes doors, and continually at his, or their favorites sides, might
not also get their rescripts, Bulls and Declarations by the like fraud, for
their own ends, although questionless with the like pretended zeal and piety
I leave to every man's conscience to judge. For as in Catholic Countries where
Bulls and Breves are directed to Bishops of Diocesses there can be no thought of
any sinister proceedings: so out of such countries where particular men or
Corporations busy themselves in procuring such Bulls, etc. there is never want
of suspicion and most commonly of abusive dealing. And it stands with reason:
because particular men would never sue for general Briefs concerning a whole
State, or trouble themselves more then others, if it were not for their own
ends, and did not concern themselves above the rest. And therefore the ancient
Piety and Apostolical Clemency of Popes in such Cases has been, patiently
to hear wherein they have been misinformed and abused; for it is not their
intention at any time to grant any thing either upon a veyled truth, or unjust
(though speciously suggested) grounds. Hence Alexander the third, writing to an
Archbishop of Canterbury, gives a Rule of large extent; Extra de rescript. ex
part. That in these kind of letters (that is, such as proceed upon
information, as our Case is) this Condition (If the request be upon true
grounds) is ever understood, though it be not expressed. And writing to the
Archbishop of Ravenna, Ibidem he says, Siquando, If at any time we write such
things to you, as exasperate your mind, you must not be troubled; but
diligently considering the quality of the business, whereof we write, either
reverently fulfill our command, or pretend by your letters a reasonable cause
why you cannot: for we will endure patiently, if you forbear to perform that,
which was suggested to us, by evil information: by which appears the worthy
integrity of the Sea Apostolic, howsoever it be by the unworthiness of
flattering hypocrites oftentimes abused.

. 3. That it is not unlawful to go to Church for fear of danger of
subversion or Blasphemy, which is the third and last branch of the Minor to be
proved.
WHich I prove thus. Not danger of subversion: for to what purpose should they
preach subversive doctrine? when that supposes a knowledge in the Minister of
some people there present to be subverted. Which supposition is false, and must
needs savor of a broken fancy. For the Minister intends no more, then to
exhort his Auditors to a good life, and to instruct them in morality. For as I
have said, if he should preach controversies, he must know some Catholics to
be there; or otherwise he would but engender doubts among Protestants, and
doubts science: and by that means would more trouble and disturb the minds
of the people, then profit them; which out of prudencie, he forbeares: and so
contents himself now and then, with an untruth, and away. And in Catholic
countries I my self have heard Priests rebuked for preaching of controversies
to a Catholic auditorie, as being a means rather to disturb them, then
profit them, as troubling themselves with doubts of things either above their
reach and capacity; or whereof otherwise they are infallibly certain: so that
generally controversies are never preached, unless it be to bring people from
their doubts, to a better and greater certainty then they were in before;
which has only place among people newly converted, or staggering in their
religion.

Secondly. A man is said to be in danger, when that which is feared commonly
and oftener happens then the contrary: so a man is in danger of subversion by
going to a place, where few come, but are subverted: but so it happens not in
the Protestant Church: as is apparent by Schismatics of all sorts; who many
years frequent the Protestant Church, and yet retain their opinion of the
Catholic religion without subversion, and become Catholics at last.

Add that going to Church will rather confirm Catholics in their religion,
then subvert them from the same: for then they will have upon their own
knowledge, what now they take upon trust: for if what is done in Protestants
Churches, be opposite to what is done in Catholic Churches (as the contrary
opinion uses to say, comparing them to light and darkness, which are
privative opposites according to Dialecticks; although the comparison be false)
I say, opposita per se posita magis elucescunt: opposites being set together
do more clearly show each other; then that which is best, sends the best
species to the power from the object, and consequently to be embraced. Now if a
man has the best already, it will then more clearly appear; and he is not so
mad, as to leave the best, and take the wor^^; but will be more sure and
certain, that he has the best: as seeing the opposite, and confirm himself
the^ein. This appears true to every mean capacity: What danger then can
there be in going to Church? shall we be afraid to let a Greyhound go into the
Yet some of these Greyhounds have been taken by the Hares he speaks of, as
Albertus Piggius by Calvin^, Paulus Virgerius by Bre^tius, and diverse others,
but of this see page 53. letter E.
field, for fear he should be taken by an Hare?

Thirdly, those that go to Church, either they were borne Catholics, or
converted Protestants; if the latter: then that which moved them to become
Catholics, cannot move them to be Protestants again. If the first, it were a
wonderful thing, that hearing a little morality, should make them fall from
the doctrine they were brought up in all their life: or hearing a small piece
of controversy mentioned (if it should so happen) by a Minister, they should
be presently carried away from the doctrine they have so long known, and never
once tell it to the priests, they daily converse with: especially when they go
not out of any dislike of their religion, but with a clear conscience for some
other ends. I conceive it would rather confirm them, in hearing that spoken,
which in their own conscience they know to be untrue, that it will be so far
from troubling or striking their consciences, that they will come home
rejoicing at the truth, which they heard that day impugned: as that they heard
the Minister speak of such, or such a point: as that Catholics adored It is
true that the Romanists teach the simpler sort of the vulgar, that they are not
to adore Images, but only to use them for memory sake: and Cardinal
Bellarmine himself in his second Book De imaginibus sanctorum, c. 22. has
these express words, quantum ad modum loquendi, praesertim in concione ad
populum, non est dic^dum imagines ullas adorari debere latria; sede contrario
non debere sic adorari: For the manner of speech especially in Sermons to the
people, we must not say that any Images ought to be adored cultu latriae, but
on the contrary, that they ought not to be so adored: Yet the truth is, that
the Roman Church maintains the religious worship of Images. For in the
second Council of Nice confirmed by Pope Adrian they are thunder smitten who
adore them not, clamat Synodus, says Bellarmine in the Chapter above cited,
imagines adorandas and venerabiles imagines amplexamur; qui secus faxit
anathemate percellimus: and in the nineteenth year of King Richard the Second,
the Lollards have a form of recantation prescribed them in these words. From
this day forward I shall worship Images with praying and offering unto them, in
the worship of the aints, that they be made after Ex Rotulo Clausarum de Anno
decimo nono R. sec. in 18. dorso. See the Appendix to the Animadversions. And
to come nearer; the Council of Trent, Sess. 25, decrees in these words,
Imagines Christi, et deiparae virginis et sanctorum in templis perpetuo
habendae et retinendae sunt, iisque debitus honor et veneratio impertienda. The
Images of Christ, and of the Virgin the mother of God, and of Saints are
perpetually to be had and kept in Churches, and due honor and veneration to be
given unto them: and lest any should think that this worship and veneration is
not to be exhibited, to the Images themselves, but only to glance through them
to the Saints. Cardinal Bellarmine in his second book De imaginibus
sanctorum, c. 21. most plainly and expressly resolves the point: Imagines
Christi et sanctorum venerandae sunt, non solum per accidens vel improprie; sed
etiam per se et proprie; ita ut ipsae terminent venerationem, ut in se
considerantur; et non solum ut vi^em gerunt exemplaris: The Images of Christ
and Saints are to be worshipped not only by accident and improperly, but also
by themselves an^ properly; so that the worship is terminated in them as they
are considered in themselves, and not only in regard of that they represent.
And cap. 20. He acknowledges it to be the opinion of Alexander of Hales, Tho:
Aquinas, Caietane, Bonaventure, Marsilius, Almaine, Carthusian, Capreolus, and
others, that the same honor is due to the Image and the pattern; and
theref^re the Image of Christ is to be worshipped with latria or divine
worship. And Vasquez de adorat. l. 1. disp. 6. c. 3. Rex Nebucadonosor admirans
sapientiam et spiritum Danielis, in signum honoris et reverentiae, iussit ei
offeri munera odorum et suffituum, id quod nos etiam secundum fidem nostram
immaginibus facere consuevimus. Nebucadonosor admiring the wisdom and spirit
of Daniel, in sign of honor and reverence unto him, commanded that sweet
odours and incense should be offered unto him, as we according to our faith use
to do to our images: and now let the intelligent Reader judge whether
Protestant Ministers are slanderers, or Papists Idolaters and Image-worshippers
by their own profession
p^ctures, or the like; which they knew in their own con^sciences to be false,
and thereby stir up an earnestness in them in religion, as zealing their
own being opposed by falsehood: and this may engender such passion or
distraction in the hearer, that it may be thought zeal of religion or heat of
devotion. Which heat, if after this fight of contrarieties or opposition,
should not be allayed (the parties being as it were swallowed up, with zeal of
the house of our Lord) and the dislike of the Sermon as fraught with untruths,
seem too troublesome: they may depart the Church, for there be many cases of
necessity, to make a man go out of the Church, and as many likewise to make
him come short of the same: as to Service ( if it stand: if not, there is the
less to be done, and it shall never trouble me) Sermon, or both: for as there
are many ways to the wood, so there are many ways to the Protestant Church.
And I have always observed, that most commonly Catholics converted from
Protestancie, have been more firm and solid in religion, as knowing both, then
those that never knew but one. And if Schismatics (of whom I have before
spoken) from the wisest to the meanest of capacity, that notwithstanding they
go to Church, and are void of grace, are never so much as shaken from their
intention of being Catholics, or their opinion of Catholic religion; why
should those that abound so much with Gods grace and professed Catholics, be
said to be in danger, or feared to swerve from a religion they so well know?

As for blasphemy there is likewise none. If you reply (as the contrary
opinion uses to do out of Saint Thomas 2a. 2ae. q. 13. art. 1. and 2.) that
Protestants out of a set intent and purpose ascribe their heresies to Gods
revelation, and deny his revelations to Orthodox articles of faith, in which
consists blasphemy, and without this blasphemy they cannot preach: and
therefore no Catholic can go to Church. I answer the antecedent to be false;
and this blasphemy to be much like the Rhemists Idolatry, as preferring and
embracing their own opinions before God: and so honoring a creature and
rejecting their Creator: but in truth and charity, we ought not to make them
worse then they are: for blasphemy and Idolatry being sins, there must be
some formal intention in the sinner to deny God his due in what he does. And
so likewise there must be an intention of committing Idolatry; that is, of
preferring and embracing that which is a morally known creature before the
Creator; and so to give the creature what is due to the Creator: or otherwise
there can be neither blasphemy nor Idolatry. As no man will say, that I eating
flesh on a fasting day unknown or forgotten, commit Idolatry in preferring my
belly before the law of Gods Church, and consequently God, because I had no
intention thereto: so no man can say that in the Protestant Church there is
formal Idolatry or blasphemy, because they mistake. For Diana says, 5a. part
tract. de par. mamae. resol. page 138. that blasphemy is a sin, in that
contumelious words are spoken against God with a mind or intention to
dishonor God, either directly, or indirectly, virtually, or interpretative.
Now in the Protestant Churches what contumelious words are spoken against God
with a mind, etc? If you say as before, that they ascribe their heresies to
Gods revelation, and deny his revelation to Orthodoxe Articles. I answer, that
their minds and intentions are not so much as interpretative to dishonor God
thereby; or indeed so to ascribe their heresies. For if they knew their
opinions to be heresies, and the tenants they reject to be Orthodoxe Articles,
as we do by the light of faith; it would evidently follow, that they spoke
sometimes contumeliously against God, which they do not know, but simply
interpret Scripture according to their own fancies, and therein they err and
mistake. And because they do not endeavor the means to search and know the
truth, by the definitions of Councels, and Doctrine of Catholic Fathers, they
sin: yet do not commit Idolatry: for it is not their intention, to make an
Idol of their opinion, unless you take Idolatry so largely, as every sinner
may be said to be an Idolater: because in every sin there is an aversion from
God, and a conversion to the creature: and consequently in this sense, all
sinners are Idolaters. And if it be unlawful to converse with these Idolaters,
or the like blasphemers; that is, such as sin by word or deed; we must
converse only in spatio imaginario, or as Saint Paul says, 1 Cor. 5. verse.
10. We must go out of this world.

There were diverse very learned and holy Fathers, as Saint Cyprian in the
question of Baptism administered by heretics, St. Anselme and others, who did
mistake and err, before they knew the sense and definition of the Church: whom
therefore to call blasphemers or Idolaters were blasphemy indeed. So likewise
there are diverse points this day controverted among Catholic Divines, as the
immaculate conception of our blessed Lady and the like; the Authors of which
to count blasphemers, before they knew the sense of the Church, were more then
peevish. Neither are they to be so accounted, after the sense of the Church is
known, for the time they held their opinions before. So it is with
Protestants, for although the Orthodoxe Articles are known to us by the
Church; yet to them they are unknown; and to most of them so unknown, as if
they had not been revealed at all; because they know none other Church but See
page 52. letter ^.
their own. And therefore what they believe, they have by error and mistake,
and not as blasphemy. Whence in my opinion it were more proper and Apostolical
for such men, as call them blasphemers and Idolaters, to use some prudent and
fair way, to propose to the aforesaid Protestants, the true Church, and the
authority of the same, without all suspicion of partiality, and then they
should see, whether having this mean of belief in a balanced judgment, they
would attribute their heresies to Gods revelation, and deny his revelation to
Orthodoxe Articles, or no.

To the authority of St. Thomas. I answer, that he means such as attribute
heresies quatenus tales to Gods revelation: and deny his revelation to Orthodox
Articles qua tales: as Arch-hereticks did in this reduplicative sense to be
blasphemers. But not such as take Scripture for the revealed word of God, and
misunderstand the same in a specificative sense, through their own ignorance or
infirmity, to be blasphemers; Neither did St. Thomas or any other temperate
and solid Divine ever inte^d to say.

It may be here first objected, that Catholics in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign went to Church, and so did likewise the Catholics in
Scotland: and they were all, in a short time subverted. Ergo: there is danger
of subversion in going to Church. I deny the later part of the antecedent: and
say, that while the plot of Recusancie was working, there was a command got,
upon the former suggestions, that no Catholics should go to the Protestant
Church. So by barring them of their Christian liberty by degrees to bring in
Recusancie, as a pretended sign, between a good Christian and a bad. Which
some few Catholics then believing themselves bound to obey (as indeed they
were not, but might as well withal reverence and obedience have beseeched the
Pope to have recalled his command) refused the Church. Others (and those the
most part of the kingdom, as appears by the before Author of the Answer to the
Libell of Justice, cap. 8. page 172. and 182.) fearing the penalties of the
said Statutes, did not refuse: but continued to go to Church: who being
neglected by Priests (being but a few then in England, and those of most power,
being for the said recusancy) as having no spiritual comfort, or instructions
in what sense, they might truly and lawfully do what they did, to avoid the
said penalties of the Law, and likewise thinking that those Priests thought
them to do ill* in what themselves found no hurt, they dyed as they lived. But
whether in Protestant tenants or Catholic: or whether they would not have
dyed Catholics if they had had help, especially such as lived before in
Queen Mary's time, I present to any wise and pious man's judgment truly
considering the state of those times. And afterward their children being still
neglected upon this point of Recusancy, and living in ignorance, engendered the
Protestant Re^igion now on foot. So that the cause of their falling was not
their subversion, as may be proved by witnesses yet alive; but over indiscreet
zeal in Priests the chiefest heads of whom (aiming as is evident at a
temporal end) neglecting and rejecting such as would not obey their
unreasonable command: and in the same manner it happens with Catholics that
now go to Church in these dangerous times. Who going to Church only to save
themselves from ruin, and being rejected as judged to be fallen from the true
faith by ignorant Priests, and therefore not looked after, with any Christian
instructions or admonitions feign themselves Protestants, rather then they will
be thought to live against their conscience. Whence I may truly say (and
prove by the Author last before cited, who confesses that in the thirteenth
year of Queen Elizabeth's reign the third part of this Kingdom at least was
Catholic) that since the fall of Religion in England, by this only Cheat of
recusancie, ten souls have been lost, for one gained, which is both
lamentable and damnable to those that were the first Authors of the same.

As for the Scots: their fall was neither subversion or Recusancie which was
never generally admitted (because not covertly procured) by the Clergy of that
Kingdom: but want of Priests to administer the Sacraments, and give them other
spiritual comfort; who seeing the soil not so fertile as ours, and the laws
more severe; those few that were, rather chose to converse on the Northern
borders of England, then in their own Country. And Catholics there, seeing
themselves destitute of all spiritual comfort, went to Church to save their
inferior portion from ruin; who if they had had but plenty, or sufficiency
of priests to have instructed them, I doubt not, but they would have still
remained Catholics. And it had been far more easy, so to have conserved
them, then fallen now to convert them. And thus came the bane of The bane of
Popery not of Catholic religion. See page 1. letter C and page 52. letter C.
Catholic religion into both Kingdoms; which are like so to continue
remediless, unless they be assisted by Gods infinite and miraculous power.

It may be objected secondly; that diverse Popes, as Paul the fourth, Pius the
fifth, both the last Gregory's, Sixtus, Clement, and Paul the fifth, granted to
priests their faculties with an intention, that they should administer the
Sacraments to only such, as abstained from Protestant Churches. I answer that
it is so said by R. P. but whether it be so in truth or no, I know not:
peradventure such faculties might be granted to such as received them from the
aforesaid suggestors hands, and to none others. Neither did I ever see any
faculties as yet so limited, nor I hope ever shall. For although the aforesaid
Popes might be inclined to the said suggestors tribe, and so admit of their
suggestions, thinking them to proceed from zeal, and not from hypocrisy: who
likewise thought their pretenses holy: and what a Christian like thing it was,
to suffer persecution for Gods sake; and what a number of Martyrs were made in
England, and sanguinem martyrum esse semen Ecclesiae: that the blood of the
Martyrs was the seed of the Church. Further, what an abominable people
Protestants were: Idolaters, blasphemous heretics, subversive of souls, and
many other the like exaggerating speeches; upon which any Pope living (unless
he had foreknowne their drift) would have done the like. Whereas certainly had
they but made known, the true State of England in those days, and sought the
good of souls (and not themselves) in truth they ought to have done; the said
Popes would never have done, as they did to us, more then to the Scots,
Hollanders, Germans and other nations: by subjecting us and all posterity by
this device of Recusancie to all misery and slavery. Neither has his Holiness
that now is, ever declared any such thing, for I perceive that he (better
knowing by experience the said suggestors tribe, and their plots, with their
moth-like dealings in most Kingdoms) will be advised hence forward, how he
grants any more Rescripts, or limiteth any faculties upon their importune
suggestions. As for our Martyrs of England. I hope them truly Martyrs, because
they died not so much for recusancie, Nay not so much for Religion, noe nor at
all for it, but for Treason and disloyalty. See page 22. letter Q.
as for Religion and a good conscience (although that might be a means to
bring them to their death, sooner then otherwise). Yet I dare not call all of
them Saints, until the holy Church does bid me, as having approved of their
miracles: but most of them I think truly to be blessed men, and of great
charity. For as our Savior says, Ioh. 15. v. 13. Majorem charitatem nemo
habet, quam ut animam suam ponat quis pro amico suo. No man has greater love,
then who lays down his life for his friend. Yet I hope likewise others some,
who yet live, to be as blessed, and their charity or love as great; although
not so apparent for the present, because as yet not exercised in fight, but
when God shall be pleased to call them to suffer for their Religion, they may
make it as manifest. For although a man of a thin skin, and a vein
transparent with less art struck, does presently bleed in abundance: yet no
man may hence infer, that a man of a thicker skin, and a more obscure vein
not lightly struck, has no blood in his body to shed; so it is in the present,
between him that suffers for Religion being discovered by Recusancie, and him
that suffers not, being undetected by rejecting the same. And in this they
differ; that as the one suffers for a good conscience sake; so the other
suffers not, with a good conscience. As for the said exaggerating speeches,
they do so much strengthen and confirm me, knowing them to be false, that I
am morally certain: that the said The Fathers heo speaks of were the flower
of the Council of Trent, neither were they abused by any false suggestion, for
the case was put truly unto them, and they resolved it according to their
conscience after long disputation and mature deliberation. See an extract of
their Decree in the Appendix to the Animad versions.
twelve Fathers in the Council of Trent, selected by the said suggestors for
recusancie were abused; as well as the aforesaid Popes. And therefore as they
are said to have granted to some limited faculties, merely upon the said false
suggestions (which how far they did bind, the suggestors at their pleasure,
to great persons according to their custom, could very well tell) they might
as well have granted the same, without any such limitation, if it had pleased
them: and I am persuaded more to the glory of God and increase of his Church as
daily experience teaches. For it is improbable with me, and against the nature
of an Apostolical mission, that men should be sent out of Colleges into
Protestant countries to private men's houses, to play bo-peepe: as fearing to be
seen conversing with Protestants, and Protestants not caring to come to them,
for any matter of religion. I wonder by this kind of conversation, what kind
of conversion could ensue? whereas Saint Paul said to them that were about him,
Act. 20. verse. 20. You know how I have withdrawn nothing that was profitable,
but that I preached it to you, and taught you openly, and from house to house.
Neither do I believe that any man can prove any notable increase of Catholic
religion in England, either in great families or in small, from the time of
this recusancie brought in, unto this present: only this I see, a great
impoverishment of the Catholics here, and half a dozen fair high Colleges
built beyond the seas, besides what common purse I know not: and this I
conceive to be all the effect of recusancie; for persecution (as I have said)
begets prayers to God, and almesdeeds to his supposed servants, which produce
great Colleges for refuge to themselves.

But some may here again reply; that if recusancie had been rejected, and
conformity admitted, yet Protestants would have had some other invention to
punish Catholics for their religion. I answer it might be so, if some evil
spirits had told them the proceedings of Catholics before hand (as I never
yet knew in my life Catholics private to themselves) otherwise why should
they have invented more to punish Catholics, then they have hitherto done to
punish Schismatics or Separatists? The said Suggestors had best invent for
them some way more then they have already, to continue a persecution, which
were but conformable as it seems, to the said Author of the Answer, etc. cap.
9. page 216. as is before said: who delights more to have a persecution
(although not to fall upon himself or his tribe) then a toleration in
religion. Yet in the mean time, we had done the uttermost of humane prudence,
and then we might have left the rest more safely to God; who ordinarily, what
second causes cannot do in working to his will, himself mercifully supplyeth*
and then at leastwise, it would have been more apparent to the whole world,
that we had suffered merely for religion, and not for a toy, to wit: If
Recusancie be so small a matter, the more to blame all Papists who for such a
toy as Recusancie, does disobey the Laws. The easier the performance of a
commandment is, the greater contumacie in disobeying it.
Recusancie.

Add that whatsoever had been invented either by oath or abjuration, or what
else, it must have been done in justice, and I hope by a Here he has found
la^^bram periurio, this conceit, of not being bound to answer the truth but
before a competent Judge (and they will have none a competent judge but one of
their own religion) is the ^yges ring by which the late Papists, especially
those that are Iesuited go invisible in and from all our Cour^s of Justice.
But I demand of them First, why our Judges in England are not as competent, as
those beyond the ^eas: if the King be, as it is treason for them or any other
to deny, our Liege Lord and lawful Sovereigne, those that are put in
authority under him (being men of learning and integrity) cannot be denied to
be competent Judges. The Apostles rule is without exception, There is no power
but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God, Romans 13.1. And by higher
powers to whom we must be subject, he understands not only Kings, but all
those that are in authority under them, 1 Timothy 2.2. First the King as
supreme, and after governors, as them that are sent by him, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14.
Secondly, I demand of them, whether that command of Saint Peter, 1 Pet. 3.15.
may be limited by their distinction of a Judge competent and incompetent?
surely though in other causes a man is not bound to appear or answer coram
iudice non competente: yet in matter of faith when we are required to give an
account o^ it there is no excepting against our Judge. For we must be ready
always to give an answer to every man that asks us a reason of the hope that
is in us with meekness and fear. Thirdly, I demand of them whether they
account Pilate a competent Judge in Christ's cause, or Nero in Peter's and Paul's
cause, or any of the Roman Deputies and Proconsuls before whom the glorious
army of Martyrs (who signed the Christian Faith with their blood) were brought,
were competent Judges? they were no Roman Catholics nor Christians; yet
Christ Jesus before Pontius Pilate, 1 Timothy 6 13. and Peter and Paul before
Nero; and the rest of Christ's noble soldiers before heathen Judges, witnessed
a good profession. Fourthly, I demand when that confession of faith which the
Apostle implies to be necessary to salvation is to be made, Romans 10.10. With
the mouth confession is made to salvation, is it not when we are brought before
Kings and Rulers for Christ's name sake, Luke 21.12. For a testimony against
them? If we are bound to confess our faith only to those of our own
religion, because they are only supposed to be competent judges, no man ever
need to suffer for his religion, and all the noble Confessors and Martyrs of
former ages by this Jesuitical doctrine deserved rathers fools caps then
Martyrs crowns: for they did not shed their bloods for Christ's cause, but they
spilt it causelessly. For they needed not to confess what they were, before
incompetent Judges. Here I will make bold to use the words of David concerning
Abner, 2 Samuel 3.33. Did Abner die a fool? Did all those worthies whose souls
cried under the Altar, Apoc. 6.10. How long Lord, holy and true, do thou not
judge and avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth, and to whom white
robes were given, verse. 11. Die as fools? it seemed they died so in the
judgment of this Priests prudent Catholic, who though by this slight he now
avoid all confession of his faith (that he is not examined before a competent
Judge) yet he shall one day, when he shall come before the Judge of all the
earth condemn his own folly, and justify and magnify also Christ's noble
Confessors and Martyrs, taking up the lamentation of the reprobate set down in
the book of Wisdom, We fools accounted their life madness, and their end
to be without honor, but now how are they numbered among the children of God,
and their lot is among the Saints, therefore have we erred from the way of
truth, and the Sun of righteousness has not shined upon us, Wisdom 5.6.
competent Judge* or otherwise I should have taught out of the common opinion
of Catholic Divines, as well Schoolmen as Casuists, that putting off their
hats, they might have passed by, in Justice: for as Titelman says, contra
vulpem I have read, logicam si vis discere lege Titlemannum, ille Sophistaru^
crimi^a pandere vult, but I never read, theologiam si vis discere, lege
Titlemannum, he is in a very ill case who rules his conscience by this casuist
whose divinity is no better here then his Latin. I confess in Machiavels
school it is a lesson read to those of the upper form, leoninae assuere
vulpinam, to piece out the Lions skin with a Foxes, but in Christ's school
Zuickius teaches us another lesson, non decet in hac causa cum vulpibus
vulpinari et cum astutissimis huius mundi sapientibus, astutia certare,
certandum est nobis sola perseverantia pietate simplicitate adeo et patientia
crucis: we ought not to play the fox with foxes, nor contend with the subtle
vizards of this world in craft and subtlety, but we must fight against them,
with sole perseverance and piety, and simplicity, and bearing of the Cross.
In the whole Scripture we never read of fox or fox craft commended. The Spouse
in the Canticles commanded to take the foxes, the little foxes that spoil the
grapes, Cant. 2.15. And it is David's curse upon Gods enemies, let them be a
portion for foxes: and our Savior to brand Herod with perpetual infamy,
calls him a fox, Luke 13.32. saying, Go ye and tell that fox, neither can it
be proved to be more lawful for us to play the fox with foxes, then play the
wolf with wolves, or play the Sophister with Sophisters, or play the hypocrite
with hypocrites, or play the Devil with Devils. Though crafty companions may
deserve to be served with their own sauce, yet it is not fit for us to dress
it for them. The very Poet could say ac tu indignus qui faceres. That may be
very just and fit for one to suffer which is not yet fit for another to inflict
or put upon him. However this Priest is not his crafts master. For it is
against fox craft to profess it: he will hardly or never deceive a m^n, who
brags before hand he will do it, and though it may be this Priest and his
accomplices are annosae vulp^s, old foxes, and the proverb is, annosa vulpis
haud capitur laqueo: an old fox is seldom or never caug^t in a snare: yet if
those who are commanded to catch these foxes should be pleased to make snares
with this fox his own cords here stretched out by him, namely to put them to
an express abiuration of the maine and fundamental points of their Trent
faith, or set them such a form of recantation of their tenants, and with such
conditions as they enjoined the Lollards in the days of King Richard the
second, (See the Appendix to the Animadversions infra) it may verily be hoped
through Gods blessing upon the wisdom and care of zealous Magistrates, that
this Kingdom of England may in time be as free of these foxes as it is now of
wolves, with which in former ages it much abounded.
vulpizare licet. It is lawful for a man to play the fox against a fox.

It may be objected thirdly, that it was Decreed in the 63 Canon of the
Apostles. That if any Clarke, or Layman did enter into the Synagogue of Jews
or Heretics to pray, he should be deposed, and excommunicated. I answer, that
it might be a necessary Decree: because then there were but young Christians,
and they newly instructed, in very high mysteries, as the mystery of the
Incarnation, which was so hard to them, as that God should be borne man, poor,
live poorly, and at last be put to so shameful a death, by the hands of men,
his own creatures, that the forcible Arguments of the Jews might have There was
no fear of the Jews perverting the primitive Christians, especially in the
Apostles days in which we read in the Acts, how mightily the Apostles and
their converts confounded the Jews, Christ making good his promise to them
that he would give them a mouth and wisdom which their enemies should not be
able to resist, Luke 21.15. but the true reason why they made such a Canon (if
yet they made such Canons which is very much doubted) was to prevent the scandal
which the Church might receive by the Christians frequenting the Jews
Synagogues in which the now abrogated rites of Moses were to the injury of the
Gospel retained, and Christ himself blasphemed which no Christian ear ought
to endure.
easily perverted them. Again, the Jews were formal blasphemers of God; our
Savior telling them himself; that he had done those signs among them, that no
other man could do. Whereby he gave them to know, that he was God: all which
the Jews rejected as naught, and said, that he did them in Beelzebub Prince of
the Devils. And when he told them, Ioh. 10. verse. 36. that he was the Son of
God, they answered that he blasphemed, to whom he replied, verse. 37. If I do
not the works of my Father believe me not. And therefore it was requisite, that
those Christians should abstain from their synagogue, least they should have
fallen to have been as they were.

The company of heretics, the Apostles might likewise forbid: because they
were such as fell from and amongst themselves, and very likely particularly
denounced excommunicate; so that danger of subversion was there imminent:
because their intention was formally to subv^rt, and infected with one or two
points of heresy were not so easily to be discerned, as those that profess
themselves so wholly different from the Catholic Church, that if they did but
know a Papist to be in their Churches, they would go near to pull them down
to the ground; and so borne and bred, as they know no other religion, but their
own, and there do so rest: teaching their own but to live morally which is
both common to Catholic and Protestant. Which motive or reason has no place
in our case, where (I contend) there is no danger at all.

Hence it may be generally observed that what Scriptures, Councels, Fathers, or
Canons soever, forbid Communication with heretics: they are to be understood
of notorious heretics in point of their heresy, or particularly denounced
excommunicated for heresy and fallen in Catholic countries or from amongst
Catholics. And not of such as are not formal and subversive heretics, but
borne incredulous in a country to be converted, and not knowing the Catholic
Church.

After all this, some may yet say, that it has been a long custom with them
to abstain from the Protestant Church above these threescore years: and they
have suffered and lost much by refusing the same; and can I have so little
judgment, as to think upon mine own bare word or opinion to make them leave
this their custom? I answer (how small soever my judgment be) that it is not
only my opinion, but the common opinion of Divines in the Catholic Church:
and I never spoke with any Priest in England about this point in my life, that
was able to give me satisfaction to the contrary. Some indeed have answered me,
that it were lawful, if it were not for scandal. Others, if it were not a
distinctive sign: and when I have urged, that scandal may be avoided (as I
have before said) and for a distinctive sign, I knew none, for who should
institute that sign? then they have answered, that a long custom had brought
it in: I have blessed my self to think, that men should so unjustly deal with
poor Catholics, as to bring upon them a yoke or fetters; which they can
keep upon them by no other law, then that they themselves cunningly got them
on, or chained them about threescore years since, and now to kick of these
chains, or their devises would prove (forsooth) scandal: because they would
seem refractary and disobedient to their suggestive humors: but to give me a
reason why going to Church was unlawful before the refusal thereof became
this supposed distinctive sign, or before the same could be cause of scandal
I could never yet hear any man give: but only the aforesaid R. P. has given
in writing the aforesaid suggested untruths (with a great deal of passion that
this my opinion was thought rational ^or almost forty years ago and since
recusancy was brought in, (as appears by his said book) of many most prudent
men in this kingdom,) which is to me no reason at all. For let us propose to
any Divine in Christendom these three following questions: relating the true
state of the Protestant Church in exterior actions (for we meddle not (as I
have said) with their opinions in matters of faith) and withal adding that we
are constrained to them under See page 22. letter Q*
pain of death, and loss of all temporal fortunes.

1. Whether it be lawful for a Catholic to hear the Prayers, Epistles,
Gospels and Psalms of the Catholic Church among Protestants in their Church?

2. Whether it be lawful to hear a Protestant preach in the same place, some
morality, although it should by chance happen that some ignorant Minister
should speak of some point of mistaken doctrine: as that Catholics trust in
their If Papists trusted not in their own merits, it would go better with
them then I fear it will with many, who the more they arrogate to themselves,
the more they derogate from our Savior, and the further they go from
salvation. I confess many of them upon their deathbeds have renounced their
own merits, and wholly stuck to our Saviors: yet certain it is that the
general doctrine of the Church of Rome is for trust in their own merits. For
they teach that faith alone does not justify us before God, that good works
are not only satisfactory for sin, but also meritorious of eternal life, and
supererogatory also for others* ( Consil. Trid. in sess. 16. Bellar. l. 5. de
iustif. c. 16.) and they who believe that they can so far stead them do
commonly confide in them. Let them return to the more ancient and true tenent
with Bernard, saying, Meritum meum est miseratio Domini; Gods mercy is my
merit, and if their be any work of our own meritorious it is the renouncing
our own merits and flying merely to Christ; sufficit ad meritum scire quod
non sufficiant merita. Let them confess with holy Job, Job. 9.3. that they
cannot answer one of a thousand, and profess with Esaias, Esa. 64.6. All our
righteousness is as filthy clowts; and pray with David, Psalm. 143.2. Lord
enter not into judgment with thy servants, for in thy sight shall no man
living be justified; and close up their last Will and breath also, as Bellar.
is said to have done: (For Papists often dye in another faith then they lived,)
with that holy ejaculation; Lord vouchsafe to receive me into the number of thy
Saints, non meriti estimator, sed veniae largitor, not weighing my merits, but
pardoning my offenses, and we will not only clear them of Pharisaicall pride,
and trusting in themselves, but also conceive a better hope of their salvation.
own merits or the like falsehood?

3. Whether it be lawful for a Catholic to receive bare bread and wine in
remembrance that Christ dyed for him, as a pious ceremony? and whether not
better, so taken, then without such remembrance?

I dare say that there is no impartial Divine, but will answer. Yes. And for
these opinions I make no question, but if I had been as well backed in Rome, as
the said R. P. was, I would have got as great approbation to the same; as he
had to the same questions after his subdol^us manner proposed as follows.

1. Whether it be lawful to frequent the Churches of heretics, where there is
both imminent danger of subversion and scandal?

2. Whether it be lawful to hear the blasphemous and id^latrous Sermons of
heretics, in which both God and his Church is notoriously and highly abused?

3. Whether it be lawful to receive Calvines See a sponge to wipe out this
false aspersio^ upon that worthy servant of Christ and great Instrument of Gods
glory, page 59. letter H.
Communion of bread and wine, which they hold a Sacrament, and is a sign of
heretical perfidiousnesse, whereby a man betrayeth and denies his faith?

To which every Catho^ique whatsoever would and must answer. No, but this in
truth is not our case. For the belief of Catholics is not questioned, nor
subversion, or blasphemy, or denial of faith, either apprehended or feared.
Neither can they scarce possibly happen in the Protestant Church, as I have
before said, but the question only is, what Catholics may exteriorly do, for
the safeguard of life with a good intention, and how, and in what manner, they
may best converse, and preserve themselves from ruin with most security.
Therefore I pray forgive the said R. P. who proposed the said questions in Rome
out of his abundant See the Advertisement to the Reader.
zeal (of money, and youth to propagate his family) not once considering that
it is an impossible thing for them to be heretics, who never were Catholics.
As for their custom of Recusancie. I say, first that it is no custom, for a
custom is a continuance of a thing time out of mind without any interruption.
Now recusancy has been interrupted oftentimes, first by Doctor Wright who
wrote against the same, Ann. 1607. and since him Master Broughton, and now my
self. Neither has it been time out of mind, for there are some yet alive
borne in Queen Mary's days, who have known when our recusancie was not in
England, and thereupon in these troublesome times do now go to Church. I say,
secondly, that an inconvenient custom with imprudencie, is better broken, then
kept: and the prescrip^ion of threescore years not good. Yet if they will
needs claim a right in and to their actions by the same. I do hereby promise,
not to take it from them, by any suit in law. For I do write, more to avoid
the scandal of the weak: then that I do think thereby to satisfy the weak,
or rob them of their said custom. As for their sufferings and losses I am
sorry for them, and do assure my self, that they will receive a great reward
for the same: because they suffered not so much, for the love of recusancie, as
for the love of God: for whosoever does the meanest work (no indiscretion
therein being apprehended by the doer) either for Gods sake or for virtue sake,
although of some (considering the act it self, and not knowing the doers
intention) it may be judged indiscreet: yet the work may have a reward from
God, and yet another that does not the same, no punishment.

Thus the three branches of the said Minor proposition being proved: the
Conclusion stands good for the lawfulness of going to the Protestant Church.

Me thinks here I hear some storm, that if this my opinion should be admitted
as lawful: it would follow, that they must likewise take all the oaths that
are made against Catholics, which will tend to perjurie. To which I answer,
that I would have them to do things consequenter, and any thing for safeguard
of life, wherein their is no sin. And to choose: both the Oaths of Allegiance
and Supremacy; which, if with patience they will but hear, when I have said
what they are, I will presently prove, that they may be most lawfully taken.

The Oath of Allegiance divided into eight branches.
1. I A. B. Do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and
declare in my conscience before God and the world, that our Sovereign Lord
King Charles is lawful and rightful King of this Realm, and all other his
Majesty's Dominions and Countries.

2. And that the Pope neither of himself, nor by any authority of the Church,
or See of Rome, or by any other means with any other, has any power, or
authority to depose the King, or to dispose any of his Majesty's Kingdoms, or
Dominions, or to authorize any foreign Prince to invade or annoy Him or His
Countries, or to discharge any of his Subjects of their Allegiance, or
obedience to his Majesty, or to give license, or leave to any of them to bear
arms, raise tumults, or to offer any violence, or hurt to his Majesty's Royal
Person, State, or Government, or to any of His Majesty's Subjects within His
Majesty's Dominions.

3. And I do swear from my heart, that notwithstanding any Declaration, or
Sentence of Excommunication, or Deprivation, made or granted by the Pope or his
successors, or by any authority derived, or to be derived from him or his See
against the said King, his heirs or successors, or any absolution of the said
subjects from their obedience. I will bear faith and true Allegiance to his
Majesty, his heirs and successors, and him and them will defend to the
uttermost of my power, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever which
shall be made against his or their persons, their Crown and Dignity, by reason
or color of any such sentence or declaration, or otherwise: and will do my
best endeavor to disclose, and make known unto His Majesty, his heirs and
successors, all treasons, and traiterous conspiracies which I shall know, or
hear of, to be against him or any of them.

4. And I do further swear, that I do from my heart abhor, detest and
abjure as impious and heretical, this damnable doctrine and position, that
Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or
murdered by their Subjects or any other whatsoever.

5. And I do believe, and in my conscience am resolved, that neither the Pope,
or any Person whatsoever, has power to absolve me of this Oath, or any part
thereof.

6. Which I acknowledge by good and full authority to be lawfully ministered
unto me, and do renounce all Pardons and Dispensations to the contrary.

7. And all these things I do plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear,
according to the express words by me spoken, and according to the plain and
common sense and understanding of the same words without any equivocation, or
mental evasion or secret reservation whatsoever.

8. And I do make this recognition and acknowledgement heartily, willingly and
truly, upon the true faith of a Christian. So help me God.



This Oath according to every part and parcel of the same may be lawfully
taken by any Catholic; as have averred both M. Widdrington, Sir William
Howard, and others; who have so substantially wrote of the same with
explanations of each branch; that I think no wise man dares hazard his credit
in going about to refute the same. Yet the weakness of some Catholics has
been so great, that they have not only taken scandal, (being of the
Pharisees not much to be regarded) but gone about to defame such as stood for
this Oath to their great prejudice; notwithstanding the said Mr. Widdrington in
his Newyeeres-gift, has sufficiently proved, that besides the authority of
many famous Divines, it was the opinion of the chiefest secular Priests in
England; but these uncharitable proceedings were hatched by a sort of arrogant
and covetous people, who labored to make every thing scandalous among
Catholics that was not done by their approbation; and to this purpose, the
first principles were to lead people into scruples, and being there, to put a
ring upon them, abusively termed, the yoke of our blessed Lady; by which they
might more easily lead them to their opinions and censures, as men do Bears
to their purposes. Oh wise Venetians! how sacred are your laws? would a man
think that such blindness, or rather envious peevishness could be in
Catholics, as, what they understand not, to censure at their pleasure without
any respect of persons? and presently judge them as fallen men whom they
dislike? although indeed firmer then themselves, and very well able to teach
most of their guides. But to the purpose, the truth is, that the aforesaid
Authors have so fully proved the lawfulness of taking the said Oath, that no
man needs speak more in proof thereof, as not being able to speak better to
the purpose. And therefore I refer every man to the said Writers to inform
themselves lest they demeritoriously suffer for refusing the ^ame.

This only give me leave to insert, as a caution to some, that considering it
is contrary to the Popes (forced) opinion as appears by his Declarative
Breve; he that shall swear or abjure the doctrine and position ( That Princes
which be, etc.) in the fourth branch, as impious, heretical, and damnable (I
conceive) indirectly abjureth the Popes opinion, as impious, heretical, and
damnable: and what a fault that may be made in Rome (especially by some
suggestors, who although to mine own knowledge do teach, this Oath lawful in
private, to men of quality: yet in public, and to his Holiness out of a
seeming zeal they will lament the fact) I leave to the judgment of wise men.
When as they shall swear his doctrine erroneous in such bitter terms, whom
they acknowledge to be the supreme Pastor of their souls: questionless in
such, it will be interpreted at the least arrogacie and presumption. And I for
mine own part should think it very hard to be forced to take the Oath of
Supremacy in Rome under any terms directly or indirectly misbeseeming my
duty to my natural Prince: howsoever he might err in mistake. And therefore
I do humbly present the consideration of our case in this Oath of Allegiance
to his Majesty's most gracious Clemency. This caution or consideration I
present to such, as having taken the said Oath, intend afterward to converse
at Rome. But if death or ruin urge, then ( spectata conscientia) I say as
before, follow the opinion of Sir William Howard, and Master Widdrington as
secure. For in such extremity it is to be hoped, that his Holiness will be
rather a pious and pitiful father, then too severe a Judge.

If any be urged to this Oath out of any temporal preferment: let him follow
the example of that huge Divine a Sancta Clara (an acquaintance of mine) and
take it in private before a Master of the Chancery, and get a Certificate
thereof from him, and it will be sufficient.

Here is to be noted the intolerable abuse which some suggestors did put upon
the Popes Holiness, concerning this Oath of Allegiance; who procured him to
send forth a declarative Brief, forbidding English Catholics to take the
same; as containing many things plainly repugnant to faith and salvation: and
by this means compelled him against his will, to make the Doctrine adverse to
the Oath, his own opinion. When as the procurers themselves, and their
abettors did (as I have said) counsel in private, some men of quality (who
were friends to them) to take the same as lawful, as may be easily proved. And
which is more strange, that they should procure it to be declared so repugnant:
when as the doctrine to be abjured in the said oath wrote by Santarellus was
declared by all the Sorbon Doctors and sixteen of the chiefest Jesuits in
France to be wicked: so that what is held lawful by most Divines in the Church
(it being the most common opinion, except some few that would seem to flatter
the Pope) should be held wicked only for us to take: but I conceive, as I have
said before, that the intent and end of the procuration of such Briefs is, that
nothing should be thought good or lawful in England to be done, without the
special approbation of the suggestors tribe: so that if any man should do
what they have not approved, by virtue of the Popes Brief, he shall be
presently blasted for an heretic: and if he do what they approve, he shall be
saved harmless by them both at home and abroad, let him be never so bad. Sed
meliora Spero.

Let any judicious man consider all the Bulls, Breves and Censures that have
been procured touching the affairs of English Catholics from the first Bull
of excommunication against Queen Elizabeth by Pius Quintus to the last before
spoken of in Anno 1639. against one who knows nothing of the same, and he
shall find, by far, more hurt done to Catholics, then ever good. It were a
blessed turn if some order might be taken by our most gracious Queen for the
prevention of such mischiefs: which serve for nothing more, then to make
Schisms and Rents in the Church of God, and the Pope, and his authority to be
less regarded. It were more fitting in my poor judgment, that Catholics
were succored in tribulation, then by barring them of their Christian liberty,
in what they may lawfully do, to add affliction to affliction. I must say no
more; for I perceive that some begin to swell, but the matter is not great:
for I will write nothing by Gods grace contrary to the Catholic Church. Yet I
fear they will break before I have done with:

The Oath of Supremacy, which is as follows, divided into four branches.
1. I A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Kings
highness is the only Supreme Governor of this Realm, and of all other his
Highness dominions and countries, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal.

2. And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or Potentate, has or
ought to have any Jurisdiction, power, superiority, pre-eminence or authority
Ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this Realm.

3. And therefore I do utterly renounce and forsake all foreign Jurisdictions,
powers, superiorities, and authorities.

4. And do promise that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance
to the Kings Highness, his heirs and lawful successors; and to my power
shall assist, and defend all Jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences and
authorities, granted or belonging to the Kings Highness, his heirs and
successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. So
help me God, and by the contents of this Book.



Where is to be The head of controversies, between the Romish and Reformed
Churches is the controversy about the Head of the Church, which the Papists
will have the Pope to be, but reformed Churches Christ alone: I say head of the
Universal or Catholic Church, but of particular Churches, sovereigne Princes
within their several Realms may be termed Heads, that is, chief Governors
which this Priest here acknowledges. For the acknowledgement of this supreme
authority and power of the King in his dominions of England and Ireland, the
Oath of Supremacy was appointed by Act of Parliament in the 35. of Henry the
eighth, to be taken by all his Majesty's subjects; this Act was continued in
the reign of Edward the sixth, but repealed in the first and second of Philip
and Mary, and revived the first of Queen Elizabeth: now the question here is,
whether the Oath of Supremacy thus confirmed by diverse Acts of Parliament,
exclude not that Spiritual jurisdiction, which all Papists believe to be in
the Pope Iure divino: or, which comes all to one, whether a Papist ut si^, that
is, remaining a Papist and holding his Popish religion, may salv^ conscientia,
take this Oath of Supremacy: this Priest affirms he may; but we shall
demonstrate the contrary hereafter by impregnable arguments drawn from the
intention of the Lawmakers, the letter of the Acts of Parliament, and the
Queens Injunctions, the judgment of the Church of Rome, and the confession of
the adversary himself.
noted first, that in the first year and Parliament of Queen Elizabeth's
reign; when they abolished the Popes authority, and would have yielded the
Not the same authority which the Pope had in all things, but so far as it is
expounded and limited in the Queens Injunctions in the first year of her
reign; the Queen (as her brother and father before) only resumed that power,
which the Pope had unjusty taken from the Crown, and usurped it himself; a
power which is and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, that is, under God to have the Sovereigntie and rule over all manner of
persons, borne within these Realms and Dominions, and Countries, of what
estate either Ecclesiastical or temporal soever they be. See admonition to the
Injunctions in the Appendix.
same authority with the Title of Supreme head to the Queen, as it was given
before, to her father and brother: diverse especially moved by Minister Calvine
conceived that King Henry the eighth by the Title of Head of the Church,
challenged a far greater power then what the Act of Parliament acknowledged
in him, or he ever exercised: but after the Title of Head of the Church was
publicly declared and expounded by Q. Elizabeth, both he and all the Reformed
Churches rested satisfied in the lawfulness of that Title which imported not
Supreme teacher or directer unto Trtuh: but Supreme commander for the Truth,
in all causes, and over all Persons.
Calvines writing (who h^d condemned in the same Princes, that calling) liked
not the term; and therefore procured that some other equivalent term, but
less offensive (although in truth, it is all one with the other) might be
used. Upon which formalitie, it was enacted, that she was the Chief Governor
as well in causes Ecclesiastical or Spiritual; as Civil and Temporal* because
otherwise there could have been no color, to make new laws for the change of
Religion. So the abovesaid Author to the Answer, etc. cap. 1. page 7. and 8.
And this was the only and sole intention, of making the aforesaid Oath: which
was div^rs from the The intention of Henry the eighth, and Queen Elizabeth,
was the self same as is expressed in the Act of Parliament 35. Henry the
eighth; and the Admonition annexed to the Injunctions of the 1 Elizabeth:
namely the extirpation and extinguishment of the usurped and pretended
authority, power and jurisdiction of the Sea and Bishop of Rome: and the
recovery of their own right by adorning the Crown with a flower before
wrongfully taken from it: and here I cannot sufficiently admire the impudence
of this Priest who so confidently affirms that the intention of Queen
Elizabeth was diverse from her father in prescribing and requiring this Oath,
whereas she her self in the above named Admonition declares to all her loving
subjects, That nothing was, is, or shall be meant or in^ended by the same Oath,
to have any other duty, allegiance or bond required by the same, then was
acknowledged to be due to the most nobl^ King of famous memory, K. H. 8. her
Majesty's father, or K. Ed. 6. her Majesty's bro^^er.
^ntention of King Henry the eighth, and consequently the Oath not the same.
For his intention in assuming to himself the Supremacy was not (as I shall
say beneath in the third note) to alter any principle of Religion (the
Supremacy only excepted) or so much as any ceremony of the Catholic
Church: but to give himself a more The liberty he speaks of was given by the
approbation of the chief Universities beyond the Sea of the Romish Religion.
licentious liberty in point of marriage and divorce, and to make the same
liberty justifiable to his subjects; and because he could not have the same
granted to him by the Pope, was angry and displeased with him, and took it of
his own accord: and for his sake, disturbed the Church and Clergy of England,
and took away their lands, and gave them to his Nobility.

It is to be noted secondly, that we are to swear, that the King is chief
Governor as well in all spiritual things, etc. Where by (All) is to be
understood; in all things ordered or to be ordered by him, unless some
exception be made in reason touching the establishment or regiment of the
Protestant Church of England: that the spiritual things were meant touching
the Church, appears by the very words themselves: Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical: and that they were meant touching a Church to be established,
distinct from the then Catholic Church in England: appears by the intention
of the oath which was (as I have said) to enable the Queen to change and alter
Religion; and to form an Not to form another Church, but to reform that
Church which was before, and restore Religion to her purity by the example of
Ezekiah, Josiah, and other religious Kings.
other Church diverse, from that which then was; which is the Protestant
Church: and that there are some spiritual things justly excepted No power at
all excepted but the former power explained only how far it extended (viz)
Not to the authority and power of Ministry of divine Office in the Church,
which none of the Kings or Queens of this Realm possessours of the Crown
ever challenged.
from the King; appears by the Declaration of Queen Elizabeth, in her next
visitation of the Clergy, after the said Oath was made; wherein she her self
made an exception, and declared in print (the same being published by her
commandment) that in truth She had not power (we will not examine then, from
whence her Nor I in this place by what authority your Bishops anoint your
thumbes and ordain your Priests to offer the unbloody sacrifice of the Mas^e
for the living and the dead. There is nec vola nec vestigium of any such
calling in the Scripture or purer Antiquity, as for our Ministry it is ^o
clearly justified together with the succession thereof, out of your own best
records and tenants by Francis Mason de succes. Episc. and Ministerio Angl.
that ever since the printing thereof all your Romish cavillers and carpers at
it, have been as mute as fishes.
Ministers power came she having none her self) by the words of the Oath and
Act, to minister the Sacraments. Neither had she any such intent, and that no
such thing was employed in her Title, or claim of Spiritual regiment; nor no
other thing, nor more then was before granted to her father, by the term of
Supreme Head: requiring all her loving subjects to receive the Oath at least
in that sense (which was, she meant, that she might dispose of Church matters,
as her Father had: and have power to form See p. 117. letter ^.
what Church she pleased) and so that should suffice her Highness.

It is to be noted thirdly that the aforesaid oath when it was made, was
unlawful to be taken by any Catholic; as the oath before made in the days
of King Henry the 8th. Although when it was made, it was not altogether so
unlawful, as that of King Henry: because in his days there was no A shameless
untruth in his sense: for he takes Catholic (as usually in this Pamphlet) for
the Romish and Popish Church and in that sense it is most false. For there were
many congregations in England before this 35 of Hen. 8. of Protestants, and
diverse crowned with martyrdom as Th. Man in the year 1518. Io. Brown in the
year 1517. and diverse others set down in the Acts and Monuments of the Church,
some before and some after Luther began the Reformation in Germany.
other Church extant, or like to be extant in England, but the Catholic
Church: of which A notorious untruth as appears by the very Act, Ann. 35. in
which the Oath of Supremacy was first required to be taken, King Henry never
challenged to himself the Style of Head of the universal Church, but only to
be supreme H^ad under God of the Church of England, and Ireland, and all
other His Majesty's Dominions.
contrary to the Law of God, and his own conscience, he made himself head (as
appears by a book set forth by the said King himself, in the later end of his
reign, and many years after he had framed his Oath of Supremacy; entitled: A
necessary Doctrine and Erudition for any Christian man, set forth by the Kings
Majesty of England, etc. In which he sets forth the Christian faith, then to
be professed in England. Which was as absolutely Catholic, and the self-same
in every point, as now it is in Rome. And if any man should have sworn him the
supreme head, as he intended of that Church: he would have sworn false: as
making the Church a Monster in having two heads: or depriving the Pope of his
authority granted him by God: which had been to have denied an Article of
faith: but when the said Oath was repealed in Queen Mary's days. And another
Oath No other Oath at all in sense, but the former only abridged in words as
will appear evidently by comparing them both which are copied out in the
Appendix.
of Supremacy made in the aforesaid first year of Queen Elizabeth. It was as
I have said to enable her (not so much to be head of the Church then extant,
and to be utterly abolished, as) to be Governor of a new Church distinct from
the Catholic Church then out of hand to be propagated and established: of
which to swear Her Head, before it was: or to swear Her Head of the Church
then extant, which she conceived superstitious: of which indeed she was not
head, was in a true and proper sense unlawful. And so continued unlawful
until after the abrogation of Mass, and perfect establishment of the new
Protestant Church within this Realm, and other His Majesty's Dominions. Which
being established as now it is: the said Oath of Supremacy ceased from being
unlawful: because then there was an apparent face of a Church (distinct from
the members of the Catholic Church, which then began scarce to appear, in
respect of the greater multitude) of which only A ridiculous evasion and
contrary to the intention and letter of the law, as shall be proved hereafter.
The intention of the law was to abrogate the Popes usurped jurisdiction not
over the Protestant Churches which he never had: but over the Romish
Catholics or Papists which he before that time enjoyed, and exercised.
Besides, the letter of the law carries supreme governor of the Realm and
all other Her Highness Dominions and Countries, not only of the Protestant
Church within Her Realms. This is made more evident in the Admonition to the
Injunctions, 1. Eliz. where Her Supremacy is described to be over all manner
of persons borne within Her Realms, Dominions and Countries: therefore over
Papists as well as Protestants, unless they be no manner of persons.
she was supreme governor and chief head, and no other person whatsoever had
or ought to have any jurisdiction or pre-eminence in the same, and all that
were or are not of the same faith and Church were and are in a true and proper
sense forreiners to the same.

It is to be noted fourthly: that a man may be said to be a Forreiner I
acknowledge the word forreiner is sometimes taken for an opposite to domesticus
fidei, a stranger from the covenant of grace: but in the Act of Parliament and
Oath of Supremacy, as it is expounded in the Admonition (which is also
Enacted) the word forreiner can signify no other but those who are not natives.
in a twofold sense. First, in respect of a temporal Dominion. Secondly, in
respect of faith, whence arises a spiritual jurisdiction. In the first sense,
all that are not Natives of His Majesty's Dominions (although some Lawyers say)
all that do no homage to His Majesty) are forreiners. In the second sense,
all that are of the Protestant faith with the King, are Domestics of the same
faith, and within His Dominions only subject to His spiritual jurisdiction by
the Laws of the Realm. And all that are not of the Protestant faith, are
forreiners to the same, conformable to St. Paul, who accounted all those of
whatsoever Nation, or under whatsoever temporal Dominion or Jurisdiction in
the world) who were of the same faith with himself which he taught, were
Domestics of that faith. And those of whatsoever Nation or temporal Dominion,
that were not of the same faith, he accounted forreiners. Whence he says, Gal.
6.10. Let us do good to all: but especially to the domestics (or those of the
house) of faith. And 1 Thessalonians. 4. verse. 12. Rogamus ut honest ambuletis ad eos
qui foris sunt, and nullius aliquid desideretis. We desire you brethren, that
you walk honestly toward them that are without, (that is, forreiners to our
faith) and need nothing of any man's.

It is to be noted fifthly and chiefly, what conditions are required in every
lawful oath: which according to the Prophet Jeremy, are three. viz* Truth,
Judgment, and Justice: for he says in his fourth Chapter. Thou shall swear
our Lord lives, in truth and in judgment and in justice: upon which place the
holy Doctor, S. Hierome notes, that the foresaid conditions are requisite to
every oath: of whom all Divines have le^rned the same; requiring in every
lawful oath, every of the said three conditions. The reason hereof is: because
an oath being an invocation of God, as witness that what we speak is true; it
is requisite that we should use judgment or discretion, to see that we do
nothing rashly, or without due reverence, devotion and faith, toward so great
a Majesty, but we must especially regard, that we make not him, who is the
chief and Sovereign verity and inflexible justice, either ignorant o^ what
we say: or Patron of a lie, as witness of that, which either is false in
assertion, or unjust in promise. Hence an oath wanting Judgment or discretion
and wisdom: is a rash and foolish oath, that which wants Justice: is called
an unjust oath. And finally, where there is not truth: it is adjudged a false
or lying oath, and is more properly then all the rest, called Perjurie.

These notes premised, I shall now prove, the said Oath of Supremacy to be
lawful for any Catholic to take.

Every Oath that is accompanied with the three said conditions or companions,
viz. verity, justice, and judgment (in the opinion of all Divines, Canon and
Civil Lawyers) is a lawful Oath: but such is the Oath of Supremacy above
recited in every part and particle of the same. Ergo. The Minor is proved,
discoursing of every branch in particular, and first, of the first branch:
wherein I swear that the King is only Supreme Governor of this Realm, as
well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, touching the Church
of the said Realm: as Temporal touching the State, or of any other his
Dominions. Which I do swear discreetly as a thing true and just. For there is
no other Supreme Governor of temporal things to be assigned, but the King: as
all will confess: nor of Ecclesiastical things, or the Church of England; as
by a sufficient Enumeration may be proved. For the Parliam^nt, is not supreme
governor of the Churches within this Realm; when as according to the natural
light of reason, the King is governor of that: and therefore not supreme. The
Primate cannot be assigned supreme governor, when as he has all his
authority of government from the King, and so he has a Superior. A
Lay-eldership cannot be supreme governor, for although it be unknown, what
it is, or from whence it receives its authority; yet I think no
Lay-eldership so barbarous: as not to admit the King chief governor of the
same. Neither can the Pope be any way supreme governor of the aforesaid
Church: because he professes himself only supreme head and governor of the
Catholic Church and of no other according to Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 5.12. what is
it to him to judge of them that are without, of which Catholic Church His
Neither can the Pope. Here we thank him for freeing us from all subjection to
the Pope and See of Rome. Though he challenges not to be the Head of the
Catholic, that is, the universal Church of Christ scattered far and wide
over the whole face of the earth: yet he challenges to be and is Supreme
Governor of all His Subjects within His Dominions, whether they are members of
the Romish or Reformed Church.
Majesty does not claim to be head. Neither will he be governor The
superstition and Idolatry of Papists practiced in England does not any way
abridge His Majesty's Supreme power, for he exercises His power not in
regulating those idolatrous and superstitious rites, but in suppressing them,
and punishing those who so defile Gods worship in His Kingdom.
of any spiritual or ecclesiastical thing therein, as conceiving the same
both superstitious and idolatrous. Ergo. the King must be supreme governor of
the Protestant Church.

That the King is (only) Governor is proved: because none other can be
assigned his equal in preheminencie of government in the aforesaid Protestant
Church.

For the second or third branch it is likewise proved. For I swear them
likewise discreetly, truly and justly. viz. that no foreign Prince, Person,
Prelate, etc. has or ought to have any jurisdiction, etc. within this Realm
(in the Sea this Evasion refuted, page 120. letter S.
said Protestant Church) which I add as before, because according to the
intention of the Law and Lawmakers (as I have before said) it was so meant. For
neither does His Majesty or did Queen Elizabeth claim to be chief Governor
of the Catholic Religion, or Roman Church, or any jurisdiction therein. It
being by them both (as I have often said) abhorred as superstitious, and
abolished for the same reason by the said Queen and State of England:
therefore it is against reason, and a kind of petty treason to swear either
of them governor of a Religion which they apprehend so evil* but in respect
of the Protestant Church established, the Pope is a foreign Person and Prelate:
and his jurisdiction foreign. Neither has he, or any other foreign Person any
jurisdiction in the aforesaid The words of the Oath are not that no forreiner,
Prince, or Prelate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction or spiritual
authority within the Protestant Church but within the Realms, therefore no
jurisdiction within His Majesty's Dominions, over any members either of the
Protestant or of the Romish Church.
Church, or ought to have: for as I have said in the fourth note, out of Saint
Paul: as all those that are of the Catholic faith, are domestics of that
faith: and all that are not of the same faith, are forreiners to it: so all
that are of the Protestant faith (of which His Majesty is governor) are
domestics of the same: and all that are not of the same, are forreiners to
that Religion. Hence appears the truth of the said branches: wherein is said
(in the second) That no foreign Prince, etc. and (in the third) I do utterly
renounce and forsake all foreign jurisdictions, etc. which I do justly and
lawfully renounce as well in respect of the Protestant Church, as of the
Catholic: for as I have said the Pope is truly a forreiner to the Protestant
Church: in respect of which, I must by the law renounce his jurisdiction. And
he is no forreiner in respect of the Catholic Church, in which I am bound to
respect him and his jurisdiction: for if all Catholics be domestics one to
^he other (as I have proved out of Saint Paul) how can the Pope who is chief of
that faith be said to be a See the Answer to this sophisme, page 120. letter T.
forreiner? his jurisdiction being as internal and intrinsecall, as innate and
natural to every Catholic in the world; as it is to him, that stands next
him in his chamber at Rome. And therefore there being no foreign jurisdiction
in the Catholic Church, in every sense I may lawfully renounce all foreign
jurisdictions.

The fourth and last branch can have no difficulty at all, with any
Catholic. So that the words of this Oath seem to me so clear and lawful,
since the establishment of the Protestant Church; that it may be taken of any
Catholic without any the least danger of Perjurie, or any other sin
(scandal being avoided) or without mental reservation or secret equivocation:
that I admire that any man has so long scrupulized to the loss of himself
and fortunes: when as being necessitated to take the same, and scandal being
easily to be avoided (as I have said out of Diana and others) he might have
prevented his own ruin with a safe conscience: as I conceive Sir John Winter
and other men of estates did, who are reported to have lately taken the same.

It may be objected first, that this Oath thus explicated, has no coherencie,
the first branch with the second and third; and therefore that it be coherent,
and taken conformably to the intention of the lawmakers, as we swear the King
to be only Supreme Governor of the Church of England in the first branch; so
ought we in the second and third branch to renounce all Jurisdiction foreign
to the same. To which I answer first, that coherencie is no condition requisite
to an oath, but impertinent to the truth or falsehood of the same: for there be
many things of a different nature inserted in an oath.

Secondly, that there is a most perfect coherencie in the aforesaid
explication: for as in the first branch, I swear the King Head of the Church
of England, so in the second and third: I abjure all foreign Jurisdictions
whatsoever. Which are the very direct words of the oath: for there are no words
in any branch signifying a renunciation of all Jurisdiction foreign to the
Protestant Church of England. Whence there is a great difference between
renouncing all Jurisdiction foreign to the particular Church of England, and
renouncing all foreign Jurisdiction. For a foreign Jurisdiction renounced is
rightly described A power or right denied to be extent to the swearer by any
law, and is more general, then a Jurisdiction foreign to the Protestant
Church: which is only a power not extent to a Protestant qua talis: which
although it be foreign to the said Church; yet it may be properly extent and
appertaining to the swearer. So that it is intended by the said oath; that as
in the first branch, we swear the King only Supreme Governor of the
Protestant Church within this Realm and his Dominions: so in the second and
third; we are to renounce all foreign Jurisdictions whatsoever; which either the
Pope, or any other foreign Person has, or ought to have in the same: which
every Catholic may lawfully do, notwithstanding that general saying; That
the Pope has Jurisdiction over all Christians: for that is meant, a general
Jurisdiction in the Catholic Church, either actual or potentiall, extent to
all; which is foreign to none: and which, by taking this oath is not denied. I
answer thirdly, that all penal laws (as is this law for taking the oath) in
doubtful words, are ever to be It is true if the words will bear it and it be
agreeable to the intention of the law and lawmaker, but maledicta glossa quae
corrumpit contextum; cursed be the Gloss which corrupts the Text, and quite
perverts the meaning of the law as this does. See the Injunctions.
taken in the more favorable sense, and which makes the law to contain no
falsehood, or injustice. And therefore in this law to swear, as the words lie,
may be done without any inj^stice or falsehood; which is and ought to be
presumed to be the mind of the lawmaker; for no law or lawmaker intends
perjurie. And therefore it is a frivolous thing to invent scrupulous crotchets,
which the words do not import.

It may be objected secondly, that the oath must be interpreted according to
the intention of the law and lawmaker: for as Suares says, lib. 6^. de leg.
cap. 1. upon the will and intention of the lawmaker (which is the soul of the
law the substance and force of the law does chi^fly depend: therefore it by any
means, the will of the lawmaker may be known, according to it especially we
must understand the words of the law. But the will of the lawmaker is
sufficiently known concerning this oath, to make it apparently unlawful for
any Catholic to take as appears by the words of King James of blessed
memory, saying, (in his Premonition page 9. and in his Apology for the oath,
page 2. and 9.) that by the oath of Allegiance, he intended to demand of his
subjects nothing else, but a profession of that temporal Allegiance and civil
obedience, which all subjects, by the law of God and nature, do owe to their
lawful Prince, etc. For as the Oath of Supremacy, (says he) was devised for
putting a difference between Papists and them of our profession. So was the
oath of Allegiance ordained for making a difference between the civilly
obedient Papists and the perverse disciples of the Powder treason; by which
words it appears that King James held, both the law and the law maker
intended by the oath of Supremacy, to put a difference between Papists and
Protestants: and that no Papist would take that oath, wherein the Jurisdiction
of the Pope, was intended to be abjured, Ergo, the said oath of Supremacy is
to be interpreted accordingly, all doubtfulnesse of words set aside; and
consequenter unlawful for any Catholic to take.

To the Major of which Objection; I answer first, granting the same. Secondly
with a distinction; that the intentions of the law and law maker are to be
sought, when they interpret the law in a truer sense, then the plain words
do, as they lie; otherwise not, lest it want verity.

To Suarez I answer, that himself says in the place before cited, that if at
any time the property of the words of an oath should induce any injustice, or
like absurdity, concerning the mind, or meaning of the lawmaker: they must be
drawn to a sense, although improper; wherein the law may be just and
reasonable: for this is presumed to be the mind of the law maker, as it has
been declared by many laws in F. tit. de lege. thus Suarez.

So that although there were in the words of this oath diverse significations
impropper and unusual; yet in the opinion of Suarez, it might be taken; and
the words interpreted in the truest sense, abstracting from the real intention
of the law maker: how much more then (say I) the words being not improper, or
unusual, but according to the intention of the Of the intention of the law and
lawmaker in prescribing this oath to that which I have spoken before I shall
add something in the close of this Chapter to which ^referre the Reader for
further answer
law and law maker, may they be taken in the more favorable sense, which may
make the law to be just and reasonable? See for this doctrine Can. Cum tu de
testibus cap. 16. Can. ad nostram de Iurejurando, cap. 21. et de regulis ^^ris
in 6. reg. 49. in paenis leg. Benignius F. de leg. Leg. In ambigua ibidem.

Hence it follows first out of the doctrine of the said Suarez, that although
the words and sentences contained in this oath, being considered barely by
themselves, and without due circumstances (to wit, the intention of the law and
lawmaker, and to what end and purpose the s^id oath was framed) may seem to
some doubtful and ambiguous (although to me they seem not so) that is, not
clear and morally certain; and so for one to swear them in that doubtful
sense, were to expose himself to danger of perjurie: yet considering (as I
have said) that such doubtful words, are to be taken in the more favorable
sense, and which makes the The law is just and reasonable without your forced,
and forged Gloss: for why should not all that enjoy the benefit of his
Majesty's laws as well as Protestants, submit themselves to his Majesty's
scepter, and supreme power over themselves as well as Protestants, especially
seeing the power is the same, which the most religious Kings of Judah, and most
Christian Emperors of Rome, and diverse of his Majesty's Predecessors within
this Realm have exercised upon all their subjects.
law to be just and reasonable, and to contain no falsehood or injustice. If any
one swear* those words, which of themselves are doubtful, in no doubtful
sense, but in a true and determinate sense, and wherein they are not doubtful,
but clear and morally certain, there is no danger of perjurie at all.

It may seem to follow secondly out of the aforesaid doctrine, that such as
took the oath of Supremacy in King Henry the eighth days (which rather then
those famous and glorious men, Sir Thomas Moore and Bishop Fisher would take,
they worthily chose to die) were not to be condemned of perjurie; because it
might be supposed, that they being learned Bishops and Noblemen, knowing what
belonged to an oath, did draw the same to some improper sense, which ought to
have been the intention of the aforesaid King to make the law just; as if they
should have sworn the then King, Head or chief of the Church of his country;
for that he was Sovereigne Lord and ruler of both persons Spiritual and
Temporal: all sorts being bound to obey his lawful civil laws and
commandments. And so in this sense (although it be a kind of improper speech)
every King is Head of the Clergy and all others of his own Country. Or
peradventure they might swear him Supreme Head of the Church of England; that
is, Chief of the congregation of believers within his dominions: for so in our
language, we commonly say him, to be the head of a College, Court or City,
that is the chief; and him to be chief who is supreme therein. The Church
being then taken by all Divines for a congregation of men; Why might not King
Henry be improperly sworn (in the opinion of Suarez) Head of the then
congregation in England? So that what Sir Thomas Moore lawfully and piously
refused with relation to the intention of the aforesaid King, others might
without perjurie take with relation to the law of God (abstracting from all
unlawful intentions) to wit, that every oath be just and reasonable as being
to be taken in Verity, Justice and Judgment: and so what was unlawful in a
proper sense, might at lest be free from Perjurie in an improper. Thus
understanding the first branch; and the second and third in the same sense
before delivered, they might peradventure be excused (as I have said) from
perjurie; But never from sin. For considering the state of England in those
days, and the absolute intention of the King which (well known to the whole
world) was; to be sworn Supreme Head See page 119. letter Q.
of the Catholic Church, Catholic religion still here remaining as I have
said: his oath was as much different from this See page 119. letter R.
now oath of Supremacy, as darkness from light: For by this, the Queen
claimed not the Supremacy granted by Christ to Saint Peter, as did her father:
but only to be Supreme governor of a Church, out of which, she would not
only discard the Pope, but likewise root out all Catholic religion,
contrary to her fathers mind as I have showed: so that the question in the
said Kings days, was about an Article of faith, viz. Whether the Supremacy
were granted by God to the King, or to the Pope. Which Article they were bound
with loss of their lives to have professed being called thereunto: for then
did occur the times of obligation before expressed (by Saint Thomas and other
Divines) for the profession of a man's faith. As when the honor and glory of
God, and the spiritual benefit of his neighbor should exact the same. Now
when or what greater honor could a man have done to God, then to have stood
for the truth of the Gospel, and defense of the Catholic faith being so
opposed? And in whom could there have been more edification and greater
example given, for simple and unlearned men to follow, then in Bishops and
great men of authority. Neither was it to purpose for them to allege, that
they were in danger of their lives and fortunes; for they were bound to loose
both, rather then to deny any one Article of faith. For although I have said,
that a man is not bound, with danger of life, or fortunes, to abstain from a
thing lawful, or of its own nature indifferent (as the going to a Protestant
Church in a Protestant Country, taking the oath of Alleagiance, or the now
oath of Supremacy; every of which is far enough from an Article of faith, or
point of religion; only more cried down, because out of fashion, then out of
any grounded reason or judgment) to avoid the scandal of we^ke ones, after
instruction or admonition given of the nature of the thing, and the danger in
abstaining Yet I never said, that a man was not bound to profess his religion
in time convenient; or that he might deny his faith, or any part or point of
the same for fear of death; but absolutely the contrary: hence I say, that the
Supremacy in those days, being a point of religion, and an article of faith,
although they might be excused from perjurie, yet never from sin and
scandal. And therefore I conceive that Suares only intends that then laws
and oaths invented contrary to the law of God, may be drawn to an improper
sense, when scandal may be avoided with integrity of faith. And so those that
took the aforesaid Kings oath, I leave to the judgment of God: for as Saint
Paul says, 1 Cor. 4. It is our Lord that judges; who best knows the
rectitude of all men's actions, and the secret intentions of each man's heart.

The Minor of the said objection is denied. And to the words of K. James
saying: that as the Oath of Supremacy was devised for putting a difference
between Papists and them of our profession. So was, etc. I answer that the said
King did not by those words, undertake to give an absolute and total reason,
why the said oath was devised, (himself not being the deviser or maker
thereof) but spoke according to the effect, which he saw the oath of
Supremacy took in his days: who conceiving that Catholics held it, not an
oath lawful for them to take (and therefore some in King Henry's days refused
the same out of conscience; others since the abrogation of Mass and
establishment of the Protestant Church, out of scruples, not considering either
the change of times, or alteration of the Church) conceived likewise a
difference to result thereby between them and Protestants; so that the said
And yet his words as you cite them out of his Praemonitorie Preface, page 9.
are these: The oath of Supremacy was devised for putting a difference between
Papists and them of our profession, Devised by whom but by the lawmakers; and
if devised by the the lawmakers for this end, to put a difference between
Papists and Protestants, it cannot be denied but that it was their intention,
to make this oath as a didinctive sign whereby to know Papists in the kingdom
from Protestants.
renowned King did not intend by the aforesaid words, to make known the
intention of the law or lawmaker, but only spoke what an effect the said
devised oath had in Catholics wrought.

That neither of the said oaths of Supremacy were framed to put a difference
between Papists and Protestants is evident by what I have said; for in King
Henry his days, there were no Protestants See page 118. letter P.
known in England to differ withal: and that oath was made only and solely
for his pleasure. And in the said Queens days, the oath was only made to give
and acknowledge her power and authority in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things; thereby (as I have sufficiently said) to propagate and establish the
Protestant Church: and to no other end or purpose.

The Major and Minor being thus answered, the consequence appears naught; and
the assertion for the lawfulness of the oath in force.

If any simple man (pardon the bluntness of my speech, for I know that no
discreet or judicious man of either learning o^ piety will justly censure me)
shall whisper in a corner that this doctrine is scandalous and unheard of: and
that diverse have suffered and shed their blood, rather then they would admit
the same: and which, if it had been lawful, others of his tribe would have
found out, before this time: (he should have added to men of great quality)
and therefore it being no matter of faith, none ought to believe it. I forgive
the poor man; for he speaks out of hypocrisy or ignorance, or both; for he
cannot tell you with learning and sincerity why, or how it is scandalous. And
if any did suffer for the same, I pray let him likewise whisper when, or in
what year, or Kings reign? and then compare his speech to what I have said.
Yet whenever they did it, because they would not sin against their
consciences; which rather then to offend, they (not understanding the truth of
the said doctrine, and their fancy being the contrary way strong) were bound
to do. Yet good brother Simple do not persuade me against my conscience;
unless you can confute me in reason: for I conceive, that I say nothing
(although not written of before) but what is evident with Grace in reason;
although it be not certain by divine faith. And therein I show my self a true
friend to my distressed Country; for certus amicus in re incerta cernitur. A
sure friend is tried in a doubtful matter. Yet I should be loath, that any man
should charge me with the least thing said, as contrary to faith, or the
doctrine of the Catholic Church. (To which and whose censure, I do in all
humility submit my self, for all my doings, sayings and writings; as well for
the satisfaction of mine own conscience, as that ignorant brains may take no
offense). And i^ this doctrine were never heard of before; what then? Is it
therefore false or scandalous? And if your tribe did not find it out before;
is it a wonder? None at all with me: for I should wonder indeed, to hear you
the inventers of any thing beneficial to Gods Church; (howsoever you may and
do write over, and translate other men's works; and so seem to ignorant men,
to find out something for the good of the Church, that was never lost, or
before wanting therein) because as yet I have never heard or known so much.
Those therefore that shall hearken to such whisperings, I will wish them no
other punishment then that the Vicar of fools may be their ghostly father. In
the mean time (maugre all censures) I will thank God, that he has enabled me
to help my distressed friend at a dead lift, by counselling and instructing to
a lawful (I had almost said meritorious, but that I feared more anger) and
discreet act.

Thus then seriously to conclude; If any man shall yet remain unsatisfied: I
knowing, that an Angel of light cannot infuse either wisdom into a fool, or
prudence into a simple man: and nothing harder for the best Divine, then to
yield the continuance of a serene conscience to a scrupulous person: do only
desire and entreat, that what he himself either cannot, or will not receive
satisfaction in; he would not judge amiss in others; and so be scandalized,
(which will prove to himself rather the scandal of Pharisees then weak ones)
according to the exhortation of the Apostle: Qui non manducat, manducantem non
Spernat: he that eats not, let him not despise him that eats. As for mine
own part what I preach with Gods grace I will practice. And if any man can give
a better reason, for the contrary to what I do, then I can give for what I
say: I do hereby promise to subscribe: otherwise let every one look and dive
into his own actions, and not into other men's; for he shall render an account,
only for his own, and not for theirs. And because All in these times
(perchance) are not bound under sin to embrace these opinions ( the The
question whether a Papist may with a safe conscience take the ^ath of
Supremacy, may be understood either in sensu diviso, or in sensu composito, in
sensu diviso it is true, that a Papist may and ought to take the Oath of
Supremacy: for he that is now a Papist may become a Protestant, and then he
not only may, but ought to take this Oath being lawfully tendered unto him:
but in sensu composito it is false that a Papist continuing in his faith and
profession of popery may with a safe conscience take this Oath: for this Oath
implies the renouncing a maine Article of his faith from whence he has the
denomination of a Papist (See the Notes of the Rhemists upon Act. 11.26. which
fasten and assume this word or name Papist to the children of their papal
Church) namely the Popes Supremacy: and this as before was promised shall now
be demonstrated.

1. first from the intention of the law and lawmakers, who prescribed this Oath
of Supremacy as appears both by the Preface to the Oath: Whereas ther^ was a
Statute made and ordained against such as would extol and stand to the
jurisdiction, power and authority of the Sea and Bishop of Rome: in which
Statute there is comprised another oath in such wise as in the same Statute
among other thin^^ is mentioned: for as much as in both the said Oaths there
lacks full an^ sufficient words, whereby some doubts might rise: Be it
enacted by the authority of this Parliament, that this Oath hereafter
mentioned in this Act shall s^and in force and place of the same two Oaths.
And by these words in the body of the Oath, I shall keep all the contents of
the Act, and all other Acts and Statutes made in and for that purpose: viz. the
derogation, the extirpation, and extinguishment of the usurped and pretended
authority, power and jurisdiction of the Sea and Bishop of Rome. As likewise
by the Preface to the Act of Parliament in 1. Elizabeth, viz. To the intent
that all usurped and foreign power, and authority Spiritual and Temporal,
may for ever be clearly extinguished, and never to be used or obeyed within
this Realm, or any other your Majesty's Dominions and Countries: may it please
your Highness that it may be enacted as follows, etc. Hence I thus argue:

No Papist with a good conscience can take an Oath prescribed by an Act of
Parliament made purposely, and with an express intention for the extirpation
of the Popes jurisdiction and Supremacy over the whole Church, which he
claims by virtue of Christ's promise made to Peter, tibi dabo claves.

But such is the Oath of Supremacy as appears by the Statutes above cited.

Ergo, No Papist with a good conscience may take it.

2. Secondly, from the letter of the law and formal^ and express words of the
Oath, which are these: That neither the Sea, nor Bishop of Rome, nor any
foreign Potentate has or ought to have, any Jurisdiction, power, or
authority, within this Realm; neither by Gods Law, nor by any other just law
or means, Henry 8.35. year, hereunto add the Admonition to the Queens
Injunctions. Hence I thus argue.

No Papist may take an Oath which contains in it the renouncing a prime
Article of his faith, necessary to salvation in his Religion and the judgment
of his Church. But every Papist taking the Oath of Supremacy renounceth a
prime Article of his faith necessary to salvation. For so we read in the
Extravagans, cap. unam sanctam de mayor. et obed. Subesse Romano pontifici,
omni humanae creaturae declaramus dicimus, definimus, et pronunciamus, omnino
esse de necessitate salutis. We (says Boniface the eighth) declare, say,
define, and pronounce that it is altogether or absolutely necessary to
salvation for every humane creature to be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

Ergo, no Papist may take the Oath of Supremacy.

3. Thirdly, from the judgment of the Church of Rome, which accounts Fisher
Bishop of Rochester, and Sir Thomas Moore sometimes Lord Chan^ellour of
England, blessed and glorious Martyrs, because both these lost (...) heads
^ather then they would acknowledge the King Supreme Head (...) and (...) the
Popes Headship. To omit the testimonies (...) ^ovius Bishop in Italy, John
Cochleus of Germany, William Paradine a learned Historian of France, Cardinal
Poole, living in the Court at Rome and writing to the King in the defense of
Ecclesiastical unity, says thus by the figure of Apostroph^: Thy Father O
England, thy ornament, thy de^^nce was brought to his death being innocent in
thy sight; and a little after, he lef^ his life for thy sake, left he should
overthrow and b^tray thy salvation: and Cardinal B^llarmine in his Book De
Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis ab Anno 1400. ad 1500. thus writes of Fisher
Bishop of Rochester. Johannes Fischerus natione Anglus, Episcopus Roffensis,
postea, S. R. E. Cardinalis, et quod long gloriofius est, Martyr Christi
occisus est Henrici octavi Regis anglorum iussu, Anno, 1535. John Fisher an
English man Bishop of Rochester, and afterward Car^inall, and which makes him
far more glorious, a Martyr of Christ was slain by the coommandement of King
Henry the eighth, in the year of our Lord one thousand five hundred thirty
five: Whence I thus argue.

To his evasion that it was not the same Oath. See the answer, p. 119. letter
R. and the Appendix p. 141.

Either Fisher and Moore were no Martyrs, who died for refusing to take this
Oath, or they are no good Papists who take it.

But Fisher and Moore were famous and glorious Martyrs in the opinion of the
Roman Church as has been prooved.

Ergo, they who take the Oath of Supremacy are no good Papists.

4. Fourthly, from the confession of this Priest, page 118. The Oath of
Supremacy when it was made in the days of King Henry 8. was unlawful to be
taken by any Catholic: and page 119. If any had sworn the King to be
Supreme Head of that Church, he would have sworn false, as making the Church
a monster having two heads, or depriving the Pope of his authority granted him
by God. Whence I thus argue.

The Oath of Supremacy prescribed by that Act of Parliament, in the 35. of
Henry 8. was unlawful to be taken by any Roman Catholic, as this Priest
confesses.

But the Oath of Supremacy prescribed by Act of Parliament in the first of
Elizabeth in force at this day, is the same with the Oath prescribed by Act of
Parliament in the 35. of Henry the eighth, as appears by comparing both the
Oaths together, with a proviso in an Act the fifth of Elizabeth for expounding
this Oath, where it is said: That we confess and acknowledge in her Majesty,
her Heirs and Successors, no other authority, then that which was
challenged, and lately used by the noble King Henry the eighth, and King
Edward the sixth: as in the Admonition to the Qeenes Injunctions more plainly
appears. The Queens Majesty would that all her loving subjects should
understand that nothing was, is, or shall be meant, or intended by the same
Oath, to have any other Duty, Allegiance, or Bond required by the same Oath,
then was acknowledged to be due to the most noble King of famous memory, King
Henry the eighth her Majesty's father, or King Edward the sixth, her Majesty's
brother.

Ergo, the Oath of Supremacy prescribed by Act of Parliament the first of
Elizabeth, is unlawful to be taken by any Roman Catholic.

I conclude therefore, super tota materia that the taking of the Oath of
Supremacy, is an abrenunciation of the Romish faith, and consequently, that we
wrong no Papist that takes the Oath, if we believe him a forswearer who
forsweares his belief.


question not being, which is absolutely the safest or perfectest way, and all
dispositions of each soul, not being alike; but only whether the said opinions
are forbidden or not forbidden by the Law of God, or the Church, so that
absolutely in case of necessity they may not be done; and what may best in
prudence be done; (yet safe enough, with a good conscience, and without sin)
the condition of times and persons considered) those that shall not embrace the
same; but suffer for their conscience sake; I shall beseech Almighty God to
lay no more upon them, then they are able to bear; that they do nothing
against their conscience; for that were to carry a continual hell about them:
which of all earthly miseries were the greatest: from which God of his infinite
mercy preserve us all: Amen.

FINIS.
Appendix.
HEre follows the form of recantation enjoined the Lollards, Anno Regis
Richardi Secundi decimo nono. Together with the resolution of the Fathers in
the Council of Trent, 1564. and the Oaths of Supremacy enacted 35. Henry 8.
and 1. Elizabeth; as also a proviso for expounding the Oath the fifth of
Elizabeth. and the Admonition annexed to the Injunctions Elizabeth 1. whereof
there is often mention made in the Animadversions.

Ex Rotulo clausarum de Anno decimo nono Richardi Secundi -- m. 18. dorso.
MEmorand. quod primo di^ Septembris Anno Regni Regis Richardi secundi* De
memorando irrotulat^.
post conquestu^ decimo nono Willielmus Dinet, Nich-Taylour, Nich-Poucher, et
Willielmus Steynour de Nottingham in Cancellar. ipsius Regis personaliter,
constituti Sacramenta divisim praestiterunt sub eo qui sequitur tenore.

I William Dynet byfor yhow worschipefull fader and Lord Archbishop of Yho^ke
and yhour Clergy with my free will and full avysede swear to God and to all
his Seynts upon this holy Gospels, yat fro this day forthwarde I shall worship
images with preying, and offering unto hem in the worschep of the Seintes, that
they be made after. And also I shall nevermore despise pygremage ne states of
holy Church in noe degree. And also I shall be buxum to the laws of holy
Church and to yhow as mine Archbishop and to mine other ordinaries and
Curates, and keep tho laws up my power, and meyntein hem. And also I shall
never more meyntein ne techen, ne defenden Errors, conclusions, ne techinges
of the Lollardes, ne swych conclusions and techynges that men clepyth Lollards
doctrine, ne I shall her books ne swych books ne hem or any suspect or
diffamede of Lollardery receive or company withal wittingly or defend in tho
ma^ters, and if I know any swych, I shall with all the haste that I may do
yhow or else your ner officers to wytten and of her books. And also I shall
excite and stir all tho to good doctrine that I have hyndred with mine
Doctrine up my power. And also I shall stond to yhour declaration which es
heresy or error and do thereafter. And also what penance yhe woll for that I
have done for meyteyning of this false doctryn injuyne me and I shall fulfill.
And I submit me thereto up my power. And also I shall make no other gloss of
this mine oath, bot as the words stand. And if it be so that I com again or
do again this oath or any party thereof, I yhelde me here cowpable as an heretyk
and to be punyshed by the law of an heretyke, and to forfet all my gods to the
Kings will withouten any other process of law; and thereto I require the
Notarie to make of all this the which is my will an Instrument agayns me.

Et ex habundanti idem Willielmus Dyn^t eodem die voluit et recognovit quod
omnia bona et catalla sua mobilia nobis sint forisfacta in casu quo ipse
juramentum praedictum seu aliqua in eodem juramento contenta de cetero
contravenerit ullo modo.

Declaratio Patrum concilli Tridentini, circa frequentationem Ecclesiarum, Eo
tempore, quo hereticiritus exercentur, aut praedicatur haeresis.
Pax Christi quae exuperat omnem sensum, custodiat corda vestra and
intelligentias vestras, Amen.

Viri Dignitate conspicui, religione, and multis nominibus illustres aequam and
honestam postulationem vestram ad nos detulerunt N. and C. quam a vobis ad se
praelatam asserebant cujus hoc est exemplum.

REligione in Anglia mutata, and poena proposita, si quis Diebus Dominicis and
festis a templis abstineat, interim Dum Psalmi, and ex utroque testamento
lectiones, lingua vulgari recitantur: laici multi catholici, nobiles, and Deum
timentes; partim in carcere agentes, partim mox eo conjiciendi, amicorum and
consanguineorum precibus ac monitionibus and imminentium periculorum metu
invitantur, ut saltem ea tenus, de sententia denuo, se permittant, ut in
templis protestantium tantisper interesse velint Diebus Dominicis and aliis
festis, Dum Psalmi ex more lingua vulgari, decant arisoliti and lectiones ex
Bibliis lingua item vulgari depromptae; nec non conciones quae ad eorum dogmata
approbanda apud pop. frequentius habentur; commemoratae sunt. Iam qui huc usque
nullo modo deduci potuerint, ut publicis predictis precibus, and concionibus
interessent, magnopere (...) postulant, quid his faciendum censeant viri pii
and (...) Nam si nullo animae periculo, aut nulla Dei offensione, ^ubli^o regni
sui Decreto parere and obedire liceat: liben^^r ^d fecerint. Contra vero si
quid in hac re periculum sit sa^utis aeternae, aut l^sae Divinae Majestatis:
quae vis perpeti de^reverunt potius quam quicquam agere aut committere unde
Deum off^nsum iri, aut irritatum intelligant. Haec quest^^ cum multas pias and
religiosas conscientias exerceat, and co^tu^bet, r^ga^di estis omnes per
v^scera misericordiae, and charitatem quam Christus a suis omnibus exigit, ut
eam palu^ and dilucide quam primum expediatis, qua multi in ho^ regno implicat^
torquentur.

Quod haec charta complectitur, nullius nomine singulariter praefertur quia non
ad unum aliquem pertinet, quod hic petitur, sed ad omnes fere nobiles quos
Anglia habet Catholicos, quibus jam multis modis pericula intentantur. Iis
universis in tua illustrissima Dominatione magna spes auxilii effulget, si
eadem vel Dei, vel nobilitatis respectu, agere dignabitur cum amicis quos in
concilio habet Tridentino ut huic questioni, quae totius nobilitatis nomine his
adjuncta est, responsum maturum and Deliberatum accommodetur, and huc commoda
tuae D. opera perferatur. In quo haud dubie acquiessent perturbatae nunc
conscientiae, si ex tetam sancto and nobili patre certiores fieri possint, quid
patres hac de re iudicent. Quanquam fortasse tutum non fuerit, hanc questionem
public in concilio proponi, ne res divulgata nostrorum protestantium animos
exacerbet, and aliquibus periculum acceleret, (nisi tuae prudentiae aliter
videatur) ideo tua prudentia consultius fecerit, si ita cum selectis quibusdam
hanc causam egerit, ut quod ipsi in hac causa piissimi and doctissimi theologi
consulti significaverint, id proinde valeat, ac si universi patres sententias
dixissent: Caeterum hoc totum tuae Do judicio, and arbitrio relinquendi satius
sit, ut ipsa quod magis in rem esse prospiciat, ^d libere agat. Qui in Anglia
^unc sunt theologi partim metuunt, partim vary respondent* ideo plane omnibus
satisfaciet, quod te procurante ex Triden^^no huc respondebitur.

Pro quo vestro tam firm christiano and vere religioso animo non possumu^ non
Deo opt. max. agere gratias, and nobis magnopere gratulari. Etsi enim
calamitatum vestrarum sensus, cunctos vehementer tangat and cruciet, ut
Christiana charitas hortatur, quae tam arcto necessitudinis vinculo omnes
devinctos and constrictos tenet, ut mutuo afficiat membra, atque fratrum
commoda and incommoda non aliena sed propria ducat; in illo tamen non est
minima consolatio, quod calamitosis hisce temporibus and in eo potissimum
regno, in quo fides religiosorum misere jacet, cernimus nullo iniuriarum
concursu, aut metus vi charitatis vestrae ardorem extingu^, aut fidem convelli,
aut constantiam labefactari: quinimo vos esse, qui in tanta rerum omnium
confusione, ac molestiarum turbulentissima tempestate nunquam curvaveritis
genua ante Baal, non sine magna Divini nominis Christianaeque disciplinae
gloria. Ne igitur vestris constans animus, qui nullis co^modis ad impietatem
torqueri flective unquam potuit, fallacibus rationibus ad vestram perniciem
comparatis aut Divinae legis ignoratione pietatisve simulatione deciperetur and
minueretur: quod sustinemus dignum and Christiani hominis officio debitum
existimavimus vestris piissimis optatis morem gerere; causamque vestram
examinandam accurate, diligenter, matureque commissimus gravissimis quibusdam
patribus ac reverendissimis Dominis Archiepiscopo Bracharensi, Archiepiscopo
Lanci^nensi, Episcopo Dombriscensi, Episcopo Lerenensi, reverendo patri Iacobo
Laine^ generali societatis Jesus: simulque spectatissimis quibusdam Doctoribus
Alphonso Salmeroni Fratri Petro de Soto quem arbitramur vobis and facie and
nomine notissimum; D. Georgio de Fr. Francisco Fercensi. Doct. Melchiori
Cornelio: Iacobo Paiva de Andrada item Doctori, quorum omnium religio, pietas
and eruditio certissimis testimoniis explorata est. Quorum sententias nostro
etiam judicio comprobatas non dubitamus quin sententiae totius concilii instar
sitis merito habituri. H^i igitur patres ac Theologi quibus haec provincia data
est, cum s^pe convenissent, atque diligenter and circumspecte divina oracula,
and sanctorum patrum sententias and instituta deliberando evolvissent,
communibus suffragiis concluserunt minime vobis sine magno scelere, divinaque
indignatione licere hujusmodi hereticorum precibus, illorumve concion^bus
in^eresse; ac long multum praestare, quaevis atrocissima perpeti quam in
profligatissimis sceleratissimisque rit^bus, quovis signo illis consentire. etc.

The Oath of Supremacy Enacted 35. Henrici octavi.
I A. B. Having now the veil of darkness of the usurped power, authority and
jurisdiction of the Sea and Bishops of Rome, clearly taken away from mine
eyes, do utterly testify, and declare in my conscience, that neither the Sea,
nor the Bishop of Rome, nor any foreign Potentate, has, nor ought to have any
jurisdiction, power, or authority, within this Realm, nether by Gods, law nor
by any other just law, or means. And though by sufferance and abuse in times
passed, they aforesaid have usurped, and vendicated a fained and unlawful
power and jurisdiction within this Realm, which has been supported till few
years passed, therefore because it might be deemed, and thought thereby, that
I took or take it for just and good, I therefore now do clearly and franckly
renounce, refuse, relinquish, and forsake that pretended authority, power and
jurisdiction, both of the Sea and Bishop of Rome, and of all other foreign
powers. And that I shall never consent and agree, that the foresaid See, or
Bishop of Rome or any of their successors, shall practice, exercise, or have
any manner of authority, jurisdiction or power within this Realm, or any
other the Kings Realms or Dominions, nor any foreign Potentate, of what
estate, degree, or condition soever he be, but that I shall resist the same at
all times, to the uttermost of my power: And that I shall bear faith, truth,
and true Allegiance to the Kings Majesty, and to his heirs and successors,
declared or hereafter to be declared by the authority of the Act made in the
Session of the Parliament holden at Westminster the fourteenth day of January,
in the five and thirtieth year, and in the said Act made in the eight and
twentieth year of the Kings Majesty's reign. And that I shall accept, repute
and take the Kings Majesty, his heirs and successors (when they or any of
them shall enjoy his place to be the only supreme Head in earth, under God of
the Church of England and Ireland, and of all other His Highnesses Dominions.
And that with my body, cunning, wit, and uttermost of my power, without guile,
fraud, or other undue means, I shall observe, keep, maintain, and defend all
the Kings Majesty's styles, titles, and rights, with the whole effects and
contents of the Acts provided for the same, and all other Acts and Statutes
made, or to be made within this Realm, in and for that purpose, and the
derogation, extirpation and extinguishment, of the usurped and pretended
authority, power and jurisdiction of the Sea and Bishop of Rome, and all other
foreign Potentates, as before. And also as well the said Statute made in the said
eight and twentieth year, as the Statute made in the said Session of the
Parliament holden the 35. year of the Kings Majesty's Reign, for
establishment and declaration of His highness succession, and all Acts and
Statutes made, and to be made in confirmation and corroboration of the Kings
Majesty's power, and Supremacy in earth, of the Church of England and Ireland,
and of other the Kings Dominions. I shall also defend and maintain with, by
body and goods, and with all my wit and power, and this I shall do against all
manner of persons, of what estate, dignity, degree, or condition they be, and
in no wise do nor attempt, nor to my power ^uffer, or know to be done, or
attempted, directly or indirectly, any thing or things privily or apertly to
the let, hinderance, damage or derogation of any of the said Statutes, or of
any part of them, by any manner of means, or for or by any manner of pretense.
And in case any Oath has been made by me to any person or persons in
maintenance, defense, or favor of the Sea and Bishop of Rome, or his
authority, jurisdiction or power, or against any Statutes aforesaid, I repute
the same as vain and annihilate, and shall wholly and truly observe and keep
this Oath, so help me God, all Saints, and the holy Evangelists.

The Oath of Supremacy enacted 1^. Elizabeth, cap. 1o.
I, A. B. Do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Queens
highness is the only Supreme governor of this Realm, and of all other her
Highness Dominions, and Countries, as well in all Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical things, or causes, as Temporal, and that no foreign Prince,
Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any jurisdiction,
power, superiority, pre-eminence, or authority, Ecclesiastical, or
Spiritual, within this Realm: and therefore I do utterly renounce and
forsake all foreign jurisdictio^s, powers, superiorities, and authorities,
and do ^^omise that from henceforth I shall bear faith an^ ^rue Allegiance to
the Queens Highness, her (...) and lawful Successor and to my power, shall
ass^st and defend all jurisdictions, privileges, preheminences, and
authorities, granted or belonging to the Queens Highness, her Heirs, and
Successors, or united and annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. So
help me God, and by the Contents of this Book.

A Proviso in an Act 5 o. Elizabeth, c. 1o. for expounding this Oath.
PRovided also, that the Oath expressed in the said Act made in the said first
year shall be taken and expounded in such form as is set forth in an
Admonition annexed to the Queens Majesty's Injunctions, published in the first
year of her Majesty's reign, that is to say, to confess and acknowledge in
her Majesty, her Heirs and Successors, none other authority, then that was
challenged and lately used by the noble King Henry the eighth, and King Edward
the sixth, as in the said Admonition more plainly may appear.

The Admonition annexed to the Injunctions Elizabeth 1o. follows with this
Title.
An Admonition to simple men deceived by malicious.
THe Queens Majesty being informed, that in certain places of this Realm,
sundry of her native subjects, being called to Ecclesiastical Ministry in the
Church, be by sinister persuasion, and perverse construction, induced to find
some scruple in the form of an Oath, which by an Act of the last Parliament is
prescribed to be required of diverse persons for the recognition of their
Allegiance to her Majesty, which certainly neither was ever meant, ne by any
equity of words, or good sense can be thereof gathered; would that all her
loving subjects should understand, that nothing was, is, or shall be meant, or
intended by the same Oath, to have any other Duty, Allegiance or Bond required
by the same Oath, then was acknowledged to be due to the most noble Kings of
famous memory, King Henry the eight her Majesty's Father, or King Edward the
sixth her Majesty's Brother.

And further her Majesty forbids all manner her subjects to give ear or
credit to such perverse and malicious persons, which most sinisterly and
maliciously labor, to notify to her loving subjects, how by the words of the
said Oath it may be collected that the Kings or Queens of this Realm
possessours of the Crown, may challenge authority and power of Ministry of
Divine Offices in the Church, wherein her said subjects be much abused by such
evil disposed persons. For certainly her Majesty neither does, ne ever will
challenge any other authority, then that was challenged and lately used by the
said noble Kings of famous memory, King Henry the eight, and King Edward the
sixth, which is and was of ancient time due to the Imperial Crown of this
Realm, that is, under God to have the Sovereigntie and rule over all manner of
persons borne within these her Realms, Dominions and Countries, of what estate
either Ecclesiastical or Temporal soever they be, so as no other foreign
power, shall or ought to have any superiority over them.

And if any person that has conceived any other sense of the form of the said
Oath shall accept the same Oath, with this interpretation, sense, or meaning,
her Majesty is well pleased to accept every such in that beh^lfe, as her good
and obedient subjects, and shall acquit them of all manner penalties contained
in the said Act, against such as shall peremptorily or obstinately refuse to
take the same Oath.

The Conclusion of the Author of the Animadversions to the Reader.
THis Treatise, Christian Reader, penned by a learned and intelligent Romanist,
resembles Ortwhinus his Book entitled Fasciculus rerum expetendarum et
fugiendarum, or the two baskets of figg^s, Ier. 24.1.2. set before the Temple,
one basket had very good figs, and the other very naughty. Among the very
good are these assertions. That in the Protestant Church there is no Idolatry
committed. That the Liturgy of the Church of England has not any malignitie
in it, that may ^ustifie Popish Recusancie. That the Oaths of All^giance and
Supremacy are justifiable by the law of God. But among the very naughty, are
these that when we are questioned about our Religion before a Magistrate, we
may vulpizure cum vulpibus, go beyond the fox if we can in fox-craft: that
in taking an oath we may frame a meaning to our selves which is proved contrary
to the meaning of him that made, or ministers the Oath that we may by our
outward gestures and actions make show of that Religion, of which indeed we are
not: that a Prudent Catholic may both frequent the Protestant Church in
public (as this Priest s^ith he has done often) and go to Mass, ^r say
Mass in private. This is no better then to wear a garment not on our bodies,
^ut on our souls made of (...), and to plough in Christ's ^ield with an Ox and
an As^e, and to (...) between two opinions reproved by the holy Prophet Eliah;
t^is is to be of the lukewarm temper, which is so (...) to the (...) of God,
that he threateneth to spew such out of his mouth. Of which beware, Christian
Reader, as thou tendere^t the everlasting health of thy soul. If the Lord be
God follow him, but if Baal be he, go after him. For assure thy self
whatsoever the Romish Baal may do, God will retain no halting followers. It
is not (...) to worship God in thy heart, but thou must worship him also with
thy body; for he who has created both, and redeemed both, will be worshipped
in both, and served by both. Say thou never did worship Baal in thy heart,
yet if thy knee bowed unto him, or thy mouth kissed him, God will account thee
for none of his servants, 1 King. 19.18. It is not sufficient to believe in
Christ, thou must also confess his The Hel^esaus were cond^mned for heretics,
for hol^ing a man might deny his faith with his mouth so he keep it in his
heart. Eusebius. h^st l. 6. c. 31.
Name; for Romans 10.10. Cic. pro (...) Am^r. vultu saepe lad^tur (...).

Ep. ^^. contami^ari se (...) a^am illam vid^^i^* (...) ibid. Fe^end^m ne est
ut, gentilis sacrif^c^t, christianus inter sit?

S^zo. hist. eccles. l. 5. c. 16. prejecto ad pedes au^o, etc.


with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
co^f^ssi^n is made unto salvation. It is not sufficient that the Religion we
profess be true, if we be not true to it: neither will our faith save us, if
we save not it and keep it incorrupt. What the Orator speaks of piety
toward our parents, may be more truly affirmed of piety toward God: religion
is wounded with a gesture, a n^d, nay a look. It was said of old, says our
Savior, Thou shall not commit adultery, but I say unto you (Matthew. 5 27.28.)
That whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her has committed adultery
with her in his heart. If we go with a friend to Mass out of a lust or mere
curiosity to see the Whore of Babylon in her richest dress upon a high
Festival day, we have already committed spiritual adultery with her in our
heart. And therefore Constantius the Emperor, as Ambrose testifies; thought
himself polluted if he had but seen an Altar: and the noble Martyrs in the
first and best ages of the Church would rather suffer the last drop of blood in
their heart to be spil^, then cast but one grain of Franckincense to the fire
in honor of the Idols. And when Julian by a slight, as Sozomen writes, had
drawn some Christian soldiers to do some kind of reverence in this kind to
his heathenish Idols, he cunningly sitting by the Altar, where there was an
Image of his Pagan Deity, and calling them to bestow some gold upon them; as
soon as ever they perceived how they were circumvented, they run back again
into the place where incense was burning to the Idol, and cast down all the
gold they had received before the Emperors face. And Valentinian carrying the
Mace before Julian the Apostata, when the heathenish Sexton cast some holy
water upon him, he ^eld him down at a blow, wiped off the water, saying,
(...). Theod. hist. l. 3. c. 15. In like manner when Licinius bad Suidas in
Auxent.
Auxentius cut off a branch of a Vine laden with cluste^s of grapes, and he
suspecting nothing had ^one it: Licinius bad him put that branch at the feet
of the Image of Bacchus: but Auxentius answered, God forbid O Emperor that I
should do it, for I am a Christian: and the Emperor replying, either do it,
or get thee out of my presence, he presently looseneth his belt and quits his
service. To whom I will add one Marcus Bishop of Arrethusa. Theod. hist. l. 3
c. 6.
more mentioned by Theodoret, who chose rather to be most cruelly tortured then
he would be brought to contribute a halfe-penny toward the repairing of an
Idol temple. Let us warm our zeal at the embers of these holy Martyrs and
Confessors, and be ever mindful of the holy Apostles exhortation; Have no
fellowship at all with the works of darkness, Ephesians. 5.11. but reprove them
rather: be not unequally yoaked with unbeleevers, 2 Cor. 6.14. For what
fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness, or what communion has
light with darkness: and what concord has Christ with Belial: and what
agreement has the temple of God with Idols: mark the Apostles gradation,
first, What fellowship has righteousness with unrighteousness: next, What
communion has light with darkness: and la^, What concord has Christ with
Belial: no more agreement may we have who are the temples of the living God
with Idols. Th^re is great opposition between righteousness and
unrighteousness, greater between light and darkness; greatest of all between
Christ and Belial: righteousness and unrighteousness (the one being a virtue
and the other a vice) are opposed contrarily, but light and darkness
privatively, which is a greater opposition; but Christ and Belial
contradictorily which is the greatest of all: Righteousness and
unrighteousness are so opposite that they cannot subsist in the same soul,
and light and darkness so opposite, that they cannot subsist in the same
room; but Christ and Belial so opposite that they cannot subsist together in
the same heaven. Righteousness fights with unrighteousness wheresoever it
meets with it; but light does more, it presently banisheth darkness; but
Christ yet more, he utterly confounds Belial: so true religion not only
fights with all heresy, and superstition wheresoever it meets with it; but
banisheth it, and in the end confounds it: Wherefore come out from among them
and be ye separate says the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing and I will
receive you, 2 Cor. 6.17.

Finis: Deo Laus Sine Fine.

