A brief CHARACTER of the LOW COUNTRIES under the STATES

Being three weeks observation of the Vices and Virtues of the INHABITANTS

-- Non seria semper.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Seile. (...)

To the READER.
AS I live Gentlemen I am amazed how any piece could be made such minc'd-meat
as this ha^^h been by a twice-printed Copy, which I find flying aroad to abuse
the Author, who long since, traveling for compaenies-sake with a friend into
the Low. Countries would needs for his own recreation write this Essay of them
as He then found them: I am sure as far from ever thinking to have it public,
as he was from any private spleen to the Nation: or any person in it; for I
have moved him often to print it, but could never get his consent, his modesty
ever esteeming it among his puerilia, and (as he said) a piece too light for a
prudentiall man to publish: the truth is, it was merely occasional in his
youth, and the time so little, that he had for observation (his stay there not
being above three weeks) that it could not well be expected he should say more;
and though the former part be joculary and sportive, yet the seriousness of the
latter part, renders the Character no way injurious to the people. And now
finding some ruffled feathers only presented for the whole bird, and having a
perfect Copy by me, I have presumed to trespass so much upon the Author as to
give it you (in vindication of him) so as I am confident it was dressed by his
own Pen. And after I have begged his pardon for exposing it without his
Warrant, I shall leave you to judge by comparing this and the former
Impressions, whether or no he has not been abused sufficiently.

Three weeks Observations of the Low Countries; especially HOLLAND.
THey are a general Sea-Land. The great Bog of Europe. There is not such
another Marsh in the world; that is flat. They are an universal Quagmire,
Epitomized, A green Cheese in pickle. There is in them an Aequilibrium of mud
and water. A strong Earthquake would shake them to a Chaos, from which the
successive force of the Sun, rather than Creation, has a little e mended them.
They are the Ingredients of a black pudding, and want only stirring together.
Marry it is best making on it in a dry Summer, else you will have more blood than
grist; and then have you no way to make it serve for any thing, but to tread it
under Zona Torrida, and so dry it for Turfs. Says one, it affords the people
one commodity beyond all the other Regions; if they dye in perdition, they are
so low, that they have a shorter cut to Hell than the rest of their neighbors.
And for this cause, perhaps all strange Religions throng thither, as naturally
inclining toward their Center. Besides, their Riches shows them to be Pluto's
Region, and you all know what part that was which the Poets did of old assign
him. Here is Styx, Acheron, Cocytus, and the rest of those muddy streams that
have made matter for the Fablers. Almost every one is a Charon here, and if you
have but a Naulum to give, you cannot want or Boat or Pilot. To confirm all,
let but some of our Separatists be asked, and they shall swear that the Elizian
Fields are there.

It is an excellent Country for a despairing Lover: for every corner affords
him willow to make a Garlandon; but if justice doom him to be hanged on any
other tree, he may in spite of the sentence live long and confident. If he had
rather quench his spirits than suffocate them, so rather choose to feed Lobsters
than Crows; it is but leaping from his window, and he lights in a River or Sea;
for most of their dwellings stand like privies in moted houses, hanging still
over the water. If none of these cure him, keep him but a winter in a house
without a stove, and that shall cool him.

The Soil is all fat, though wanting the color to show it so; for indeed it is
the buttock of the World, full of veins and blood, but no bones in it. Had S.
Steven been condemned to suffer here, he might have been alive at this day; for
unless it be in their paved Cities, gold is a great deal more plentiful than
stones, except it be living ones, and then for their heaviness you may take in
almost all the Nation.

It Is a singular place to fat Monkies in. There are Spiders as big as Shrimps,
and I think as many. Their Gardens being moist, abound with these. No
creatures; for sure they were bred, not made, Were they but as venomous as
rank, to gather herbs were to hazard Martyrdom. They are so large, that you
would almost believe the Hesperides were here, and these the Dragons that did
guard them.

You may travail the Country though you have not a guide: for you cannot baulk
your road without the hazard of drowning. There is not there any use of a
Harbinger. Wheresoever men go the way is made before them. Had they Cities
large as their Walls, Rome would be esteemd a babble. Twenty miles in length is
nothing for a Wagon to be hurried on one of them, where if your foreman be
sober, you may travail in safety, otherwise, you must have stronger faith than
Peter had, else you sink immediately. A starting horse indangers you to two
deaths at once, breaking of your neck, and drowning.

If your way be not thus, it hangs in the water, and at the Approach of your
Wagon shall shake as if it were Ague-strooken. Duke D' Alva's taxing of the
tenth penny frighted it into a Palsy, which all the Mountebanks they have bred
since could never tell how to Cure.

It Is indeed but a bridge of swimming earth, or a flagg somewhat thicker than
ordinary, if the strings crack your course is shortened, you can neither hope
for Heaven nor fear Hell, you shall be sure to stick fast between them, Marry
if your Faith flow Purgatory height, you may pray if you will for that to
cleanse you from the Mud shall soil you.

It Is a green sod in water, where if the German Eagle dares to bath himself,
he is glad again to perch that he may dry his wings.

Some things they do that seem Wonders. It Is ordinary to see them fish for fire
in water, which they Catch in nets and transport to land in their boats, Where
they spread it more smoothly than a Mercer does his Velvet when he would hook
in an heir upon his coming to age. Thus lying in a field, you would think you
saw a Cantle of Green Cheese' spread over with black butter.

If Aetna be hells mouth or fore-gate, sure here is found the Postern. It Is the
Port-Esquiline of the world, where the full earth does vent her crude black
gore, which the Inhabitants scrape away for fuel, as men with spoones do
excrements from Civit Cats.

Their ordinary packhorses are all of wood, carry their bridles in their tails,
and their burdens in their bellies. A strong tide and a stiff Gale are the
spurs that make them speedy. When they travel they touch no ground; and when
they stand still they ride; and are never in danger but when they drink up too
much of their way.

There is a Province among them, where every woman carries a Cony in a
Lambskin. It Is a custom and not one that travelse ver leaves it behind her. Now
guess if you can what beast that is, which is clad in a fur both of hair and
wool.

They dress their Meat in aqua Caelesti, for it springs not as ours from the
Earth, but comes to them, as Manna to the Israelites, falling from heaven. This
they keep under ground till it stinks, and then they pump it out again for use.
So when you wash your hands with one hand, you had need hold your nose with the
other; for though it be not Cordial, it is certainly a strong water.

The Elements are here at variance, the subtle over swaying the grosser, The
fire co^sumes the earth, and the air the water, they burn Turffs, and drain
their grounds with Windmills; As if the Cholick were a remedy for the Stone;
And they would prove against Philosophy the Worlds Conflagration to be natural,
eve^ showing thereby that the very Element of Earth is Combustible.

The land that they have they keep as neatly as a Courtier does his Beard. They
have a Method in mowing. It Is so intervein'd with Waters and Rivers, that it is
impossible to make a Common among them. Even the Brownists are here ata stand,
only they hold their pride in wrangling for that which they never will find. Our
Justices would be much at ease although our English poor were still among them:
For whatsoever they do they can break no hedges. Sure had the wise men of
Gotham lived here, they would have studied some other death for their Cuckoo.

Their Ditches they frame as they list; and distinguish them into nooks, as my
Lord Majors Cook does his Custards. Cleanse them they do often; but it is as
Physicians give their potions, more to catch the fish, than cast the Mud out.

Though their Country be part of a mainland, yet every house almost stands in
an Island. And that though a Boor dwell in it, looks as smug, as a Lady that
has newly locked up her colors, and laid by her srons. A gallant masquing suit
sits not more complete, than a Coat of thatch though of many years wearing.

If it stand dry it is embraced by Vines, as if it were against the nature of a
Dutchman not to have Bacchus his neighbor. If you find it lower seated, it is
only a close Arto rin a plump of Willowes and Alders; pleasant enough while the
Dog-daies last; But those past once, you must practice wading, or be prisoner
till the next spring. Only a hard frost, with the help of a sledge, may release
yon.

The Bridge to this is an outlandish plank with a box of Stones to poize it
withal, which with the least help turns round, like the Executioner when he
whips off a head. That when the Master is over, stands drawn, and then he is in
his Castle.

It Is sure his fear that renders him suspicious. That he may therefore certainly
see who enters, you shall ever find his window made over his door. But it may be
that is to show you his Pedigree; for though his Ancestors were never known,
their Arms are there; which (in spite of Heraldry) shall bear their
Atchievment with a Helmet for a Baron at least. Marry the Field perhaps shall
be charged with 3. basquets, to show what trade his father was.

Escutcheons are as plentiful as Gentry is scarce. Every man there is his own
Herald; and he that has but wit enough to invent a Coat, may challenge it as
his own.

When you are entered the house, the first thing you encounter is a Looking
glass. No question but a true Emblem of politic hospitality; for though it
reflect your self in your own figure, it is yet no longer than while you are
there before it. When you are gone once, it flatters the next commer, without
the least remembrance that you ere were there.

The next are the vessels of the house marshalled about the room like watchmen.
All as neat as if you were in a Citizens wives Cabinet; for unless it be
themselves, they let none of Gods creatures lose any thing of their native
beauty.

Their houses, especially in their Cities, are the best eye-beauties of their
Country. For cost and sight they far exceed our English, but they want their
magnificence. Their lining is yet more rich than their outside; not in
hangings, but pictures, which even the poorest are there fur-nishtwith. Not a
cobbler but has his toys for ornament. Were the knacks of all their houses set
together, there would not be such another Bartholmew-Fair in Europe.

Their Artists for these are as rare as thought; for they can paint you a fat
hen in her feathers; and if you want the language, you may learn a great deal
of Dutch by their signs; for what they are they ever write under them. So by
this device hang up more honesty than they keep.

Coaches are as rare as Comets; and those that live loosely need not fear one
punishment, which often vexes such with us: They may be sure, though they be
discovered, they shall not be carted.

All their Merchandise they draw through the streets on Sledges; or as we on
Hurdles do traitors to execution.

Their rooms are but several land boxes: if so, you must either go out to
spit, or blush when you see the Map brought.

Their beds are no other than land-cabines, high enough to need a ladder or
stairs. Up once, you are walled in with wainscot, and that is good discretion
to avoid the trouble of making your Will every night; for once falling out else
would break your neck perfectly. But if you die in it, this comfort you shall
leave your friends, that you died in clean linen.

Whatsoever their estates be, their houses must be fair. Therefore from
Amsterdam they have banished sea-cole, lest it soil their buildings, of which
the starelier sort are sometimes sententious, and in the front carry some
conceit of the Owner. As to give you a taste in these.

Christus Adjutor Men's;
Hoc abdicato Perenne Quaero;
Hic Medio tutius Itur.
Every door seems studded with Diamonds. The nails and hinges hold a constant
brightness, as if rust there were not a quality incident to iron. Their houses
they keep cleaner than their bodies; their bodies than their souls. Go to one
you shall find the Andirons shut up in net work. At a second, the warming pan
muffled in Italian Cutwork. At a third the Sconce clad in Cambrick. And like a
Crown advanced in the middle of the house, for the woman there is the head of
the husband, so takes the horn to her own charge, which she sometimes
multiplies, and bestows the increase on her man.

It Is true, they are not so ready at this play as the English; for neither are
they so generally bred to it, nor are their men such linnen-lifters. Idleness
and Courtship has not banished honesty. They speak more, and do less; yet does
their blood boil high and their veins are full, which argues strongly that'
when they will they may take up the custom of entertaining strangers. And
having once done it, I believe they will be notable, for I have heard they
trade more for love than money, but it is of the sport not the man, and
therefore when they like the pastime they will reward the Gamester; otherwise
their gross feed and clownish breeding has spoiled them for being nobly
minded. And if you once in public discover her private favors or pretend to
more than is civil, she falls off like fairy wealth disclosed, and turns like
beer with lightning to a sowreness, which neither Art nor labor can ever make
sweet again.

But this I must give you on report only; experience herein has neither made
me fool nor wise.

The people are generally Boorish; yet none but may be bred to a Statesman,
they having all this gift not to be so nice-conscienced but that they can turn
out religion, to let in policy.

Their Country is the God they worship. War is their Heaven. Peace is their
Hell, and the Spaniard is the Devil they hate. Custom is their Law, and their
will reason.

You may sooner convert a Jew than make an ordinary Dutchman yield to
Arguments that cross him. An old Baud is easilyer turned Puritan, than a
Waggoner persuaded not to bait thrice in nine miles. And when he does, his
horses must not stir, but have their manger brought them into the way, where
in a top-sweat they eat their grass, and drink their water, and presently after
hurry away. For they ever drive as if they were all the sons of Nimishi, and
were furiously either pursuing an enemy or flying him.

His spirits are generated from the English Beer, and that makes him
headstrong. His body is built of pitckled Herring. And they render him testy:
these with a little Butter, Onyons and Holland Cheese are the ingredients of an
ordinary Dutchman; which a voyage to the East Indies, with the heat of the
Equinoctial Consolidates.

If you see him fat he has been rooting in a Cabbage ground and that bladdered
him. Viewing him naked you will pray him to pull of his Masque and Gloves, or
wish him to hide his face, that he may appear more lovely. For that and his
hands are Egypt, however his body be Europe. He has exposed them so much to
the Sun and water as he is now his own disguise, and without a Vizard may serve
in any Antimasque you put him in.

For their Condition they are Churlish as their breeder Neptune: and without
doubt very ancient; for they were bred before manners were in fashion. Yet all
they have not, they account superfluity, which they say mendeth some, and
marreth many.

They should make good Justices; for they respect neither persons nor apparel.
A boor in his liquord slop shall have as much good use as a Courtyer in his
bravery; Nay more; for he that is but Courtly or Gentile, is among them like a
Merlyn after Michaelmas in the field with Grows. They wonder at and envy; but
worship no such Images. Marry with a Silver hook you shall catch these Gudgeons
presently. The love of gain being to them as natural as water to a Goose, or
Carrion to any Kite that flies.

They are seldom deceived; for they trust no body; so by consequence are
better to hold a fort than win it; yet they can do both. Trust them you must if
you travel. For to ask a Bill of particulars is to purre in a Waspes nest; you
must pay what they ask as sure as if it wereth' assesment of a Subsidy.

Complement is an idleness they were never trained up in, and it is their
happiness that Court vanities have not stole away their minds from business.

Their being Sailors and Soldiers have marred 2 parts already, if they bath
once in Court oil they are painted Trapdores. And shall then let the Jews
build a City when e Harlem Mere is and after cosen 'em on it.

They shall abuse a stranger for nothing, andafter a few base terms scotch one
an other to a Carbonado, or as they do their Roaches when they fry them.

Nothing can quiet them but money and liberty, yet when they have them they
abuse both; but if you tell them so you awake their fury; and you may sooner
calm the Sea than conjure that into compass again. Their anger has no eyes.
And their judgment does not flow so much from reason as passion and partiality.

They are in a manner all Aquatiles: and therefore the Spaniard calls them
Water Dogs. To this though you need not condescend; yet with-all you may
think they can catch you a duck as soon. Sea- Gulls do not swim more readily:
nor More hens from their nest run sooner to the water. Every thing is so made
to swim among them, as it is a question if Elizeus his Ax were now floating
there, it would be taken for a miracle.

They love none but those that do for them; and when they leave off, they
neglect them. They have no friends but their kindred; which at every wedding,
feast among themselves like Tribes.

All that help them not, they hold popish; and take it for an argument of much
honesty to rail bitterly against the King of Spain. And certainly this is the
badge of an ill Nature, when they have once cast off the yoke, to be most
virulent against those to whom of right they owe respect and service. Grateful
dispositions, though by theirLords they be exempt from service, will yet be
paying reverence and affection. I am confident that had they not been once the
Subjects of Spain, they would have loved the nation better. But now cut of
dying Duties ashes all the Blazes of hostility and flame. And it is sufficien
ground to contemn their eternal hate, to know the world remembers, they were
once the lawful subjects of that most Catholic Crown.

Their shipping is the Babel which they boast on for the glory of their Nation.
It Is indeed a wonder, and they will have it so. But we may well hope they will
never be so mighty by Land, least they show us how doggedly they can insult
where they get the mastery.

It Is their own Chronicle business, which can tell you that at the Seige of
Leyden, a Fort being held by the Spanish, by the Dutch was after taken by
Assault. The Defendants were put to the sword, where one of the Dutch in the
fury of the slaughter, ripped up the Captains body, and with a barbarous hand
tore out the yet living heart panting among the reeking bowels, then with his
teeth rent it still warm with blood into gobbets, which he spitted over the
battlements, in defiance to the rest of the Army.

Oh Tigers breed! The Scythian-Bear could nere have been more savage, To be
necessitated into cruelty, is a misfortune to the strongly tempted to it; but
to let spleen rave, and mad it in resistless blood, shows nature steepd in the
livid gall of passion; and beyond all brutishness displays the unnoble tyranny
of a prevailing Coward.

Their Navies are the whip of Spain, or the Arm wherewith they pull away his
Indies. Nature has not bread them so active for the land as some others: But
at Sea they are water-Devils, to attempt things incredible.

In Fleets they can fight close, and rather hazard all then save some, while
others perish: but single, they will flag and fear like birds in a bush when
the Sparrow-Hauks bells are heard.

A Turkish man of War is as dreadful to them as a a Falcon to a Mallard; from
whom their best remedy is to steal away. But if they come to blows, they want
the valiant stoutness of the English, who will rather expire bravely in a bold
resista^ce, than yield to the lasting slavery of becoming captives to so
barbarous an enemy. And this shows they have not learned yet even Pagan
Philosophy, which ever preferred an honorable death before a life thralled to
perpetual slavery.

Their ships ly like high woods in Winter: And if you view them on the
Northside you friez without hope, for they ride so thick, that you can through
them see no Sun to warm you with.

Sailers among them are as common as beggars with us. They can drink, rail,
swear, niggle, steal, and be lousy alike; but examining their use, a mess of
their Knaves are worth a million of ours: for they in a boisterous rudeness can
work, and live, and toil, whereas ours will rather laze themselves to poverty;
and like Cabages left out in winter, rot away in the loathsomeness of a
nauseous sloth.

Almost all among them are Seamen born, and like frogs can live both on land
and water. Not a Country Uriester but can handle an oar, steer a boat, raise a
mast, and bear you out in the roughest streights you come in. The ship she
avouches much better for sleep than a bed. Being full of humors, that is her
cradle, which luls and rocks her to a dull phlegmatickness, most of them
looking like a full grown oyster boild. Slime, humid air, water, and wet diet,
have so bagg'd their cheeks, that some would take their paunches to be gotten
above their chin.

The Countries government is a Democracy, and there had need be many to rule
such a rabble of rude ones. Tell them of a King, and they could cut your throat
in earnest. The very name carries servitude in it, and they hate it more than a
Jew does Images, a Woman old age, or a Nonconformist a surplice.

None among them has Authority by inheritance, that were the way in time to
parcel out their Country to Families: They are chosen all as our Kings choose
Sheriffs for the Counties: not for their sin of Wit, but for the Wealth they
have to bear it out withal; which they so over-affect that MynHere shall walk
the Streets as Usurers go to Baudy houses, all alone and melancholy. And if
they may be had cheap, he will daub his faced cloak with two penni-worth of
pickled Herrings which himself shall carry home in a string. A common voice
has given him pre-eminence, and he loses it by living as he did when he was
but a Boor. But if you pardon what is past, they are about thinking it time to
learn more civilitie.

Their justice is strict if it cross not Policy: but rather than hinder
Traffic tollerates any thing.

There is not under heaven such a Den of several Serpents as Amsterdam is, you
may be what Devil you will, so you push not the State with your horns.

It Is an University of all Religions, which grow here confurdly (like stocks in
a Nursery) without either order or pruning. If you be unsettled in your
Religion, you may here try all, and take at last what you like best. If you
fancy none, you have a pattern to follow, of two, that would be a Church by
themselves.

It Is the Fair of all the Sects, where all the Pedlers of Religion have leave to
vent their toies, their Ribands, and phanatick Rattles. And should it be true
it were a cruel brand which Romists stick upon them. For (say they) as the
Chameleon changes into all Colors but white: so they admit of all Religions
but the True. For the Papist only may not exercise his in public Yet his
restraint they plead is not in hatred but justice: because the Spaniard
abridges the Protestant. And they had rather show a little spleen, than not cry
quit with their Enemy. His act is their Warrant; which the^^ ^^etaliat justly.
And for this reason rather than the Dunkirks they take shall not die, Amsterdam
having none of their own, shall borrow a hangman from Harlem.

Now albeit the Papists do them wrong herein, yet can it not excuse their
boundles Tolleration, which shows they place their Republic in a higher esteem
than Heaven it self and had rather cross upon God than it. For whosoever
disturbs the Civil Government is liable to punishment: But the Decrees of
Heaven. and Sanctions of the Deity, any one may break uncheck'd, by prosessing
what false Religion he please. So Consulary Rome of old, brought all the
Straggling Gods of other Nations to the City, where blinded superstition paid
an Adoration to them.

In their Families they all are equals, and you have no way to know the master
and Mistress, but by taking them in bed together. It may be those are they:
Otherwise Malky can prate as much, laugh as loud, be as bold, and sit as well
as her Mistress.

Had Logicians lived here first, Father and Son had never passed so long for
Relatives. They are here Individuals, for no Demonstrance of Duty or Authority
can distinguish them, as if they were created together, and not born
successively. And as for your Mother, bidding her goodnight, and kissing her,
is punctual blessing.

Your man shall be saucy, and you must not strike; if you do, he shall complain
to the Schont, and perhaps have recompense. T is a dainty place to please boys
in: for your Father shall bargain with your Schoolmaster not to whip you: if
he does, he shall revenge it with his knife, and have Law for it.

Their apparel is civil enough and good enough: but very uncomely; and has
usually more stuffthan shape. Only their Huykes are commodious in winter: but
it is to be lamented, that they have not wit enough to lay them by when summer
comes.

Their women would have good faces if they did not mar them with making. Their
Ear-wyers have so nipt in their Cheeks, that you would think some Faiery, to do
them a mischief, had pincht them behind with Tongs. These they dress, as if
they would show you all their wit lay behind, and they needs would cover it.
And thus ordered, they have much more forehead than face.

They love the English Gentry well; and when Soldiers come over to be
billetted among them, they are Emulous in choosing of their guest, who fares
much the better for being liked by his Hostess.

Men and Women are there starched so blew, that if they once grow old, you
would verily believe you saw Winter walking up to the neck in a Barrel of
Indigo: And therefore they rail at England for spending no more Blewing.

Your men among them is elseclad tolerably, unless he enclines to the
Sea-fashion: and then are his breeches, yawning at the knees, as if they were
about to swallow his legs unmercifully.

They are far there from going Naked, for of a whole woman you can see but half
a face. As for her hand that shows her a sore Labourer; which you shall ever
find as it were in recompense laden with Rings to the cracking of her fingers.
If you look lower She Is a Monkey chained about the Middle, and had rather want
it in diet, than not have silver links to hang her keys in.

Their Gowns are fit to hide great Bellies, but they make them show so
unhansome that men do not care for getting them. Mary this you shall find to
their commendation, their smocks are ever whiter than their skin.

Where the Women lies in, the Ringle of the door does penance, and is lapped
about with linen, either to show you that loud knocking may wake the child; Or
else that for a month the Ring is not to be run at. But if the child be dead
there is thrust out a Nosegay tied to a sticks end; Perhaps for an emblem of
the life of man, which may wither as soon as born; or else to let you know,
that though these fade, upon their gathering, yet from the same stock the next
year a new shoot may spring.

You may rail at us for often changing; but I assure you with them is a great
deal more following the fashion; which they will plead for as the ignorant
Laity for their faith. They will keep it because their Ancestors lived in it.
Thus they will rather keep an old fault though they discover errors in it, than
in an easiy change to meet a Certain Remedy. For their diet, they eat much and
spend little: when they set out a Fleet to the Indies, It shall live three
months on the Offals, which we here fear would surfeit our swine: yet they
feed on it, and are still the same Dutchmen.

In their houses Roots and stock fish are staplecommodities. If they make a
feast and ad flesh, they have art to keep it hot more days, than a Pigs-head
in Py Corner. Salt meats, and sour Cream, they hold him a fool that loves not,
only the last they correct with Sugar, and are not half so well pleased with
having it sweet at first, as with letting it sour that they may sweeten it
again, as if a woman were not half so pleasing being easily won, as after a
scolding fit she coms by man to be calmed again.

Fish indeed they have brave and plentiful; and herein practice has made them
Cooks as good as ere Lucullus his latter Kitchen had, which is some recompense
for their wilfulness, for you can neither pray nor buy them to alter their own
Cookery.

To a feast they come readily, but being set once you must have patience. They
are longer eating meat than we preparing it. If it be to supper you conclude
timely when you get away by daybreak. They drink down the evening Star, and
drink up the morning Star. At those times it goes hard with a stranger, all
in courtesy will be drinking to him, and all that do so he must pledge: till he
does, the filled Cupps circle round his Trencher, from whence they are not
taken away till emptyed. For though they give you day for payment, yet they
will not abate the sum.

They sit not there as we in England, men together, and women first, But ever
intermingled with a man between; and instead of March panes, and such juncates,
it is good Manners if any be there, to carry away a piece of Apple Py in your
pocket.

The time they there spend, is in eating well, in drinking much, and prating
most. For the truth is, the Compleatest drinker in Europe is your English
Gallant. There is no such Consumer of liquor as the Quaffing off of his
Healths. Time was the Dutch had the better of it; but of late he has lost it
by prating too long over his pot. He sips, and laughs, and tells his tale, and
in a Tavern is more prodigal of his time, than his Wine. He drinks as if he
were short winded; and as it were eats his drink by morsels, rather besieging
his brains then assaulting them. But the English man charges home on the
sudden, swallows it whole, and like a hasty tide, fills, and flows himself,
till the mad brain swims, and tosses on the hasty fume. As if his Liver were
burning out his stomach, and he striving to quench it, drowns it. So the one is
drunk sooner, and the other longer. As if striving to recover the wager, the
Dutchman would still be the perfectest soker.

In this Progress you have seen some of their Vices, now view a Fairer Object.

Solomon tells of four things that are small and full of Wisdom, The Pismire,
the Grasshopper, the Coney, and the Spider.
For PROVIDENCE they are the Pismires of the World: and having nothingbut
whatgrafs affords them; are yet for almost all Provisions, the Storehouse of
the whole of Christendom. What is it which there may not be found in plenty?
They making by their industry all the fruits of the vast Earth their own. What
Land can boast a privilcgethat they do not partake of? They have not of their
own enough materials to compile one ship; Yet how many Nations do they furnish?
The remoter angles of the world do by their pains deliver them their sweets.
And being of themselves in want, their diligence has made them both Indies
nearer home.

They are frugal to the saving of Eg. shells, and maintain it for a Maxim, that
a thing lasts longer mended than new.

Their Cities are their Mole-hills; Their Schutes and Flyboats, creep and
return with their store for Winter. Every one is busy and carries his grain;
as if every City were a several Hive, and the Bees not permitting a drone to
inhabit. For idle persons must find some other mansion. And lest necessity
bereave men of means to set them on Work, there are public Banks that
(without use) lend upon pawns to all the poor that want.

There is a season when the Pismires fly, and so each Summer they likewise
Swarm abroad with their Armies.

The Ant says one, is a wiseCreature, but a shrewd thing in a Garden or
Orchard. And truly so are they; For they look upon others too little, and upon
themselves too much. And wheresoever they light in a pleasant or rich soil,
like suckers and lower plants, they rob from the root of that tree which gives
them shade and protection, so their wisdom is not indeed Heroic or Numnial;
as Courting an Universal Good; But rather narrow and restrictive; As being a
wisdom but for themselves. Which to speak plainly, is descending into Craft;
and is but the sinister part of that which is really Noble and Celestial.

Nay in all they hold so true a proportion with the Emmet, as you shall not
find they want so much as the sting.

For dwelling in Rocks they are Conies. And while the Spanish tumbler plays
about them, they rest secure in their own inaccessible Berries. Where have you
under heaven, such impregnable Fortifications? Where Art beautifies Nature, and
Nature makes Art invincible: Herein indeed they differ; The Conies find Rocks,
and they make them. And as they would invert the miracle of Moses, They raise
them in the bosom of the waves. Where within these twenty years, ships
furrowed in the pathlesOcean, the peaceful plough now unbowels the fertile
earth, which at night is carried home to the fairest Mansions in Holland.

Every Town has his Garrison: and the keys of the Gates in the nighttime, are
not trusted but in the State-house. From these holds they bolt abroad for
provisions, and then return to their fastneses replenished.

For war they are Grasshoppers, and without a King, go forth in bands to
conquer Kings. They have not only defended themselves at their own home, but
have braved the Spaniard at his. In Anno 1599, under the command of Vander
Does, was the Grand Canary taken. The chief City sacked; the King of Spain's
Ensigns taken down, and the colors of his Excellency set up in their room. In
the year 1600 the battle of Nieuport was a gallant piece, when with the loss of
a thousand or little more, they slew 7000 of their Enemies, took above a 100
Ensigns, the Admiral of Arragon a prisoner. The very furniture of the Arch
Duke's own chamber and Cabinet, yea the signet that belonged to his hand.

In 1607. they assailed the Armado of Spain in the Bay of Gibraeltar, under
covert of the Castle and Towns Ordnance, and with the loss of 150, slew above
2000, and ruined the whole Fleet. Certainly a bolder attempt has ever scarce
been done. The Indian Mastiff never was more fierce a against the angry Lion.
Nor can the Cock in his crowing valor, become more prodigal of his blood than
they.

There hardly is upon earth such a school of Martial Discipline. It Is the
Christian worlds Academy for Arms; whither all the the neighbour-Nations resort
to be instructed; where they may observe how unresistable a blow, many small
grains of powder will make being heaped together, which yet if you separate,
can do nothing but sparkle and die.

Their recreation is the practice of Arms; And they learn to be soldiers
sooner than men. Nay as if they placed a Religion in Arms, every Sunday is
concluded with the trained Band's marching thorough their Cities.

For industry, they are Spiders, and are in the Palaces of Kings. Of old they
were the guard of the person of the Roman Emperor, And by the Romans themselves
declared to be their friends and companions. There is none have the like
intelligence; Their Merchants are at this day the greatest of the Universe.
What Nation is it where they have not insinuated? Nay, which they have not
almost anatomized, and even discovered the very intrinsic veins on it?

Even among us, they shame us with their industry, which makes them seem as if
they had a faculty from the worlds Creation, out of water to make dry land
appear. They win our drowned grounds which we cannot recover, and chase back
Neptune to his own old Banks.

All that they do is by such labor as it seems extracted out of their own
bowels. And in their wary thrift, they hang by such a slender sustentation of
life, that one would think their own weight should be enough to crack it.

Want of Idleness keeps them from want. And it is their Diligence makes them Rich.

A fruitful Soil increases the Harvest. A plentiful Sun augmenteth the
Store; and seasonable showers drop fatness on the Crop we reap. But no Rain
fructifies more than the dew of Sweat.

You would think being with them you were in old Israel, for you find not a
beggar among them. Nor are they mindful of their own alone; but strangers also
partake of their Care and Bounty. If they will depart, they have money for
their Convoy. If they stay, they have work provided. If unable, they find an
Hospital. Their Providence extends even from the Prince to the catching of
flies. And lest you lose an afternoon by fruitless mourning, by two of the
clock all Burials must end. Wherein to prevent the wast of ground, they pile
Coffin upon Coffin till the Sepulcher be full.

In all their Manufactures they hold a truth and constancy: for they are as
fruits from Trees, the same every year that they are at first; Not Apples one
year and Crabs the next; and so for ever after. In the sale of these they also
are at a word, they will gain rather than exact; and have not that way whereby
our Citizens abuse wise, and cozen the ignorant; and by their Infinite
over-asking for commodities proclaim to the world that they would cheat all if
it were in their power.

The Depravation of Manners they punish with Contempt, but the Defects of
Nature they favor with Charity. Even their Bedlam is a place so curious, that a
Lord might live in it; Their Hospital might lodge a Lady: So that safely you
may conclude, amongst them, even Poverty and Madness do both inhabit handsomely.
And though Vice makes every thing turn sordid, yet the State will have the very
Correction of it to be neat, as if they would show that though obedience fail,
yet Government must be still it self, and decent. To prove this they that do
but view their Bridewell will think it may receive a Gentleman though a
Gallant. And so their prison a wealthy Citizen. But for a poor man it is his best
policy to be laid there, for he that cast him in must maintain him.

Their Language though it differ from the higher Germany, yet has it the same
ground, and is as old as Babel. And albeit harsh, yet so lofty and full a
Tongue as made Goropius Becanus maintain it for the speech of Adam in his
Paradise. And surely if there were not other reasons against it, the
significancy of the Ancient Teutonick might carry it from the primest Dialect.
Stevin of Bruges reckons up 2170 Monasillables, which being compounded, how
richly do they grace a Tongue? A Tongue that for the general profession is
extended further than any that I know. Through both the Germanies, Denmark,
Norway, Sweden, and sometimes France, England, Spain. And still among us all
our old words are Dutch, with yet so little Change, that certainly it is in a
manner the same that it was 2000 years ago, without the too much Mingled
Borrowings of their neighbor Nations.

The Germans are a people that more than all the world I think may boast
sincerity, as being for some thousands of years a pure and unmixed people. And
surely I see not but their conduction by Tuisco from the building of Babel, may
passas unconfuted Story, they yet retaining the Appellation from his Name.

They are a large and numerous people having ever kept their own, and
transported Colonies into other Nations. In Italy were the Longobards; In Spain
the Goths and Vandalls; In France the Franks or Franconians; In England the
Saxons: having in all these left reverend Steps of their Antiquity and Language.

It is a noble Testimony that so grave an Historian as Tacitus has left still
extant of them, and written above fifteen hundred years ago. Deliberant dum
fingere nesciunt: Constituunt dum errare non possunt. They deliberate when they
cannot dissemble: and resolve when they cannot err.

Two hundred and ten years he reckons the Romans were in conquering them. In
which space on either side were the losses sad and fatal. So as neither the
Samnites, the Carthaginians, the Spaniards, the Gauls, no nor the Parthians
ever troubled them like the Germans. They slew and took prisoners several
Commanders of the highest rank, as Carbo, Cassius, S. Caurus Aurelius,
Cervilius Cepio, and M. Manlius. They defeated five Consulary Armies, and Varus
with three legions, yet after all this he concludes, Triumphati Magis quam
victi sunt, They were rather Triumphed over than conquered. To confirm this,
the keeping of their own language is an argument unanswerable. The change
whereof ever follows upon the fully vanquished, as we may see it did in Italy,
France, Spain, England.

And this he speaks of the Nation in General. Nor was the opinion of the Romans
less worthy in particular concerning these lower Provinces which made them for
their valor and warlike minds, style them by the name of Gallia Belgica, and
especially of the Batavians, which were the Hollanders and part of Guelders.
You may hear in what honorable terms he mentions them, where speaking of the
several people of Germany he says, Omniumharam Gentium virtute praecipui
Batavi. Nam nec tributis contemnuntur nec publicanus atterit: exempti oneribus
and Collationibus, et tantum in usum praeliorum sepositi, velut tela atque Arma
Bellis reservantur. Of all these Nations the principal in valiant virtue are
the Batavians: for neither are they become de spicable by paying of Tribute,
nor oppressed too much by the Farmor of public Revenues; but free from Taxes
and Contributions of servility; they are specially set apart for the fight, as
Armor and Weapons only reserved for War.

All this even at this day they seem to make good: For of all the world, they
are the people that thrive and grow rich by the war, like the Poropisce that
plays in the storm, but at other times keeps sober under the water.

War, which is the worlds ruin, and ravins upon the beauty of all, is to them
Prosperity and Ditation. And surely the reason of this is their strength in
shipping, the open Sea, their many fortified Towns, and the Country by reason
of its lowness and plentiful Irriguation becoming unpassable for an army when
the winter but approaches. Otherwise it is hardly possible that so small a
parcel of Mankind, should brave the most potent Monarch of Christendom, who
in his own hands holds the Mines of the wars sinews, Money, and has now got a
command so wide, that out of his Dominions the Sun can neither rise nor set.

The whole seventeen Provinces are not above a thousand English miles in
circuit. And in the States hands there is not seven of those. Yet have they in
the field sometimes 60000 Soldiers, besides those which they always keep in
Garrison, which cannot be but a considerable number near thirty thousand more.
There being in the whole Countries above two hundred walled Towns and Cities.
So that if they have People for the War, one would wonder where they should get
money to pay them; They being when they have an Army in the field at a thousand
pound a day charge extraordinary.

To maintain this, their Excize is an unwasted Mine, which with the Infinitness
of their Trafick, and their untired Industry, is by every part of the World in
something or other Contributed to.

The Sea yields them by two sorts of Fish only, Her rings and Cod, ^^ sixty
thousand pound per annum; for which they go out some times seven or eight
hundred boats at once, and for greater ships they are able to set out double
the number.

Their Merchandise amounted in Guicciardines time to fourteen Millions per
Annum. Whereas England which is in compass almost as large again, and has the
Ocean as a Ring about her, made not above six Millions yearly: so sedulous are
these Bees to labor and enrich their Hive.

As they on the Sea, so the women are busy on Land in weaving of Nets, and
helping to add to the heap. And though a husbands long absence might tempt them
to lascivious ways: yet they hate adultery, and are resolute in Matrimonial
chastity. I do not remember that ever I read in Story, of any great Lady of
that nation, that has been taxed with looseness. And questionless it is their
everbeing busy makes them not have leisure for lust.

It Is idleness that is Cupids Nurse; but business breaks his Bow, and makes his
Arrows useless.

They are both Merchants and Farmers. And there act parts, which men can but
discharge with us. As if they would show that the Soul in all is masculine, and
not varied into weaker sex as are the bodies that they wear about them.

Whether this be from the nature of their Country, in which if they be not
laborious they cannot live; or from an Innate Genius of the people by a
Superior Providence adapted to them of such a situation; from their own
inclination addicted to parsimony; from custom in their way of breeding; from
any Transcendency of active parts more than other Nations; or from being in
their Country, like people in a City besieged, whereby their own virtues do
more compact and fortify; I will not determine. But certainly in generally
they are the most painful and diligent people on earth: And of all other the
most truly of Vesp asians opinion, to think, that Exre qualibet bonus odor
lucri; Be it raised from what it will, the smell of gain is pleasant.

Yet they are in some sort Gods, for they fet bounds to the Sea: and when they
list let it pass them. Even their dwelling is a miracle. They live lower than
the fishes. In the very lap of the floods, and incircled in their watery Arms.
They are the Israelites passing through the Red Sea. The waters wall in them,
and if they set open their sluices shall drown up their enemies.

They have strugled long with Spains Pharaoh, and they have at length enforced
him to let them go. They are a Gideons Army upon the march again. They are the
Indian Rat, knawing the Bowels of the Spanish Crocodile, to which they got when
he gaped to swallow them. They are a serpentwreathed about the legs of that
Elephant They are the little sword fish piicking the bellies of the Whale. They
are the wane of that Empire, which increased in Isabella, and in Charles the
5th. was at full.

They are a glass wherein Kings may see that though they be Sovereigns over
lives and goods, yet when they usurp upon Gods part, and will be Kings over
conscience too, they are sometimes punished with loss of that which lawfully is
their own. That Religion too fiercely urged is to stretch a string till it not
only jars, but cracks; and in the breaking, whips (perhaps) the streiners eye
out.

That an extreme taxation is to take away the honey, while the Bees keep the
Hive, whereas he that would take that, should first either burn them, or drive
them out. That Tyrants in their Government, are the greatest Traitors to their
own States. That a desire of being too absolute is to walk upon Pinacles and
the tops of Pyramides, where not only the footing is full of hazard, but even
the sharpness of that they tread on may run into their foot and woundthem.
That too much to regrate on the patience of but tickle Subjects, is to press a
thorn till it prick your finger. That nothing makes a more desperate Rebel
than a Prerogative enforced too far.

That liberty in man is as the skin to the body not to be put off, but together
with life. That they which will command more than they ought, shall not at last
command so much as is fit.

That Moderate Princes sit faster in their Regalities, than such as being but
men, would yet have their power over their Subjects, as the Gods unlimited.
That Oppression is an iron heat till it burns the hand. That to debar some
States of ancient Privileges; is for a Falcon to undertake to beat a flock of
wildgeese out of the fens. That to go about to compel a sullen reason to
submit to a wilful peremptoriness is so long to beat a chained Mastife into his
kennell, till at last he turns and flies at your throat. That unjust policy is
to shoot as they did at Ostend into the mouth of a charged Canon to have two
Bullets returned for one. That he does but endanger himself, that riding with
too weak a Bit provokes a head strong horse with a spur. That it is safer to meet
a valiant man weaponless, than almost a coward in Armor. That even a weak cause
with a strong Castle, will boil salt blood to a Rebellious Itch. That it is
better keeping a Crazy body in an equal temper, than to anger humors by too
sharp a physic.

That Admonitions from a dying man are too serious to be neglected. That there
is nothing certain that is not impossible. That a Cobbler of Ulushing was one of
the greatest enemies that the King of Spain ever had.

To con^^lu^^e, the Country it self is a Moted Castle keeping a Garnish of the
Richest Jewels of the World in it; The Queen of Bohemia and her Princely
Children.

The People in it are Jews of the New Testament, that have exchanged nothing
but the Law for the Gospel: and this they rather profess than practice.
Together a man of War riding at Anchor in the Downs of Germany.

For foreign Princes to help them is wise self-policy. When they have made them
able to defend themselves against Spain, they are at the Pale, if they enable
them to offend others they go beyond it. For questionless were this Thorn out
of the Spaniards side he might be feared too soon to grasp his long intended
Monarchy. And were the spaniard but possessed Lord of the Low Countries, or had
the States but the wealth and power of Spain, The rest of Europe might he like
people at Sea in a Ship on fire; that could only choose whither they would drown
or burn. Now, their war is the peace of their neighbors. So Rome when busied
in her Civil Broiles, the Parthians lived at rest; but those concluded once, by
Caesar next are they designed for conquest.

If any man wonder at these contraries, let him look in his own body for as
many several humors. In his own brain for as many different Fancies. In his
own heart for as various passions; and from all hese he may learn, That there
is not in all the world such another Beast as Man.

FINIS.

