THE EXAMINATION AND CONFESSION OF Captain Lilbourne and Captain Viviers, Who
were taken at Brainford by his Majesty's Forces, and had their trial at
Oxford, on Saturday the tenth of this instant December, before the Lord Heath,
other Lords of his Majesty's privy Council being present, who were judged as
Ring leaders of the Roundheads, to lose their lives on wednesday, being the
14. day of this Month. Being sent in a letter from Mr. Daniel Felton, a
Scholar of Trinity College, to one Mr. Tho. Harris in Lincoln Inness Fields.
Also many persuasions and strong inducements whereby his Majesty does make
known and declare upon good grounds how much it concerns the good of this
Kingdom, to incline to an accommodation of peace, much desired (as his Majesty
conceives) of all his loyal Subjects.

London printed for T. Wright. 1642.

TRVE Intelligence from OXFORD. WHEREIN IS FVLLY DISCOVERED the manner of the
Indictment of Captain Lilborne, and Captain Vivers, who were to suffer as
guilty of high Treason, December. 14. 1642.
SIR,
I Had long time a desire to salute you with my Letters, and my Love, and
having been debarred the intercourse of Carriers, I hope we shall now enjoy one
another more often by our Letters, his Majesty having this day made
Proclamation; That Carriers shall pass again from place to place, and to be
secured from all danger. There came intelligence this morning to Oxford, That
there is a good inclination in many of the Citizens of London for peace, and
that many thousands of them have Petitioned to the Parliament for the fame, and
that they were much opposed the last Monday in their Guild Hall, and many of
them imprisoned. It has wrought a great impression here in Oxford, and it is
made all our discourse. I must beseech you that you would so much obliege me,
as to send me word with what possible speed you can the true intelligence of
it; and in answer of so great a courtesy, I will be careful to dispatch unto
you all news worthy your observance and relation here in Oxford: And in the
first rank must acquaint you, that the sentence of Death is passed against the
two Captains that were taken prisoners by his Majesty's Army in Brainford:
They were tried for their lives before the Lord Chief Justice Sir Robert
Heath, and were indicted as guilty of High Treason, for that being subiecty
both unto his Majesty, they took up rebellious Arms against him. They pleaded
for their lives very boldly, especially Captain Lilborne, who being but a man
of low fortunes, has arose to the degree of a Captain, by the boldness of
his spirit. He spoke much for himself, and alleged he much wondered at the
proceedings of the Charge against him, the Law passing upon him as he had been
a Felon, and not a soldier that he honored his Majesty as much as any there
present, and that the preservation of his sacred person was as tender to him,
that he was so far from taking up Arms against his King, that the only end he
made in all this service, was by the loss of his blood to procure safety to
his Majesty, and peace unto the Kingdom, by endeavoring what in him lay to
pluck him from the hands of those who infused bad counsel into his sacred
ears. Notwithstanding all this, the Jury passed upon him, and found him
guilty of high treason, the sentence of death was pronounced against him by the
L. Heath: this is the day of his execution, in my next letter I will at full
acquaint you with the manner of it: in the mean time I must beseech you to
certify us with the proceedings of your Citizens Petition for peace, which
will be very welcome news unto us all, especially unto him who is,

Sir, Your most humble servant, WILLIAM FELTON.

Strong Inducemen^ whereby his MAJESTY does make known how much it concerns
the good of this Kingdom to incline to peace, etc.
GOD looking from Heaven, and beholding the miserable estate of this Nation,
which he in Justice for the delinquencie of sin had punished with civil war,
does begin to pity us again, and to show that mercy is the direct attribute of
his essence, he will soften the hearts of men to receive an accommodation of
peace, that the sword may no longer cut down the youth and most generous
spirits of this Land. There has been blood enough, and too much already spent
in a private quarrel, which by Plebeian wits was never hitherto well
understood; and Kenton field will be remembered by posterity with much grief,
since so many therein did lose their fathers, husbands, brothers, nay the blood
of all sorts of kindred was mingled together, and could not be distinguished.
And what was the cause of this unnatural battle? why the common people were
led on by ungrounded opinions, and pay, to cut the throats of their brethren,
the Protestant was exposed to fight in maintaining the unlearned humorous
conceits of the Brownists and other Sectaries, being villianous people, and
such as have bin the great disturbers of the commonwealth; they endeavored the
fall of the true Religion, and to bring in new Doctrines, which with much
impudence they brayed out in Convinticles, and had followers enough, equal to
themselves for weak heads, and shallow understandings.

The City and Country carried up their fancies with all the strength they
could make, and applauding new inventions, grateful to nature, they began to
despise the Church, and Clergy, nay the Common prayer, as things ancient, and
not fit for service. Hereupon soldiers, ready to maintain any cause, flocked
together, and being ready (for pay) to justify any quarrel, a great battle
was fought at Kenton, with much loss on both sides, and pity it was that so
many of the Nobility and Gentry should be lost in such a battle, where so
much cruelty was acted in so short a time. But though men prove more fierce
then Tigers, and ready to sheath their swords in one another bodies, yet the
hand of God can stay their hands when they are lifted up in greatest fury; and
when his good pleasure is, he can both persuade and command a peace, and the
war cannot pass beyond the bounds which his his divine providence has
appointed, but as for other hopes to see peace, he will make us beholding to
his divine bounty. For now after these furious passages of a civil war, he
does make some hearts to fall off from the prosecuting this destroying work of
ruin, by maintaining war within this land, which must needs eat up the fruits
thereof, and bring it to a despised and wretched poverty, other nations with
pleasure looking upon our calamities. And since it is a principle, that all
things must move from some beginning to an end, the City has begun to bring
about this great desired work of peace, and to set a mark upon such as do
oppose the common vote of the people, and do cry up war, transported by
their violent faction; they have therefore devised a way to distinguish such as
be desirous of peace, from the other who are either cold to embrace it, or
refrain to oppose it.

But indeed who can oppose the inscrutable works of God, plotted by many secret
ways, to manifest his Glory; therefore if he will this work of peace shall
with a swift motion go forward in despite of all opposition, let all the
heads round about this City, conspire to slack and stay those intended
propositions to the Parliament for peace, let the waves of tumult make the
Ship of the Church and Commonwealth work to the Haven of safety, yet at
last it shall conquer the tempest of ignorance, of scandal and envy, raised
by those mouths of ignorance, that blow such violent cross winds to cast it
away.

Behold the King with his Scepter is ready to oppose these waves, to compose
this storm, and shall any date to be movers and disturbers of this calm of
happy peace? No, stand now for God, the King, the Parliament, and peace: You
have now many good and great causes, united in one, then let your hearts stand
firm in contrariety to those Vipers, that would ear a passage out of their
mothers Wombs; those empty clouds of ignorance, that hover about till they are
driven away by the clear Sun shine of the Gospel. Your City is wise, and full
of grave Senators, that can with clear judgments look into the Ambition and
Bloody thoughts of all Sects; therefore, now if your hearts be inclinable to
peace, persuade your selves (as indeed it is) that nothing can be more
acceptable to God, your King and Country, then a well grounded peace. Would
you have this land, the ancient seat of plenty and prosperity, embrace peace?
or if you desire to see the King in his peaceable Throne again, and enjoy all
happiness under his gracious reign, embrace peace: Or do you wish for the
peace and quietness of your consciences, of the Church and State, embrace and
most willingly yield to peace. But what need we doubt it, for if your wisdom
fail not, you will with all cheerfulness seek this peace so much opposed,
if calamities may come within the view of of your understanding, there is
sorrow, grief, blood, loss, violence, murder, and all the miseries of war
daily extant and acted, and can there be happiness in this? is there music
in the groans of dying men? is it joy to see tears standing in the eyes of
this father, this husband, this mother and that brother, for the death of their
comfort in their several relations. Then you may roundly conclude, that war is
to be preferred to peace, murder and slaughter before life and safety, and
the Kingdoms ruin before the general good of the Kingdom. But if the
contrary be true, (as all wise men do acknowledge) then down with those
ambitious, irreligious people, that cry down peace, and let all other people
pray and endeavor for peace between the King and all his true hearted subjects.

FINIS.

