Aug. l. 18. de civ. Dei c. 20. Roma est altera Babylon, and prioris filia.
Babylon was the first Rome, and Rome is (as it were) the second Babylon. Apoc.
18. 7. Babylon the great is fallen, is fallen, and is become the habitation of
devils, and the hold of every foul spirit, and a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird.



Roma Ruens, Romes Ruin: Being A SVCCINCT ANSWER To A POPISH CHALLENGE,
Concerning The antiquity, unity, universality, succession, and perpetual
visibility of the true Church, even in the most obscure times, when it seemed
to be totally eclipsed, in the immediate ages before LUTHER.

By DANIEL FEATLEY, D. D.

MIC. 7. 8. Rejoice not against me O mine enemy; when I fall, I shall arise;
when I sit in darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto me.

Leo Se^m. in natal. Petri and Pauli. Non ^inuitur persecutionibus ecclesia
dei, sed augetur magis.

Ager dominicus segete ditiore vestitur, dum grana, quae singula cadunt,
multiplicata nascuntur.

Theod. comment. in epist.. ad Philippen. (...).

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Purslow, for Nicholas Bourne, at the South entrance
of the Royal Exchange. 1644.

PErlegi hunc polemicum tractatum, cui titulus est Romes Ruin; atque, ut valde
doctum and nervosum, dignum censeo, qui prelo mandetur.

Johannes Downame.

A Table of the special contents.
I. THe Popish Challenge. II. The preface to the Reader, wherein the main and
principal question concerning the visibility of the Church is stated, and
determined according to scriptures. III. The answer to the Challenge.
Paragraph. I. Concerning the name catholic. p. 1 Para. II. Concerning the
attributes of our christian says, one true, divine and infallible. p. 3 III.
That divine faith is confined to the written word of God, and is unchangeable
p. 5 IV. Touching the propagation of the christian Faith to all ages by pastors
and teachers lawfully sent. p. 8 V. Concerning the perpetuity of the true
Church. p. 7 VI. That the true church was never simply invisible, nor so
obscure, but that it had true professors known to the members thereof, though
often invisible to the adversaries. p. 12 VII. That the Roman Church, that is,
a Church holding the present Romish Trent-faith, has not bin always visible.
p. 13 VIII. That the Roman Church neither has bin nor is at this day
catholic, viz. universal. p. 16 IX. That the Roman Church has not had an
uninterrupted succession of true bishops and pastors derived from the Apostles
p. 17 X. That the Roman Church has not the pretended mark of unity, and that
Papists differ among themselves in many substantial points of faith
particularly mentioned p. ^^ XI. That the Roman Church is not truly an
Apostolical church, much less the only Apostolical church, out of which
there is no salvation. p. 26 XII. That amplitude and eminent visibility are no
marks of the true Church, and obiter of the large bounds of the greek church.
pa. 27 XIII. Where the true Church was when the Roman fell from her first
faith. p. 30 XIV. Where, and who were the true professors of the reformed
Religion, in the immediate age before Luther. p. 32 XV. That Questions de fide
cannot be determined by mere humane stories. p. 37 XVI. That all who make not
open profession of faith in time of persecution, are not to be condemned for
hypocrites. p. 39 XVII. Of the first conversion of the english nation to the
Christian faith. p. 40 XVIII. Of the faith of Gregory the great; and that for
substance it was the same that we profess at this day, is proved by instance
in 12 main points of difference between the reformed and the present Roman
Church. p. 43 XIX. Of the faith of Constantine the great, and that the church
in his days maintained the same doctrine with us, is proved by the testimonies
of the doctors of the Church, who flourished in that age. p. 50
Indiculus authorum.
A.
G. Abbot. Abulensis. Adrianus. AEneas Sylvius. Alfonsus a Castro. Almaine.
Alvarez. Ambrosius Med. Anastasius. Andradius. T. Aquinas. Athanasius.
Augustinus.
B.
Barclayus. C. Baronius. Basilius mag. Beda. Bellarminus. Benno Card.
Berengarius. Bertram. Bilson. Birbeck. Bonaventura. M. Bucerus.
C.
Cajetanus. Canus. Capito. Catharinus. Chrysostomus. I. Cocleus. Constantinus.
Contarenus. Curopalata. Cyprianus. Cyrillus Hieros.
D.
Damasus. Dicetus. Dionysius Ar^op. Driedo.
E.
Elfricus. S. Ephrem. Epiphanius. Erasmus. Eusebius.
F.
Fabritius. Ferus. Field. Fisherus. Fox. Fulgosus.
G
R. Gallus. Genebrardus. Gerardus. Gerson. Gildas. Glaber Rodolphus. Gratianus.
Gregorius M. Gretserus Ies.
H.
M. Heart. Helvicus. Hieronymus. Hilarious. P. Homerus. Hugo de sanct. vict. L.
Humphredus. I. Huz.
I.
Iacobus Christop. T. Iamesius. Ignatius. Illyricus Fl.. Innocenti^s.
Ioachimus. Ab. Ioachimus. Ca. Jonas Aurel. Irenaus. Invenalis.
L.
Lactantius. Lambertus Geasomb. P. Lombardus. Luitprandus. Lucius Tudensis. I.
Lidius.
M.
Macarius Aegy? Mantuanus. Marselius P. Martialis. Martinus Luther. Ph.
Melancthon. Minutius felix. Metrophnes Crit. P. Molineus.
N.
Nazianzenus. G. Ne^^rionsis. Nioephorus. Nicetas Abbas.
O.
G. Occa^. Orthwinus. Osiander.
P.
Pacianus. Parsonus Ies. Pellicanus. Petrus de Alliac^. Photius. Al. Pighius.
Plichdor^ius. M. Polonus. Pontanus. H. Pragensis. S. Prosper.
Q.
Quir^ga Card.
R.
Rainerius. I. Rai^oldus. Rhemist. Roffenfis.
S.
Salvia^^s. Scotus, Dans, Erig^^. Sigebertus. Sigonius. Sisselius. Socrates
hist. D. Seto. Stella. Suarez. Sulpitius Severus
T.
R. Tapperus. Tertullianus. Theodoretus. Theophilus Alex. C. Turrecremata.
V.
Vasquez. Vbertinus a Casa^s. Vignierus. Virgilius. Vortleg. Vsherus.
W.
Wesselus Groaning. G. Whitakerus. F. White. Wi^^lius. Widdrin^^nus. Wimpina. I.
W^l^ius.
THE CHALLENGE.
WE catholics say, that there is always one, and but one true, divine and
infallible faith professed by the church of Christ, without which none can
please God, nor attain to salvation: this one true faith generally preached
through the world was not to cease with the Apostles and their immediate
hearers, but was by Christ's promise to continue unchanged to the worlds end.
For so it is said (Mat. ult.) behold, I am with you all days, even to the
consummation of the world: and John 14. The holy Ghost whom my Father will send
in my name, he shall teach you all things.

This divine truth once established, to the end it might continue, was to be
derived to posterity; not by angels sent to teach particular persons, nor by
illuminated brethren of Amsterdam still pretending new light, but by a
continued succession of known visible pastors, and bishops lawfully ordained
and sent to preach it perpetually, in despite of all new sectaries and
novellers whatsoever. Whence, we say, it follows, that not for six hundred
years only, as many protestants grant, there was a true church free from spot
of error, but likewise in all ages following there ever was and must be such a
church, in the union whereof all sorts might be saved.

For to say (as some protestants do) the church was long invisible (besides
that it is contrary to many clear prophesies and predictions of the old
Testament) it barreth the heathen of necessary means to salvation, whilst he
seeks not the true church, with which to jown hands; and amongst christians
this invisibilitie supposed, it were very hard to hold communion with her in
the administration of the sacraments. We then affirm, and let our adversaries
disprove it if they can, that the Roman church has bin always visible.

We affirm that the Roman church has bin always catholic, viz. universal.

The Romish church has ever had a succession of true bishops and pastors
derived from the Apostles, still teaching the same unchanged doctrine, in all
substantial points of faith.

All which going together, and being only found in her, and no other church,
do evidently prove that she alone is truly Apostolical, and consequently out
of her there neither is nor can be salvation.

To disprove us herin, we require that a protestant church with these marks may
be showed to have bin always extant.

Or, if they cannot do this (as we well know they cannot) let them labor to
assign us another catholic church, distinct from the Roman, when she, as they
falsely suppose, fell from the first truth?

Or at least they must show us who were the true professors of protestancy in
the immediate age before Luther began, in what city, town, or country they
dwelt, and what writers speak of them which lived before our times.

If they cannot satisfy us in any of these demands, in which alone we offer to
join issue with them, then do we think the day to be ours: if they can name any
who did both believe and profess the protestant doctrine in all points, let
them do it, and then, if we do not disprove them, the day is theirs. And seeing
all is brought to this issue, we wish your learned to encounter us in this only
point, and whatsoever they shall return for answer not belonging hereunto, we
shall account it impertinent, and unworthy reply, as not direct to our purpose,
which is to find out the true catholic and visible church.

Ridiculous it is to answer, as some do, that there were true believing
protestants when Luther began, but durst not for fear of fire profess their
faith: this we say is to condemn them to have had no faith at all, but to be a
dissembling company of such, as were neither hot nor cold; Christ saying of
such, he that denies me before men, I will deny him before my father in heaven.

Or if your men fly this difficulty, we will join issue with them in the
maintenance of that faith and religion into which we Englishmen were first
converted by Austine a monk, a man of God sent by Gregory the great, bishop of
Rome, more then a thousand years since: a faith confirmed by miracle from
heaven, and therefore must needs be true, and never noted to differ from the
common received faith of christendom in those days, as appears by the
several epistles of the said S. Gregory, to the bishops of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, with all whom he held communion of faith, so as if Christ had a
catholic church upon earth, as needs he must, S. Gregory was of it; and it
then being a true church, we say (holding still the same ^enets) it must needs
be so now, Gods truthbeing, like unto himself, without change: and therefore if
an angel should come from heaven to teach us any other doctrine then we first
received, we are not to hear him, the good seed being ever first sowed, and the
Galathians were worthily reprehended by S. Paul, for not constantly retaining
their first planted faith.

Or lastly, if you desire to go nearer to the times of the apo^^les, we will
join with you to prove our faith in the days of Constantine the great, who
first built and opened christian churches; and gave freedom for christians to
come together, and to know and publish to the world what was held by them,
which before could not so well be done by reason of the great persecutions, in
which the church had bin till then generally eclipsed.

Finis.
The PREFACE to the ensuing ANSWER.
(...), To the unknown reader.
BE not offended (courteous reader) at the epithete I give thee. For I call him
to witness whom the schools rightly term primam veritatem, that I am, in
respect of my present condition, to seek a man of quality and authority, to
whom wronged truth may fly for succor and shelter. Albeit the ensigns are
every where displayed for the defense of the true protestant religion, for
which both sides engage their persons and estates: yet upon exact search it
will be found that the flags and streamers lately in Ireland, and now also in
England are dyed with protestant blood.

And for my self in particular, though in the former Halcyou days of peace I
could scarce name more persons of worth and quality, then patrons of my weak
endeavors against the common adversary: yet now I may truly say with Gregory
the divine, epist. 31. (...) (...). Notwithstanding a^ Cynegyrus in a sea fight
against the Persians, after his weapons were wrested from him, caught hold on
the ship with his right hand; and when that was cut off, with his left hand;
and after both, with his teeth: and as Crassus the famous orator, when Philip
the consul sorely threatened Cic ter^de eratnon tibi illa sunt caedenda si
Crassum vis coercere, haectibi est ^x^id^^da lingua, qua vel ^vulsa, spiritu
ipso libidinem tuam liber^^s mea refuta^i^.
him for speaking so freely for the liberty of the senate, answered like a true
Roman senator, if thou will have me hold my peace in so good a cause, thou
must cut out my tongue, which aster thou have plucked out, with my very breath
my liberty shall resute and confound thy tyrannical humor and proud
insolence: in like manner, though I have lost both libras and libros, all means
of livelihood and liberty too: yet I will never be wanting in the defense of
Gods truth against Romish Idolatry and tyrannis, while I have a hand to write,
or a tongue to speak; dum memor ipse mei, dum spiritus hos regit artus.


Having therefore received a challenge from a Romanist (whose name I know not)
who defieth the host of the living God, and like Iliad 3.
Paris in Homer, (...).
has demanded a duel, a single combat with any that dare to enter into the
l^sts with him in the quarrel of the Romish church: I could not contain my
self, though restrained at the present, and unfurnished of my choicest weapons:
but accepting of the challenge I have met with him in the field pitched by
himself, I mean, the controversy touching the perpetual visibilitie of the
true church, and other difficult questions, both historical and theological,
depending thereon. Now because our Romish adversaries conceive that they have
most advantage in this dispute of all other, and therefore seek to reduce all
questions to it (as you hear in the challenge) I hold it fit, in this proamble
to the ensuing encounter, exactly to state it and set it upon its true bases.

In this question touching the visibilitie of the Catholic Church three terms
are to be explicated.

1. Church. 2. Catholic. 3. Visible.
First church: by church we understand not a particular congregation or company
confined to one certain place, parish, city, or country; for such a particular
Church is not always visible. Where there have been visible professors in many
famous cities, and countries, there are few or none now; and where there were
none before, as in diverse parts of America, there are visible churches now. The
can^lesticks follow the light, and when the light, that is, the preaching of
the gospel is removed, the congregations, that is, the candlesticks are also
removed; and from what c^y or country soever both are translated, there is
darkness, and in darkness no visibilitie.

Secondly, catholic is taken in a double sense, logical, and theological:
logical, for a generic all notion of a church which is predicated of every
particular church, tanquam genus de specie, as when we say the Greek or the
Latin is a christian church. In this sense church is the object of the
understanding, not of the sense; and catholic so taken is intelligible, not
sensible or visible. For, universalia (qua talia) non cadunt sub sensum.
Secondly theological, for the whole company of all that are called to the
knowledge of the truth, and outward means of salvation by Christ, having Gods
word and ordinances among them. The catholic church so taken is spread over
the face of the whole earth, and though not in the whole lump, yet in every
part and parcel thereof is visible, so long as that part and parcel continues
a member or portion of the catholic church; and though some members, like
branches of the golden tree in the poet, be cut off or wither, yet others rise
up in their places, or upon some other boughs or arms of that great tree.

Thirdly visible, when we say the catholic church in a theological notion is
visible, we mean in respect of outward profession of faith, and public use of
sacraments common to all christians, not in respect of the inward grace of the
spirit and proper marks of the elect; for so it is not object to sense. Those
marks are like the white-stone in the Apocalypse, which no man knows but he
that receives it, and Apoc. 2. 17.
in this notion the whole company of the elect is by our divines called the
invisible church: not that the elect in it are not seen, but because this
cannot be seen or known by sense that they are elect. A child sees a shining
stone, which is a diamond, topaz, or some precious gem; but he knows it not
to be a true jewel: all men knew Nathaniel to be an Israelite, but our Savior
only, the beams of whose eyes pierced into the hidden corners of his heart,
could say, behold, a true Israelite in whom there is no guil. Ioh. 1. 47.


That a man is a true Israelite, that is, has true faith, is a matter of
faith; and the catholic church taken for a company of such as they are such,
is an article of our creed: credo sanctam ecclesiam catholicam, I believe there
is such a holy catholic church, but neither I nor any man else can discover it
to be such by sense. Yet to avoid all mistaking, the church we believe in the
creed is not a distinct church from that which we see in the several and
particular members thereof. For the elect which make the invisible church, are
in the visible as the soul is in the body, or a diamond in a ring, or the
apple in the eye, or gold in the oar: and we may properly call them the church
of the church, as Demosthenes* called Athens the Greece of Greece and Cicero
Leontium the Sicilie of Sicilie.

Of the catholic church, as it is invisible, we dispute not now; but as it is
in the parts and members thereof visible: and our question is rather de modo
than de re, not whether the church be always visible, but how far it is
visible, and whether such visibilitie be a proper and inseparable note thereof.
We acknowledge there has been and ever will be a true church visible, but not
always eminent; conspicuous, but not always illustrious: known, but not always
nutorio^s: fair and specious, but not always pompous and glorious. For what
show could a church make when it consisted but in Abel, and Aug. in Psalm. 125.
he was murdered? and afterward in Enoch, and he was taken from the company of
men to walk with God? or at the death of our Savior, when, as Alen^^s
reaches, the true faith remained only in the blessed virgin, and one candle
alone left on Easter evening burning, after all the other are put out, in the
Roman Church implies as much, if we may believe the interpreters of that
ceremony? Certainly the Church was brought to a low ebb when the deluge
overflowed the whole world, and only eight persons were preserved in the ark,
and it is a question whether all of them were eternally saved. I am sure, one
of them, namely Cham was cursed of God. Show me the glorious luster of a
visible church in the days of the Patriarks pilgrimage in Mesopotamia, or their
posterities bondage in Egypt, or captivity in Babylon, in which sad times
they who lived and belonged to the true church sighed to God often in private,
but were not suffered to pray to him in public: they lif^ed up their hearts no
doubt continually, but not their hands, they were so straightly manacled: they
often looked toward the holy city, and the place where Gods honor dwelt, but
they could not stir their foot toward it, for they were fettered. All their
sacrifices they could then offer were their broken and contrite hearts, and
their sweetest incense their burning desires, and their drink offerings their
tears, which they powered out by the waters of Babylon, and made them waters of
Marah, salt and bitter. No marvail that the spouse of Christ hid her self in a
strange land, and then covered her face, when it was swollen with grief and
blubbered with tears; but did she ever so in her own country and kingdom. Did
she ever wear a mask in Judah and Israel? Did she ever there shut up her self
in her closet, and water her plants? Certainly she did, as we read 2 Chro. 15.
3. Now for a long season Israel had been without the true God, and without a
teaching priest, and without the law: but when they in their trouble did turn
to the Lord God of Israel and sought him, he was found of them. v. 5. and in
those times there was no peace to him that went out, not to him that came in,
but great vexations were upon all the inhabitants of the countries.

What face of a church was to be seen in the days of Elijah, who makes this
grievous complaint against Israel? 1 King. 19. 10. The children of Israel have
forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altats, and slain thy prophets with
the sword, and I, even I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away. I
suppose, a clearer evidence of the latencie and obscurity of the church cannot
be brought. Yet our Rhemists and Romanists seek to avoid it, by laying the
whole blame upon the ten tribes of Israel, and clearing Judah. But it is too
manifest by the reformation of Ezekiah, 2 King. 18. 4. and Josiah 2. King. 22.
23. and the judgment of God upon Manasses, 2 King. 24. 3. that Judah was
partaker with Israel, and therefore both are alike charged by the spirit of
God, 2 King. 17. 13. Yet the Lord testified against Israel and against Judah by
all the prophets, and by all the seers, saying, turn you from your evil ways,
and keep my commandments and my statutes, v. 14. notwithstanding they would
not hear, nor obey, but hardened their necks, like to the necks of their
fathers, v. 16. they made molten images, and worshipped all the host of heaven,
and served Baal, v. 19. also Judah kept not the commandments of the Lord their
God, but walked in the sta^es of Israel which they made: therefore the Lord
cast away all the seed of Israel and afflicted them, and delivered them into
the hands of spoylers, and carried them into the land Ashur, where according to
the prophecy of Hosea, c. 3. 4. the children of Israel abode many days without
a king, and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image,
without an Ephod and without a Teraphim. A sad text to comment upon, no king,
no priest, no scepter, no censer, no throne of David, no chayr of Moses, no
court, no temple. Where was now the glorious hierarchy our adversaries dream
of, where was the reverend assembly of prelates, the numerous congregations of
people, the solemn feasts, the stately processions, the rich furniture, and
pompous ceremonies, and glittering shows which make the luster of such a church
as they would have? Where was now the city set upon a hill that cannot be hid,
the tabernacle piched in the sun?

At this time, and afterward in the days of Jeremie, and Ezekiel, and likewise
after the death of our Savior, during first the ten Aug. epist. 88. quae
aliquando obscuratur and obnubilatur scandalorum multitudine.
persecutions of the church by the heathen emperors, and in the middle by the
Arrian, and last of all by antichristian princes and states, the true church
was more like to the moon than the sun, which is ofttimes in the wane,
sometimes in a partial, and sometimes also in a total eclipse; and true
believers are compared to the sands which are by the sea shore, and appear
innumerable in calm and fair weather, but in trouble some times, as it were in a
rough sea, tribulationum and tentationum fluctibus operiuntur, atque turbantur,
not a sand is to be seen. Such times have been, and we are to expect no better
in the lees of time, and latter days. For then many false prophets shall arise
and deceive many, Mat. 24. 11. and because iniquity shall abound, the love of
many shall wax cold: there shall be a falling away, or a general apostasy
from the christian faith, and the man of sin shall be revealed, the son of
perdition: and the tail of the dragon shall draw the third part of the stars of
heaven, and cast them to Apoc. 12. 12.
the earth, and the devil shall rage the more, by how much his time is
shorter: and the dragon shall give power unto the beast, and he Apoc, 13. 4. 7.
8.
shall make war with the saints, and overcome them, and all that dwell upon the
earth shall worship him, whose names are not written in the book of life. When
iniquity gets the upper hand, and antichrist shall be in his highest
elevation, shall the son of man then find faith upon the earth? that is, as the
Romish commentators themselves Luke 18. 8. Ep 88. ecclesia est sol, luna and
stellae: qua^do sol obscurabitur and luna non dabit lucem suam and stellae
cadent de coelo, ecclesia non apparebit, impiis eam ultra modum persequentibus.
expound the word, any public outward profession of faith, any beauty of
holiness, or appearance of a christian church? S. Augustine resolves
negatively; by the sun, moon, and stars, the church, in regard of her clearest
lights and eminent professors, is understood, when the sun shall be darkened,
and the moon shall not give her light, and the stars shall fall from heaven,
the church shall not appear, wicked men persecuting her above measure. Against
which times the Lord arm, and prepare his dearest servants that love the truth
in sincerity.

Aldersgate London, from prison in Peter-house, August the first 1644. Thine in
the Lord Jesus, D. F.

AN ANSWER TO A POPISH CHALLENGE, Touching the antiquity and visibility of the
true church, and other questions depending thereon.
PARAGRAPH. I. Concerning the name catholic.
CHALLENGE.
We catholics say, etc.

Answer.
IF I mistake not in my guess, you seem to be some mendicant friar, and
according to that profession you begin with begging; for in the very first
words you beg the main point in question; to wit, that you are catholics,
saying, We catholics; prove your selves to be so, and then speak so; win the
name and bear it; mean while, say not, we catholics, but we papists; or, if
you have a months mind to the name catholic, qualify it, and allay it with
your distinctive term Roman, and speak as your fellows do, we of the Papists
call themselves catholic romans, as the followers of Andias the heretic called
themselves Christiani Andiani, Christians Andians. Epiph l. 3. here is. 70. Aug
cont ep. Manic. c. 4. haretici se catholicos dici volunt. Salv de guber. dei l
6 apud nos sunt hareretici, apud se non sunt, nam tantum se catholicos esse
judicant, ut nos ipsos titulo hereticae appellationis infament.
catholic Roman church, that is, we of the universal particular church; for,
if catholic be universal, surely roman is particular. Or rather, say not, we
catholics say, but we say that we are catholics, for this has been the say
of all heretics and schismatics. The Arrians, says Salvianus (and all other
mis-beleevers) are heretics in our account, but not in their own. nay they so
far over w^ ^n themselves catholics, that they stick not to def^ us who are
truly, catholics with the title and brand of heretics. As S^ Magus styled
himself the great power of God; Theod. hist. Trip (...).
and Iezabel called her self a prophetess; and Nestorius, a notorious
heretic covered himself with a vail of an orthodox professor; and the Turks,
though it appear out of all stories that they came from Hagar the bond-^o^^n
and are truly Hagar^ns, yet give themselves the names of (...): so you papists
generally, though you are a medley or cento of many heretics, both ancient and
latter, yet you voice your selves catholics, and your own testimony Whitaker.
Append to his book of the church Rivet. prof to his cathol. orthodox The Church
dispersed over the whole earth. Vin Ly^ cont. ^aret Arrian^ venen u^ ja^ non
por^^^nculam quandam, sed pene orbem totum contaminaverat; a^^^ ^t prope
cunctis latinis episcop^s, partim v^, partim ^^aude deceptis caligo quadam
mentibus offunderetur.
is the best, if not the only plea you have to that title. For if any other,
whom you hove not taught to speak, give you that title, it is out os ignorance,
or in derision, as the Athenians made a decree to deine Alexander, quia
Alexander vult esse deus, sit Deus; because Alexander will be a god, let him be
a god. The term catholic cannot be taken but in one of these two senses,
either properly for universal, and so it is opposed to particular: or
improperly, for orthodoxall, and so it is opposed to heretical, or
schismatic. When this epithere is applied to the church, it is taken in the
first sense (...), supple (...); but when it is applied to faith, it is for the
most part taken in the latter sense as in the creed of Athanasius, whosoever
will be saved must hold the catholic faith; that is, the orthodox faith which
he there sets down: for at that time when he wrote, that creed of his was
not catholic in the first sense, that is generally and u^^versally received,
if that be true which Vincentius writes, the p^son of the Arrians did not
infect only a portion of the church, but (...) a manner ^ain^ed the whole
world, insomuch that almost all the la^^n bishops being surprised by fraud or
by force had a mist cast before their eyes. In neither of these two senses of
the word can either your church, or your faith, or your persons be termed
catholic. Not your church, for Dr. Reynolds has long ago demonstrated in his
second Thesis, tha^ present Roman church is neither the Ep. 1. ad Sy^pron
christiaanus mihi nomen est, catholicus cognomen^ illud me nuncupat, istud
ostendit: hoc probor, inde signi^.
catholic church of Christ, nor a sound member thereof: not your faith; for
that, as I said before, (so far as it differs from ours) is patcht up of many
heresies: not your persons, for they are singular, or individual, and
therefore cannot be catholics, that is, ^^iversall. Here you use to allege
for your selves a passage out of Pacianus, christian is my name, and catholic
is my surname. But what is this to you, unless you could prove that Pacianus
held your Trent faith (when you prove that, I will immediately turn Roman
catholic;) till you show some affinity between your faith and his, you cannot
challenge his surname catholic. As for his meaning in this his elegant motto,
christian is my name, and catholic is my surname, he alludeth evidently to the
manner of the Romans and some other nations, who used to give their children
two names at least, one common, as Marcus, or Cneius, or Caius; the other
proper, as Cicero, or Crassus, or Anthony, or Pompey; and the sense his words
carry is this, christian is a name which I have in common with all that in any
sort believe the gospel, and are neither Jews not Paynims: but catholic is my
proper name, whereby I am distinguished from diverse sorts of christians, to
wit, all those who profess christianity in general; yet not purely, but with
mixture of some heresy, or schismatically sever themselves from the communion
of the catholic, that is, the universal church: and truly the name catholic
in his days, as also in the days of S. Austin (when the heretics were but a
handful, and lurked but in corners here and there) was a distinctive term: for
then the heretics in regard of their paucitie could not with any color
pretend to the name catholic, but afterward when heresies became catholic,
that is, spread over the whole face of the church, and the orthodox christians
were far fewer in number, the title catholic ceased to be a note of
distinction, and the word orthodox was used in stead thereof to distinguish
true believers from all miscreants heretical or schismatic.

PARAG. II. Concerning the attributes of our christian faith, true, divine and
infallible.
Challenge.
That there is always one and but one true, divine and infallible faith
professed by the church of Christ, without which none can please God, or attain
to falvation, etc.

Answer.
When I read your preface and compared it with that which follows, I could
not but think of Oretes pots sent for a present to Bruson. facet. et exem. l. 1.
Polycrates, in which there was a little gold laid on the top, and under it
nothing but trash; for after these two golden assertions of the unity and
immutability of the true, divine and infallible faith, laid as it were in the
top of your discourse, there is nothing to be found under them but lead and
trash, as shall appear hereafter in the gaging it. I grant there is one, and
but one true, divine and infallible faith; but you should have explicated, how
but one, and in what sense. Divine and infallible faith has been always, and
is one for substance, though not for circumstance: all believers even from Adam
were, though not in name, yet in truth christians, Christ and his meritorious
actions and passions were the object of their faith as well as ours: but they
believed in Christ to come, we in Christ that is come: we and they resemble the
spies that carried the bunch of grapes on their shoulders, the former who went
before looked backward, the latter who went behind looked forward on the
grapes: they looked forward with the eyes of their faith on the incarnation,
passion, resurrection and ascension of Christ to come, we look backward on
these as past, they saw Christ in foregoing types, we in succeeding sacraments.
Yea, but it may be objected, that many new articles of faith are daily
declared, and many new theological conclusions found out, else how should
knowledge increase? How then is the faith of the church always one? For answer
hereunto I will borrow Vincentius his decision, what (says he) is there no
profiting in Christ's school? no growth Vine cont haeret. nullus ne ergo in
ecclesia profectus? habeatur sane and maximus, sed ita tamen ut vere profectus
ille fidei sit, non permutatio. Not believing it, or not in the true sense.
in faith and the knowledge of salvation? Yes, very great, but provided always
that this progress be a going forward in the same way to heaven, not a turning
out of the way: an improvement of faith, no change; that is, holding the same
principles of faith, we may and ought daily by the studies of scriptures deduce
new conclusions, but such as are vertually contained in those principles, not
such as are any way repugnant to them: so long as we mutilate not our creed by
dis-beleeving or mis-beleeving any article of it, and whatsoever we offer
farther to be believed, we clearly and evidently conclude from scriptures, or
other prime and fundamental articles of christian religion, the faith of the
church is still one. Secondly, this faith is said to be divine in a threefold
regard: 1. Of the object, which is God: 2. The efficient, which is the spirit
of God: 3. The motive, which is the word of God, or the authority of the
speaker, which is divine: and because God cannot deceive, nor be deceived,
hence it follows, that the faith which is grounded upon his word is
infallible, and such is the faith of the reformed church of England, one,
divine, and infallible; whereas on the contrary your romish faith is neither
one, nor divine, nor infallible. Not one, for you differ one from another in
many substantial points of faith, as is proved Paragraph the X. Nor divine,
for the last resolution of your faith is unto the church, a company of men
subject to error. Nor is it infallible, for it is partly grounded upon
unwritten traditions, which vary; partly upon the decrees of Popes and
councels, which contradict one the other; the general synod held at Ariminum
contradicted the first of Nice, Vid. infra.
in the point of Christ's deity; the council at Frankeford contradicted the
second council of Nice, in the point of images: the general council held at
Lateran contradicted the general council at Basil, in the point of
supremacy; and I could with a wet See Bilsons supremacy, par. 3. and Bellum
papale.
finger produce diverse decrees of Popes, out of the canon law, flat repugnant
one to the other; but others have done it to my hand, and saved me this labor.

PAR. III. Concerning the immutability of divine faith.
CHALLINGE.
This one true faith, generally preached through the world, was not to cease
with the Apostles and their immediate hearers, but was by Christ's promise to
continue unchanged to the worlds end. For so it is said, Mat. 28. 20. I am with
you always unto the end of the world. Joh. 14. 26. the comforter whom the father
will send in my name, he shall teach you all things.

Answer.
Neither of these places comes home to prove that which you intend, viz. that
the christian faith is to continue unchanged, and may not by any addition or
detraction be altered. Why did you not produce to that purpose, Rev. 22. 18,
19. I testify to every man that hears the words of the prophesic of this
book if any man shall add unto these things, God shall add unto him the plagues
that are written in this book? and Gal. 1. 8, 9. but though we or an angel from
heaven preach any other gospel unto you then that which you have received, let
him be accursed? Upon which words S. Austin thus paraphraseth; whether it be
(says he) concerning Christor the Church, or any thing else which belongs to
faith and our life, Aug. cont. lit. Pet^l l. 3. c 6. Sive de Christo sive de
ecclesia, sive quacunque alia re, quae pertinet ad fidem vitamque nostram, non
di came, si nos (nequaquam comparandi ei qui di^^it) sed si angelus de coelo
vobis annunciaverit praeterquam quod in scripturis, legalibus and evangelic is
accepistis, Anathema sit. Hillar. ad Costant. ^iror te, domine Constantine
imperator. fidem tantum secundu^ ea quae scripta sunt desiderantem. Cyril
Hierosol ca^ec. (...). nihil, ne minutum quidem sine scripturarum authoritate
statuendum. Theoph. Alex. ser. 1. de Pasch. daemoniaci spiritus esset
instinctus sop(...)tium sequi, aut aliquid extra scripturarum authoritatem
p^^are divinum. ^as. l de (...), manifestus est a side lapsus aliquid non
scriptum inducere.
I will not say, if w^, who are not to be compared to him that said it; but if
an angel from heaven preach unto you any thing besides that which you have
received in the scriptures of the law and the gospel, let him be accursed. With
whom accord St. Hilary, St. Cyrill, St. Theophilus of Alexandria, St. Basil,
and S. Athanasius. St. Hilary, I admire thee in this, my lord Constantine, that
thou requirest of us, that our faith be restrained to scriptures only. S. Cyril
of Jerusalem, we may not determine or appoint any thing, no not the least,
without the authority of scriptures. St. Theophilus of Alexandria, it comes
from a di^ellish instinct, to follow the sophisms of men's wits, and to conceive
any thing to be divine without the authority of scriptures. St. Basil the
great, it is a manifest falling away from faith to bring in (to our christian
belief) any thing that it not written. And S. Athanasius, what exceeding folly
is it in you, to speak things that are not written? It is the manner of Marcion
and other heretics, not to walk within the bounds of the gospel, but to speak
out of their private fancies; and you Sabellians, walking in their steps, go
about to pervert the unstable, by speaking things that are not written. But you
thought fit to balk those texts of scripture with the fathers glosses upon
them, and deductions from them, though very pertinent to prove the immutability
of our christian faith, because they have no good meaning to your unwritten
traditions. As for the two texts you here allege of Saint Matthew and Saint
John; they are to singular purpose, but not to yours; they are two deep wells
of salvation, out of which we may draw abundance of water of comfort; for if
Christ be always with us, we are always sure of protection; if his spirit will
reach us all things, we shall be sure of instruction. But what is this to the
imimmutability of our faith, or unvariablenesse of the doctrine and sacraments
De in^t. Christi. (...); Idem de salutari Christi adventu, (...). Et contra
Sabell. (...).
of the church? God was always with the chosen of Israel under the law, and his
spirit taught them all things needful to salvation; yet was the priesthood
thereof changed, and the law also, and a new covenant made upon new conditions,
and with new promises, and so it might be also under the gospel, if God in his
word revealed in scripture had not declared the contrary, namely, Psalm. 1104.
the Lord swear, and will not repent, thou art a priest for ever after the order
of Melchizedeck: whence the apostle infers, Heb. 7. 24. this man because he
continues over, bath an unchangeable priesthood: and 1 Cor. 11. 26. as often as
ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye shall show the death of the lord till
he come; that is, the second time, to wit, to judge the quick and the dead, the
lords supper therefore shall continue till we are bid to the marriage supper of
the lamb in heaven: and Apoc. 14. 6. I saw another angel fly in the midst of
heaven, having the everlasting gospel to preach to them that dwell on the
earth, and to every nation and kindred, and tongue, and people; if the gospel
preached unto us be everlasting, no new gospel shall succeed it; and if no new
gospel, no new faith. The celestial lights often turn their shadows, and give
to the inhabitants of the earth diverse denominations of per^scii, amphiscii and
heteroscii; but with the father of light^ there is no shadow of change. Jam. 1.
17. It was true before all time, and shall be after all time, when heaven and
earth shall pass away, when the whole world shall be changed into a second
chaos, and that chaos shall be re-changed into a new world, ego Deus non mutor,
Mal. 3. 6. I am the Lord, I change not. As God is, so it his essence; and as
his essence is, so are his attributes; and as his attributes are, so is his
word; and as his word, so is our faith grounded upon it, immutable. Nothing is
more unsteady than the needle in a dyall or compass, shaking and quivering
continually; yet if it be touched with a loadstone, and set to the north, it
rests unmovable; in like manner though nothing be more variable and unsteady
than our assent to mysteries above reason and nature, yet if it be touched by
the spirit, and fixed to the word of God, it remains unmovable, and the
church of Christ ever holding and embracing this faith, may truly use the motto
of the Phoenix of her age, Queen Elizabeth, semper eadem, always the same.

PARAG. IV. Concerning the propagation of the christian faith to all ages, by
pastors and teachers lawfully sent.
CHALLENGE.
This divine truth once established, to the cud it might continne, was to be
derived to posterity; not by angels sent to teach particular persons, nor by
illuminated brethren of Amsterdam still pretending new light, but by a
continued succession of known visible pastors, and bishops lawfully ordained
and sent to preach it perpetually in desp^ght of all new sectaries and
novellers whatsoever.

Answer.
Of angels sent to particular persons, since the time of the apostles, and the
fathers of the primitive church, I read no where but in your golden Legend; and
for fanatic and fantastic spirits at Amsterdam, if any of that mad brood
still remain, you well know that we build our faith no more upon these
illuminated brethren of Amsterdam pretending special revelation, than upon
your inspired fathers of Rome pretending infallible direction, and a kind of
appropriation of the holy Ghost. The differences of the two o^^^les (both
bragging of infallible assistance) is this: they are lay-p^pes, yours are
clergy enthusiasts. The propagation of the christian faith to al ages, even to
the end of the world, we believe by the ministry of the word established by
our Lord and Savior, when he ascended far above all heavens, that he might
fill all things; and he gave Ephesians. 4. 10. 11. 12. 13.
some apostles, and some prophets, and some evangelists, and s^^e pastors, and
teachers, for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for
the edifying of the body of Christ, till (...) all com^ in the unity of the
faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God (...) a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. We acknowledge also, that
these ministers S. Paul speaks of, and distinguishes by the titles of
evangelists, doctors, and pastors, etc. ought to be lawfully ordained, and be
visible, and known to those who belong to the true church, though not always to
their blood-thirstie enemies. When our blessed Lord and Savior fled into Mat.
2. 14. Rev. 12, 6. Heb. 11. 38.
Egypt, and the woman into the wilderness, and the primitive saints wandered
in deserts, and in mountains, and in dens and caves of the earth; when S.
Hilarie complains against many in his time, Con. Aux. male vos par^^tum amor
cepit; mo^tes mihi and filvae, and solit ^dines and v^^ agines sunt tutiores;
in ill i^ enim prophet^ aut de^er si, a^^ man^ntes de^ spiritu prophetabant.
who were carried away with the splendor and outward pomp of the Arrian
clergy possessing the greatest cities and towns: you do ill (says he) to be
in love with walls: hills, and woods, and deserts, and gulfs are safer for me;
for in these the prophets either drowned, or, remaining alive, prophesied by
the spirit of God. In such perilous times as these, the visible pastors you
speak of, kept out of the eye of the world and the walk of their enemies, and
were not so known as you would seem to imply; yet did they preach the gospel in
despite of antichristian opposits, (bending all their forces and banding
against them) and there were added to the church daily such as should be saved.

PARAG. V. Concerning the perpetuity of the true church, and her immunitie from
all fundamental 'errours in points necessary to salvation.
CHALLENGE.
Whence we say it follows, that not for six hundred years only, as many
protestants grant, there was a true church free from spot of error: but
likewise in all ages following there ever wa^, and must be such a church, in
the union whereof all might be saved.

Answer.
That from the creation of the first Adam and his consort, till the coming of
the second Adam to judgment, there has been and shall continue a true church
in the world, to which all that belong to Christ's kingdom may and ought to
repair for the means of salvation, we doubt not. And of this church we believe,
that though it consist of men subject to error, as well in doctrine as in
practice: yet that it is so preserved, by the spirit of truth promised by
Christ, from all fundamental errors in points necessary to salvation, that
Io. 14. 16. 2^. etc. 16. 13.
neither the militant and visible church universally, nor any true member
thereof finally, shall ever be stained with any spot of such error. But
errors of less dangerous consequence which may be called pulvisculi, navuli,
or aspergines, spots indeed, but not stains, the visible church upon earth has
seldom or never been free from. For to let pass the first six hundred years,
because on both sides we rather appeal to them, than any way appeach them.
Beda, who flourished in the year 730. bemoans the state of the church; saying,
every man sees with wet eyes how the state of the church daily grows worse and
worse; and well might he complain in such sort, for, Genebrard a popish
chronicler confesses, that in succeeding Ex Wolfio. cp. ded. videt quisque non
sine lachrymis rem indigna^, quantum ecclesiae status ad pejora quotidie and
infima devolvatur. Geneb. chron. l 4. ad an. 901: per annos fere centum
quinquaginta, a Iohanne scilicet actavo, qui Nichola^ and Adriano secundo
sanctis pontificibus successit, usque ad Leonem nonum, qui primus a deo vocatus
(velut alter Aaron) antiquam pontificum integritatem e coelo in sedem
apostolicam revocavit a virtute majorum prorsus defecerunt, apotactici,
apostaticive potius quam apostolici. Benn, card. Sella pontificia terribiliter
dei nutu scissa est in plures parts; ut manifest daretur intelligi sessores
illos pontificis sedem and ecclesiam Christi crudeliter dissipare. Lamb.
Zizania totum sacri gregis corpus quasi tabe quadam infecerunt. Otho. R^ma
crevit in divitiis and potentia, decrevit in veritate and justitia. Ioachi. l.
de concord. disserit qu^^ ^^nge aliena sit omnis hodierna religio aforma
primitivae ecclesiae; and sup. Esa. ecclesia senesc^^s, sicut Solomon,
idol^latrica factaest.
times, from John the eighth, till Leo the ninth, all that sat in the
apostolic chair, fell away from the virtue of their ancestors, and deserved
rather to be termed apotacticall and apostaticall than apostolical. And after
the thousand year, when satan was let loose, even till the happy reformation
of the church by Martin Luther, let us heat what the witnesses of the truth in
their several ages have deposed touching the church failings, especially in
the western parts.

In the year 1050. Benno writes, that the popes chair was fearfully cut into
more parts; and that prodigy boded that those popes who were to sit in it
should miserably rend the church of Christ.

In the year 1078. Lambertus Geasonburgensis writes, that tares ran over the
whole field of Christ, and that the whole body of Christ's flock pined away in a
consumption.

In the year 1160. Otho Frisingensis observes, that Rome grew in wealth and
power, but decayed in truth and justice.

In the year 1200. Ioachimus, a religious Abbat discourses, how far the
religion practiced in his time differed from the form and manner of the
primitive church, and how the church now growing old, like Solomon, fell into
idolatri^.

In the year 1290. Robert Gallus had a vision, wherein he saw a Gallus. Vidi
pontificem missam peragentem capite arido and macilento, acsi esset ligneum;
and dixit spiritus ad me, hoc ecclesiae Romanae statum significat. ubertinus.
hodierna ecclesia dicitur nova Babylon, quia est meretrix magna, quia verus
cultus and amor sponsi sui Jesus est turpiter adulteratus, and spiritus justorum
hujus temporis supra modum opprimitur, and velit nolit in mult is ejus actibus
meretrici servire compellitur. Occham; op. n^nagint, dierum. ut intentum suum
horrendum ad finem perducere possint, defendentes veritatem per sequuntur,
interimunt innoxium sanguinem fundunt; quique hoc faciunt sunt ipsi qui
videbantur regere and docere populum, ipsi ponti fices, egressa est enim
iniquitas e Babylone. Gerson. negare non possum multa inter christianos
simplices sub specie religionis introducta esse, quorum sanctior esset omissio:
Plat damnat mandata Christi qui se ejus vicarium dicit, and ^redentes in verba
dei e^urit: and beu miseram certe condition^m coecorum hominum; qui, quia
contra conscientiam in errore persistunt, se^pso^ in aternum c^itium
prosternunt!
pope saying mass with a lean, meagre, and dry head, like as if it had been
made of wood; and the spirit said unto him, this signifies the state of the
Roman church.

In the year 1304. Ubertinus a Casali charge the Roman church with gross and
foul adultery: the present church is called new Babylon, which is the great
whore, because the true worship and love of her spouse Jesus is foully corrupted
in her, and the spirit of righteous men in this time is oppressed above
measure, and is compelled, will they, nill they, in many things, to serve the
where in her unclean acts.

In the year 1320. William Occham thus declaimeth against the popes tyranny
and cruelty in wasting the church of God, and suppressing the truth; the
bishops who now seem to govern and teach the people of God, that they may
compass their wicked ends, persecute those that defend the truth, even to
death, and shed innocent blood.

In the year 1370. S. Brigetta describes the miserable state of the church in
her days, in her writings extant in Bibliotheca patrum.

In the year 1416. Gerson the famous chancellor of Paris inge^^ously
confesses, that many corruptions and abuses were brought into the church under
the color of religion, which it were far better and more pious to omit, than
retain.

In the year 1460. Platina brandeth Christ's vica^ with cruelty against the
true servants of Christ. He, which calls himself Christ's vicar, condemns
Christ's commands, and burns them that believe in his words.

And in the life of Bennet the eighth he breaks out into a bitter exclamation
of the guides of the people in his time. O the miserable condition (says he)
of these blind men; who, because they persist in error against their
conscience, cast themselves into everlasting perdition!

He that is not satisfied with this taste, may glut himself if (...) please,
with store of such bitter fruit gathered to his hand by the author and
supplementer of Catalogus testium veritatis, especially in the 14 centurie, and
Petrus de Alliac^ de planctu curiae Roman^, and de reformatione ecclesiae, and
Wicelius method concord.

PAR. VI. Touching the visibility and invisibility of the church in a different
notion.
CHALLENGE.
For to say (as some protestants do) the church was long invisible (besides
that it is contrary to many clear prophecies and predictions of the old
testament) it barreth the heathen of necessary means to salvation, whilst he
seeks not the true church with which to join h^^ds: and amongst christians
this invisibility supposed, it were very hard to hold communion with her in the
administration of the sacraments.

Answer.
What protestants affirm that the catholic visible church, to wit, the company
of those who profess the true christian faith, was a long time invisible? We
deny that the church was ever driven to such straights, or reduced to such a
paucitie or obscurity (much less invisibility) but that new proselytes might
have access unto her, and her own members communicate with her in the pledges
of salvation, though not always without danger to their persons and estates.
And therefore when you fight against an invisible church professing
christianity, you fight also against an invisible adversary, and pursue your
own fancy, as Antipho in Aristotle imagined that he drove his own image in the
air before him. Of this see more at large in the Preface.

PAR. VII. Concerning the visibility of the Roman church, and how the Papacy
has been opposed in former ages.
CHALLENGE.
We then affirm, and let ^ur adversaries disprove it if they can, that the
Roman church has been always visible.

Answer.
That a Roman church has been always in some degree visible, we yield you
gratis; but that the Roman church you mean, has been so, we peremptorily deny.
When we grant that a Roman church has been always visible, our meaning is,
that since the christian faith was at first planted by the preaching of the
prime apostles, and watered with the blood of many millions of martyrs, there
has been always in Rome and the territories thereof, and provinces belonging
to it, a church professing christian doctrine: in the beginning most purely, in
the middle more impurely; but in the end, and at this day most corruptly. And
what gain you hereby? that the Roman church you mean, that is, that church, or
rather that faction in the church, for (papatus est in ecclesia, papatus tamen
non est ecclesia) which professes the present Roman faith, and adhereth to the
Pope as supreme head of the church, has been always visible? It will no way
follow: christianity may be and was many hundred years without popery; and a
church in Rome also, but as far different from the present Roman church, as
Sicily in Cic. Ver. Act. 5. ut in uberri^. is Siciliae partibus Siciliam quare^.
Verres time was from the more ancient Sicily; and therefore as the orator
sought for Sicily in the most fruitful parts of Sicily; so we at this day are
to seek for the Roman says, and church, so much commended by the apostles in
Rome it self, and find it any where in the christian world, rather than there.
To instance in the controversy about the head, which is the head of all
controversies between us and from whence you take your denomination of pa^ists
and papalins, we deny that there was any christian church at Rome, or
elsewhere for many hundred years after Christ which acknowledged the Popes
supremacy, or built their faith upon his infallibility. 2 Cor. 12. 11. Ambros.
in 2 Cor 12. 11. Ch^ys. in Gal. (...). 8. (...), etc. (...). Oecum. in hunc
locum. Leo ser. de Pet. and Paul. Hos gratia Dei in tantum apicem inter omnia
ecclesiae membr^ provexit, ut eo in corpore cui caput est Christus quasi
geminum constituerit lumen oculorum, de qu^rum, etc.
St. Paul, we know, accounted himself nothing inferior to the chief apostles.
If your eyes be so dazzled with the brightness of the Popes triple crown, that
you cannot see Paul's equality to Peter, and consequently the equality of other
bishops to the pope, in the letter of the text; yet you cannot but see it in
the fathers commentaries. Hoc dicit (says S. Ambrose) quia non est minor,
neque in praedicatione, neque in signis faciendis, nec dignitate, sed tempore;
that is, this the apostle speaks (to wit, I am nothing inferior to the chief
apostles) because he is not less or inferior, neither ^n the gift of
preaching, nor in the gift of miracles, nor in dignity, but in time. What, not
inferior to S. Peter? no, not to S. Peter, if S. Chrysostom take him right.
As the Apostle calls the Gentiles u^circumcision, so he calls the Jews
circumcision. And he shows himself to be of equal honor with the rest; and
he compares not himself to others, but to the chief of them; showing, that
every of them held the same rank of dignity. (...) (says Oecumenius) (...):
see how he matcheth or equallizeth himself to Peter. Nay, which is more
remarkable, Pope Le^, who, when he took Peter alone, extolleth him above the
skies, and admits him (after a sort) in consortium individuae Trinitatis,
that is, into the fellowship or copartnership of the undivided Trinity; yet
meeting with Peter and Paul together, he does equal homage and reverence to
them both, and forbids us to put any difference between them, in this or any
other respect. De quorum meritis and virtutibus, quae omnem superant dicendi
facultatem, nihil diversum sentire debemus, nihil discretum, quos and electio
pares, and labor similes, and mors fecit aequales: of whose worth and virtues,
It^ sanct. Ma^i^^s. beatus Petrus et Paulus eminent inter univers^s: verum
inter ipsos, quis cui praeponatur, incertum est. Greg. l. 1. di^t. c. ult
Paulus Apostolus Petro Apostoler. primo in principat^^ Apostolico frater es^.
which surpass all ability of speech, we ought to have no diverse or different
opinion of them, whose calling to the apostleship made them equa^l, and their
travels in their office alike, and their martyrdom parallel. Here he compares
them, not only in regard of their personal gifts and labors, but of their
calling and function, electio pares. S. Paul then (in Pope Leo's judgment) may
go every where hand in handwith S. Peter, and he has the right hand of him in
the Popes seal, as is confessed by Bellarmine, who much troubles himself to
yield a sufficient reason thereof. And as S. Paul stood upon even ground (as it
were) with S. Peter, and wit^tood him to the face: so did Polycarpus contest
with Anicotus, and Polycrates with Victor (against whom he wrote a synodicall
epistle,) and S. Cyp^. ep. 188. and Praefat. conc. Carthag. Ep. ad Mart. Mayer.
ante Nic^n. conc. ^uisque sibi vixit, and ad Romana^ ecclesia^ parvu^ respectus
habeb^tur. Bellarm. lib. 2. de Romans pont. c. 17 Non est verum adeo parvum
respectu^ a^ Romana^ ecclesia^ habitum fuisse, sententia AEneae Syluii partim
est vera, partim non est vera. conc. Carthag. c. 28 and conc. Milevit. c. 22.
Sipresbyteri ^pellarent ad tra^s^arina judicia, a nullo int^a Africa^ in
communionem suscipiantur. Synod. ^^al. cap 28. Oport^re archiep. Constantinop^t
nov^ Romae ii^dem primatibus ^onoris dignu^^sse. Synod. Constan. in Trull. cap.
36. (...). Plat. in Bonif. 3. A Phoca imperatore octinuit, magna tamen
contentione, ut seeds beati Petri omnium ecclesiarum caput and dic^^etur and
haber^ ab omnibus, quem quidem locum eccles. Constantinop. sibi vendicare
conabatur.
Cyprian with Pope Stephen. And therefore AEneas Sylvius (afterward Pope) had
good reason to affirm (though Bellarmin gives him the lie for it) that before
the council of Nice, parvus respectus ad Romanam ecclesiam habebatur; that is,
that there was little account made of the Roman church or bishop. At the
council of Nice (which was neither called nor ratified by his authority, but
the Emperor Constantines) all the preeminence he had, amounted but to a primacy
of order, and his authority and jurisdiction exceeded not Rome, and suburbicas
ecclesias, as Ruffinus has it. After the council of Nice, he contented
himself with the style of, Urbis Romae episcopus, the bishop of the city of
Rome. The church of Carthage forbad (under pain of excommunication) any in
Carthage to appeal from their courts, ad transmarina judicia, intending, to the sea of Rome. In the synods held at Calcedon, and Constantinople, the patriarch
of Constantinople is equally ranked with him: the decree of the council is,
that Constantinople should enjoy like privileges to Rome, and the patriarch
thereof to be extolled, or, as the words are, magnified, etiam in
ecclesiasticis, even in ecclesiastical matters. Which words are most
shamefully corrupted in the canonlaw, and etiam in ecclesiasticis, is turned
into, non tamen in ecclesiasticis: the council says, even an ecclesiastical
matters; your canon alleges it, yet not in ecclesisticall matters. Perhaps
the compiler of your canon law thought it a meritorious work to falsify a
record for the advantage of the sea of Rome; but to let that pass, and not to
cut you out too much work at once. I affirm, and disprove it if you can, that
never any bishop of Rome obtained the title of universal bishop before Boniface
the third his time, who got it with much difficulty, by the means of Phocas
the murderer of his master: and mark it, I pray you, and glory in it if you
please, that popery (properly so called) and Mahumetanism were both bred in one
age, within a few years one of another.

PARAG. VIII. Touching the second note, universalitie.
CHALLENGE.
We affirm, that the Roman church has been always catholic, viz. universal.

Answer.
If you had rubbed up your memory, as (it seems) you have rubbed your forehead,
you would never let such a catholic falsitie, touching the catholic
universalitie of your Roman church, to have fallen from your pen. For it is
well known, and in part confessed by Alfonsus Alfon. a Castro, ^it. Indulg.
^^lla^m. lib. 3. de ecclesia militante, cap. 3. Ecclesia est coetus hominum
ejusd^^ fidei professione and ^^runde^ sacr^rum co^^union^ ^igatus sub regimine
ligitimorum past^rum, ac praecipueunius Christi in terris vicarii, Romani
pontificis. Apo^. 20 7. And when the 1000 years are expired, sa^an shall be
loosed out of his prison, and shall go out to deceive the n^tion, which are in
the ^^ur quaters of the earth.
and others, that antiquity makes little, if any mention, of sundry particular
points which at this day are held amongst you. You are not able to produce any
kingdom, no nor province, no nor village, no nor hamlet, no nor man of note for
the space of diverse hundreds of years after Christ, which agreed with you in
all points of your Tridentine faith, or subscribed to the twelve new articles
annexed thereunto. With what color or show of probability can you affirm,
that the Roman church (as you define it to be a company professing the present
Roman faith under one visible he^d, to wit, the Pope) has bin always
universal or spread over the whole world, when it is known to all, who know
any thing of the church story, (especially since the division of the christian
church into the eastern or Greek, and the western or Latin church,) that the
eastern or Greek church (in circuit as large, is not larger than the western)
never agnized, nor does to this day, either your* Popes supremacy, or your
Trent creed; and in the western church it self, though popery prevail much and
spread like a gangren very far (especially after the one thousand years, when
satan was let loose) yet was there not any main point of popery established in
the western church it self, without strong opposition and concestation. Even at
this day (Gods holy name be blessed for it) the protestar^s in England and
Scotland, France and Ireland, Germany Poland, Denmark Swethland, the
Netherlands and elsewhere, if they countervail not in number the popish party,
yet they come very near; and now what is become of your brag of universalitie?
let us now examine your succession.

PAR. IX. Touching the third note, succession:
CHALLENGE.
The Roman church has ever had a succession of true bishops and pastors,
derived from the apostles, still teaching, etc.

Answer.
The third lame leg, on which your faith rests it self, is the succession of
Roman bishops and pastors, which, if it were strong and sound, yet the
patriarchs of Constantinople, and Jerusalem, and Antiochia, and Alexandria, do
set as good a leg forth for it as your bishop of Rome. They produce as
uncontrollable a catalogue of Nicep^. lib. (...). cap. 6. ecclesia Constant. a
S. Andrea Apostol^ (...) sua^ (...). Baron. (...). 6. refert legati^nem a
Gabriele Patriar^^^ ad Clemen. 8. mis. sam, in cuj^^titul^ se 97. Patri^^cham
S. Marc. successerem indigita* Bellarm. de not. ecclesi^.
bishops and pastors, the one succeding the other in their sees, as you in the sea of Rome; and some of them from the apostles themselves. But what if this leg
of yours prove a false leg, and will double under you (to use your own
phrase?) let the day be yours (as now the night of error and ignorance is) if
by the same evidence which you bring for your succession, we prove not many
main defects and maims in it, which so deface and confound it, that it can be
no note or mark of the true church, as you make it.

First, notes and marks of any thing ought to be very remarkable and visible,
and after a sort notorious, else they are not notae, but ignotae. If then the
succession of your Romish bishops remain but quessionable, such succession
questionless cannot be a note of the church; and is it not questionable and
very uncertain, when you stick in the very beginning of your catalogue, and
your skilfullest ushers know not where to rank Clemens, in the second or the
fourth Nutat adhuc mundus, sit quartus anne secundus. Helvic. Chr^n^g. and al^^.
place? When during two and twenty schisms at least in the papacy, it was a
meeting cast, and even lay between the Popes and anti-popes, whether were the
true successors of Saint Peter? When, besides many flaws in your catalogue by
vacancies for mon^ths and years, there was a great chasma or hiatus for almost
one hundred years, during which time the Popes sat at Avinium and left Rome?
When for one hundred and sixty years together you cannot name me one firm and
allowable Pope, or such a one as he ought to be* Geneb. Chron. lib. 4. Baron.
Annal. in An. 912. Quae tum facies S. Romans ecclesiae? quam foed^ssima, cum
Romae dominarentur potentissim^* aeque ac sordidissimae merit^ices, quaru^
arbitrio m^tarentur seeds darentur episcopat. and quod horrendum and nefandum
est intruderentur in sedem Petri (...) rum amasii pseudo-pontifices, qui non
sunt nisi ad consignanda tempora in catalogo pontificu^ scripti? Virg. AEn Plat
in vit, Clem (...). Corruptis suffragiis, factiosus quisque dignitatem
pontificatus consecucus est: By bought s^ff^ages, every factious companion:
spired ^o the Pop^dom. Geneb. ch^o^. l. (...). Pontifices prodigiosilnam non
more majorum eligebantur, sed (...) Caesaribus intrudebantur. Mart. Pol^n. and
alii. Glaber. R^d^l. Monach. Clun, Anastas. in vita Pelag. Dum non essent
episcopi qui eum ordinarent, invent^ sunt duo episcopi, Ioannes de Parasio, and
Bonnus de Feren. and Andreas Pres^yter de Ostia, and ordinaverunt cum
pontificem.
your own Genebrard confesteth, that fifty of them, as I noted before, in that
time deserved to be termed rather apostaticall, and disordered and irregular,
t^a^ canonical and apostolical. Baronius gives your succession yet a more
terrible blow: what was then the face of the Roman church? how filthy, when as
most potent and base queans bare all the sway at Rome? changed sees, and gave
bishoprics at their pleasure? and, which is most abominable, and not to be
named, intruded their paramours into Peter's chair? false bishops, whose names
are written in the catalogue of Popes, only to note and design the times! Give
me the clew (I pray you) by which you wind your sel^s out of this labryinth.
Eugenius was deposed as schismatic by the council of Basit, and Amadeus was
made Pope in his stead; yet afterward this Eugenius, by the favor of princes
and a strong hand, recovered the Popedom, and from him all Popes since reckon.
Was Eugenius a schismatic and unlawful Pope, or not? If not, the general
council of Basil could not judge of schism; and whether shall we believe you,
or the general council of Basil? If he were a schismatic and an unlawful
Pope, what shall we judge of all that succeeded him? Hic labor ille domus, and
inextricabilis error.


Besides this Eugenius, how many other Popes have thrust into the chair by
usurpation and corruption? how many have cut it asunder by schism? how many
have rayed and defiled it with heresy, and abominable filthiness? When you
so confidently affirm, that the church of Rome has had always a succession of
true bishops and pastors, I pray you, tell us what you mean by true bishops and
pastors? If men capable of the Popedom, Pope Joan, and Benedict the ninth
chosen Pope at ten years old, were no such; if faithful pastors and bishops
truly discharging their pastoral function, in feeding Christ's flock by
diligent preaching, and exemplary living name me two such Popes for every
hundred of years since Christ, and Phyllida solus habeto, I^ by true bishops
and pastors you understand rightly consecrated, and canonically elected and
invested. Pope Pelagius the first was not so who obtained the papacy by an
imposture; no^ Sylvester, who aspired to it by art magic; no^ Eugenius, who
was at the first promoted by faction, and afterward held it by might, in
despite of the council of Basil; if by true bishops you mean orthodoxall
bishops, and preachers of the truth; Liberius was no such, branded with the
note of Arrianism by St. Catal. vir. illust. Synod. 6: Constant. Act. 12. and
13. Synod. (...). Nicen 2. Act. 7. Synod. 8. Constable. sub Adria 2. Act. 7.
Jerome, and Pope Damasus; Honorius was no such, for he was condemned for the
heresy of the Monotholites in three general councels confirmed by three
Popes: John the 23. was no such, who is charged in the council of Constance
with the denial of the immortality of the soul, and the life to come, and for
that and for other blasphemies and enormous crimes deposed by the council.

To come yet nearer to the quick; when you stand so much upon succession, and
make it an infallible note, what mean you by succession? local succession or
doctrinall, that is, a succeeding of bishops and pastors in the same place
only? or a succession, not only in the same place, but principally and
especially in the same orthodoxall and catholic doctrine, which is the only
true (and properly so called) succession? as Nazianzen affirms: (...) (...)
Naz. Orat. de Sancto Athanasio. Vid. Irenaeum contra haer. l. 4. c. 43, 44.
Adhaerete i is qui apostolorum doctrinam custodiunt and cum episcop^li
successione charisma veritatis acceperunt.
(...) (...) (...) (...). This excellent passage consisting of diverse
agnominations and graceful figures in the greek cannot be translated but to
the loss, and therefore omitting the english of it, in stead thereof I will
impart unto you a very pertinent note upon it, which I found in a friends book,
contrived by him into these elegant Iambicks,

(...):
(...).
(...). The Pope succeeds Peter, papists say;
So tempests calms succeed, and night the day.


If you take succession in this latter sense, you take up again a beggarly
fallacy called petitio principii; you prove idem per idem; to wit, that your
Romish says is the true faith, and the Romish church the true church, because
your Romish bishops and p^ have always succeeded one another in the profession
of one and the self-same orthodoxall faith. If you take succession in the
former sense, for bare local succession, or the sitting of diverse bishops one
after another in the same chair, you make a ^oodden argument: much like to that
wherewith the fool in Dion pers^^ded himself that he must needs be some great
commander, because he had sat in Caesar's chair: or that wherewith Vibius R^fus
was more than half induced to believe, that he had Tullies cloquence infused
into him by sitting in Tullies pew, and leaning upon Tullies desk. By this
argument you might prove profane Photius to be an holy bishop, because he
succeeded Ignatius an holy man: and Athanasius to be an Arrian heretic,
because he succeeded an Arrian bishop: and our renowned martyr Cranmer to be a
papist, because he succeeded Warham a papist: and cardinal Pool to be a
protestant, because he succeeded Cranmer a protestant. Nay, by this reason you
might prove pope Adrian, who trampled upon the Emperor Fredericks neck,
blasphemously abusing the words of the psalmist, thou shall tread upon the lion
and adder, to be a pattern of humility; Pope Hildedrand, who entered like a fox,
and ruled like a lion, and dyed like a dog, to have been a pattern of
simplicity: Pope Stephen the 6. and Sergius the 3. who pulled their
predecessor Formosus out of the grave, the one cutting off his finger, the
other his head, and casting his carcass into Tiberis, to have been patterns of
humanity: Pope Boniface the 7. who robbed S. Peter's chair of all the jewels and
precious things in it, to have been a pattern of a faithful steward: Pope John
the 12. who gave orders in a stable, gelded his Cardinals, drank an health to
the devil, and at dice called for help of Jupiter and Venus, to have been a
saint: Pope Sylvester, who gave himself wholly to the devil, to have been a
devoto: Pope Sixtus the 4. who ware cloth of gold at home in his private house,
eased nature in stools of silver, and decked his harl^t Tiretia with shoos
covered with pearl, to have been a modest and frugall man: Pope Alexander the
6. who carnally knew his own daughter, and Pope John the 13. who was slain in
the very act of adultery, to have been virgins: nay, by this argument you might
prove Pope Joan, who was said to be brought on bed in the street in a solemn
procession, to have been a man, because she succeeded men in that see. The
heralds, who have blazoned the arms of the popes, are Platina, Genebrardus,
Luitprandus, Sigonius, Sigebertus, Martinus Polonus, Baptista Fulgosus,
Iovianus Pontanus, Wesselius Groaning. Let me give you good counsel in your
ear: invent better arguments for popery than these, or charge your elect
ladies, sub sigillo confessionis, never to utter any of them before a learned
protestant, for fear of scandalizing your Romish faith. Let this suffice for
your note, succession; I will now canvas your note, unity.

PARAGRAPH. X. Touching the 4. note of the church, viz. unity.
CHALLENGE.
Teaching the same unchanged doctrine in all points of faith.

Answer.
To help out your former argument drawn from the note, succession, you add
another note (as you make it) the note of unity and consent in doctrine, at
least, in all substantial points of faith: against which I except; first, that
it is no proper mark of the Church: secondly, that this mark is not to be found
in your Romish church. Although nothing better becomes the church of God,
than to be at unity in it self; yet certain it is, that both ^nity may be
without the true church, and even in the purest times the true church was
without unity. The enemy shortly after the apostles time sowed such tares of
dissension among the good wheat in the field of the church, that the heathen in
their theaters derided the christians for the multiplicitie of sects among
them. On the contrary, as the poet said, magna inter molles concordia, so we
Iuvenal. Sat. 2. Psalm. 2. 2.
may often observe too great an unity in the enemies of the gospel, conspiring
against the Lord and against his anointed. The Sadduces might, the Nestorians
may, the Arrians did brag of their consent in matter of faith. Who art thou
(says the Arrian Emperor to Liberius then orthodox) who troublest the peace
of the whole world? Will you hence argue that the Arrians were orthodox, or the
Nestorians Catholics, or the Sadduces right believers? Did you never read in
S. Hilary, the ministers of antichrist are (...) to (...) Hilar. Cont. Auxen.
ministri antichristi de impictatis suae unitate jactare solent, agentes se non
ut christi episcopos sed ut antichristi sacerdotes.
of their unity in their impiety? if you ever read it, could you choose but
reflect upon your self? as for us, though we desire nothing more than that we
may think one thing: and that, as we all agree in the love of truth, so we
might all profess that truth in love; yet when piety and unity, truth and
concord are divided, we say with Nazianzen, a godly discord is better than an
ungodly concord; it is better to dissent for truth, than consent in error.
Here if you reply, that you argue not barely from consent, but from consent in
the truth, you fall again to your begging trade: you suppose that which is the
main point in question and bears all before Nazian. Iren. (...).
it; prove your doctrine to be the truth of God, and take all. A man would
think that there should not be heard so much as the noise of an hammer among
your workmen who stand so much for unity. If there should be differences even
in matter of says necessary to salvation among us, as there are not, our
controversies are de fimbriis, non de textu, of the lace and fringe of
ceremonies, not of the queens vesture of gold wrought about with diverse
colors: I say, if Psalm. 45. 13.
there were differences amongst us in substantial points of faith, this could
be no strong argument against us who make not unity an inseparable note of the
true church; but it utterly overthrows your church in your own judgment, who
determine peremptorily, that where there is not unity, there is no true church;
but I assume, there is not unity in doctrine of faith amongst you, therefore out
of your own mouth I conclude you have no true church, Although, like Samsons
soxes, you are all tied by the tail, that is, the conclusions de fide set down
by your false prophet teaching lies (whom the prophet Esaias warranteth us to
call the tail;) yet your heads are as far asunder as may be, and you draw
almost in every controversy of faith contrary ways; casuist against ca^^ist,
and canonist against canonist, and canonist against casuist, Dominicans against
Franciscans, and Sorbonists against Dominicam, and Jesuits against all. Neither
are these quarrels, (...); but as Hercules his controversies was with Antens,
(...), about Scripture the rule of faith, and Popes and councels the judges of
faith, and regenerating grace the cause of faith, and justification the effect
of faith, and the sacraments the symbols of faith. Your controversies are sharp
and poinant, and your differences irreconcilable; you are at odds.

1. Concerning scripture. Some of you hold, that the Jews have corrupted the
original of the old Testament, as Iacobus episcop. Christop. and Canus; and
others deny it, as Driedo and Dried. l. 2 (...) eccl. d^g^. Bellar l. 2. d^
ver. Des. c. 2.
Bellarmine. Some of you hold, that the original text of Greek and Hebrew are
authentical, and that by them all translations are to be examined. Others,
according to the strict letter of the Trent-canon, hold the vulgar latin
absolutely authentical, insomuch that no man, quovis praeiextu, upon any
pretense whatsoever, Caittan. Hugo: Abulens and alii.
may reject it. Some among you hold the books known by the name Apocrypha not
to be of equal authority with the canonical scriptures, nor to be produced
to ground any article of faith upon them. Others, carried away with the
Trent-stream, admit Vasquez. de Ador O^dcor^ in exam.
those apocryphal writings into the canon of scripture given by divine
inspiration.

2. Concerning the Decalogue. Some of you teach, that we are commanded to
worship God, even in the devil himself; others Vasquez. Cathar.
disclaim this strange doctrine. Some of you teach, that the commandment, non
facies sculptile, is not moral, nor binds christians, but part of the
ceremonial law and positive appertaining to Jews only; others defend the
contrary with us. Some See Bellar l. 2. de Imag. cap. 7.
of you teach, that images are not to be worshipped in themselves, or properly,
but only, ratione prototyps, in regard of the thing which they represent:
others defend, that the image is to be worshipped, in, and for it self, and not
only in regard of the thing which it represents. Bellar. l 2. de Imag cap. 21.
Nay, some blush not to maintain, that the image is to be worshipped, eodem
cultus genere, quo prototypon; that is, that Aquin, 3. part Quest. 25. Ca^etan.
Ponavent: Almayn: Marsilius, Carthus. and alii 3. sen^distin 9.
the image of Christ is to be worshipped with the same worship wherewith we
worship Christ, to wit, cultu latria: that the image of the blessed Virgin is
to be worshipped with the same worship wherewith we ought to worship the Virgin
her self, to wit, cultu hyperdouliae: that the images of saints are to be
worshipped with the same worship wherewith the saints themselves are to be
worshipped, to wit, cultu doulia. Some hold all equivocation before a
magistrate to be unlawful, and forbidden in the Sea the w^^tings of english
Se^. priests against Jesuits. Parsons Trea^. of aquiv. Garnet.
commandment, non dices falsum, as being no better (in plain english) than a
lie. Others allow equivocation in diverse cases.

3. Concerning the blessed virgin. Some earrestly maintain, that she was
conceived in sin, as all the children of Adam are, Christ only excepted:
others, with as much vehe^^^cie both maintain the doctrine, and celebrate the
^ea^^ of her i^^^culane ^onception; and though Sixtus the 4. took part with the
France A^varez lib de Auxil. great. and al^^ Dominic. Bellar. and alii Jesuit.
yet cardinal de Turre-Cremata writes for the D^. Mulciber in Trojam, pr^
^r^ja staba^ Ap^ll^.


4. Touching the grace of regeneration, and the ^p^ration thereof in our
conversion. Some teach, that it works physice, and determines the will;
others teach, that it works only ^liter, standing (as it were) at the
devotion of the will, to admit of it, or refuse it; to be converted by it, or
not.

5. Touching justification. Some teach, that we are not justified by our
inherent righteousness, as Pighius, and o^he^s cited out of Vega; others
follow the common tenet, affirming that the righteousness, by which we are
justified before God is not Christ's imputed, but out inherent righteousness.
Catharinus lib do matrimonio. Bellar. and papistae communiter Vasquez.
Dominicus Soto Gerson. Tract. de vit. Spiralmayn. Tr. 3. Roffen in Ref. 32,
Artic. Luth citat. ex Bellar. lib. 1. de amiss. great. and stat. pec. Lombardus.
Suarez. Fisher. Corne^. a ^ap. in Esa 7. per verba consecrationis vere and
realiter generatur Christus. ^^llar, recognit. op. Gratian, de consecrat, did,


6. Touching certainty of salvation. The learned know; C^rinus has written in
this point agreeable to the doctrine of the reformed churches; as also how
Dominious S^^^ impug^eth his opinion.

7. Touching marriage. Some hold it lawful for the innocent party to marry
after divorce for adultery: others hold it utterly unl^wfull.

8. Touching merit of works. Some hold, that the work^ of a man in the state of
grace merit ex condigno, ratione operis eternal life; others ex congruo only:
and some utterly exclude all merit as they are cited out of Vega.

9. Touching sins. Some teach, that all sins in their own nature are mortal;
others are for the schools distinction of v^^iall and mortal sins.

10. Touching the sacrament of the Lords supper. Some teach, that the body of
Christ is made of the bread, and allow of a kind of production in
transubstantiation; others defend transubstantiation by way of adduction not
production. Secondly, so^e reach that the body of Christ is in very deed and
sensually handled and broken in the priests hands and ground and chewed with
the teeth of the faithful, as the form of subscription enjo^ned to Berengarius
by pope Nicholas, extant in the canon law, implies; others like not of this
gross manner of eatin^* and for Nicholas his words, they put a colorable
gloss upon them. Some hold, that mice may eat the body of Christ, others doubt
of it, and others deny Bellar. de Sacramen. Euchar. Cautel. Miss, si mus
comederit, etc. Lombard. quid ergomus comedit? Deus novit. Innocentius 10
Catharinus. Alsons^a Castro Adrian. in senten. Bellar de Romans Pontif. Bellar de
Romans Pont. and Apol. cont. Barcl. Heart. Barcl. de potest. pap. in temporal.
Widdringtonu's Serbonist^ communiter. Iesuitae communiter.
it. Some hold the consecration to be made by these words, Hoc est corpus meum;
others are of another mind.

11. Touching the pope. Some teach, that he may err, as pope, and in cathedra;
others will by no means grant, that the pope sitting in his chair, may be ever
beside the cushion. Some teach that the pope has power to depose kings, and
dispose of their kingdoms; others can find no ground at all in scripture, or
reason, for this temporal power of the pope.

12. Touching co^^cel^. Some hold, that the council is above the pope; others,
that the pope is above the general council, and both sides bring into the
field, pares aquilas, and pila minantia pilis; pope against pope, and council
against council; nay council and pope against council and pope; and here you
are at your wits end.

These, and such like controversies, nay speculations of far less moment are
matters of faith when we differ from you, or among our selves, about them.
Forsooth, your determination makes matter of faith be the question never so
flight or curious; your suspense makes it a neutrall point, be the matter never
so expedient for resolution. Nor in points resolved by the church can the
general submission of the popes subjects be accounted union, when as it is
constrained by the strong hand of authority suppressing all contradiction
rather than proceeding from any voluntary Council. Constant. Council. Lateran.
(...). (...) sub Mart^ quinto sess. 5. Gene^ale (...) a Christ^ (...), cui
quilibet cu^ status vel* dignitatis, etiam si pa^alis existat, obedire t^^^tur,
Contra council. Lateran. sub (...). ^ess. 11. sol^m Romanum (...) omnia ^lia
auctoritatem baben^, (...), (...) and potestatem (...), (...). Vide I^^* (...)
and free consent of judgments, as appears by your clipping the tongues of
Stella, Ferus. an^ very many other of your own authors, when they speak any
thing of your errors or corruptions.

PAR. XI. That the notes abovenamed are not found in the Roman church.
CHALLENGE.
All which going together, and being only found in her, and not in another
church, do evidently prove that she alone is truly Apostolical, and
consequently out of her there neither is, nor can be salvation.

Answer.
When Phasis (in Martial) being but a peasant, put himself into, a rich suit of
apparel, and, having the garb of a gentleman, thrust himself amongst the
gentlemen into the theater, and there fell a commending the new edict of the
Emperor touching the placing of all sorts of citizens according to their
ranks, saying, tandem commodius licet sedere, nunc est reddita dignitas
equestris, etc, Now we may sit without trouble: now the gentry have recovered
their right. Before he had ended his speech, in comes Lectius, the Emperors
officer to execute the edict; and by virtue of that edict, which Phasis was so
highly extolling, turns him out of his seat, as not due to him by any title or
color, save of his purple coat. Istas purpureas, and arroga^tes, M^ Epi^^am.

Jussit surgere Lectius la^ernas.


Whether Phasis his case and yours are not alike, let those judge who dare look
upon truth without such false spectacles as you p^ upon the noses of those whom
you nuzell in superstition. You set forth visibility and universality, and
unity and succession in golden and glorious colors, as the proper marks of
Christ's true church; by which marks and notes you are discovered to be none of
the t^^e church, sorex suo indicio. For (as has in part already, and shall
hereafter be showed more at large, if either your cause or heart will bear a
second encounter) popery was not visible till many hundred years after Christ,
when the man of sin began to be revealed: universal popery was never at unity
with it self, it is not at this day; and for the succeeding of Roman bishops,
it has been such, both in regard of the violent, fraudulent, symoniacall and
schismatic manner thereof, as also in regard of the persons succeeding in
that see, who have been branded with the foul marks of i^cest, and the sin not
to be named, and the black and hellish marks of schism, heresy, atheism, and
necromancy; that, if there could be a succession in hell, it could not be
imagined to be worse.

PARAG. XII. Amplitude and eminent visibilitie no mark of the true Church.
CHALLENGE.
To disprove us herein, we require that a protestant church with these marks
may be showed to have been always ext^^t.

Answer.
To disprove you herein it is not requisite that a protestant church with these
marks be showed; it is sufficient to show that these are not proper and
inseparable marks of the true church.

To ^anverse your whole discourse, we need no more than to ex^^^ge and rub out
the false marks you have drawn of the church, which may be done with a wet
finger. Of your ^^itie and succession, we suppose, you desire to hear no more:
as for eminent visibilitie and u^iversalitie, it seems strange, that
amplitude should be the mark of Christ's little flock; eminent visibilitie and
^ustre the character of the woman which fled into the wilderness, and there
hid her self a long time. If the outward conspicuousnesse of the church may not
be sometime obscured and eclipsed, S. Ambrose was out; who Ambros. l. (...):
H^xa^. c. 8. Eccl^^^a (...) and (...) freq^s.
compared her (in this respect) to the moon. You your self confess, that
before the days of Constanti^e the church was generally eclipsed, and I may as
certainly add that, not long after the days of Constantine, during the raig^
and fury of Arri^^ Emperors, and* bishops bearing the greatest sway, and
occupying the chi^f sents in the church, she was again eclipsed, or rather
turned into blood; and yet neither the heathen, nor the Arr^^^ persecution, by
the judgment of the best learned, may be compared to that (...), that last and
greatest tribulation by antichrist; at which time, as those of your own side
confess, the public sacrifice shall cease. And as S. Austine says
expressly, ^cclesia non apparebit, impi^s ultra August. ep. 80. Quando
solobscurabitur, etc. ecclesia non apparebit, etc. See the preface to the
answer supra.
modum saevientibus; the church shall not app^^r, wicked m^n raging and cruelly
persecuting her above measure. You see what becomes of your note of eminent
visibilitie, and splendor: now for amplitude and multitude of professors, if
it were safe following it, if that were the touchstone of truth, if religion
must go by voices of the many, the Greek church would carry it at this day from
you; the Mahumetans from it, and the idolatrous gentiles from all. For, as a
learned and judicious man has exactly calculated it, the christians at this
day possess near about a sixth part of the Prierwoods Inquiry, cap. 14.
known inhabited world; the Mahumetans a fifth part, and the idolatrous
gentiles, two thirds or little less; so that if we divide the known regions of
the world into thirty equal parts; the christians part is as five, the
Mahumetans as fix, and the idolatrous as nineteen. O lamentable estate of the
world! Quis talia f^^d^ temperet a lachrymis? how much larger is the heard of
satan, than the flock of Christ? if you restrain your note of universalitie to
such as profess the worship of God in Christ, and thereby exclude the Payni^^s
and Mahum^tans, yet so it will not stead you; for it is most certain, that the
party of christians which oppose the papacy is incomparably the greatest in
number. If to the protestants in the western church, you add the eastern
churches professing christian faith in a great part of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, they will bear down the scale to the ground. To speak nothing of the
Ab^ssin^^ and AEthiopians largely dispread in the kingdoms of Pr^ster John; to
omit the patriarch of Muscovia, the archbishops of Mold^via, and Walachia.
Under the Turk there are fo^^ p^triarchs at this day, to wit, the patriarch of
Constantinople, of Al^x^ndria, Antiochia, and Jerusalem: and that these
patriarchs are not like some of your bishops, whom P^normitan fitly calls
nullatenenses, appe^rs by the catalogue of archbishops subject to the p^triarch
of Con^, s^t Curop^l. d^ Offic. ^^las. (...) and Offic. mag. eccles.
down by Curopalata, which are these: 1. The archbishop of Cas^rea in
C^pp^d^cia. 2. Ephesus. 3. Heracle^. 4. A^ 5. (...) 6. Sardis. 7. Necomedia. 8.
Nicea. 9. Calcedon. 10. Mitylene. 11. Thessalonica. 12. Laodicea. 13. Synadae.
14. Ieonium. 15. Corynth. 16. Athens. 17. Patrae. 18. Trupezuntium. 19.
Larissae. 20. Naupactus. 21. Adrianopolis. These archbishops have many bishops
under them; the archbishop of Ephesus. 2. of Moldavia. 3. of Walachia. 3. of
Heraclea. 7. of Thessalonica. 9. of Corynth. 10. of Athens. 11. of Larissae.
13. of Muscovia. 17. not to overcharge your memory with more under the
patriarchs. All those christians, besides many more of the Greek church
professing Christ, differ from your Roman church in many substantial points of
faith. They ^cknowledge no supremacy of the Pope; have no faith in his
infallibility, nor trust in his pardons; they disclaim merits, and works of
supererogation; purgatory, and transubstantiation are no articles of their
faith; they allow marriage of priests; they cannot away with the mutilation of
the sacrament by depriving the laytie of the cup; they teach the perfection and
sufficiency of the scripture; they have the scripture and the church lyturgie
in their several languages understood by their people. The Musc^vits in the
Musc^vitish; the Ar^bians in the Arabic, the Georgians in the Iberick; the
Carmonians in the Carmanick; the Col^hians, Slavonians, Grecians, in their
known Greek or other peculiar languages; therefore it is not safe for you to
put the truth of religion upon this point. Were the rule of multitude of
visible professors of religion, cert^in and infallible, Mi^hea were to be
condemned, and the 400. 1 King. 22. 6. Ierem. 18. 18. M^^th. 27. 1^ Theod lib.
2. (...); Andrad. des. council. Trid. l 2. p. 185. A^ri^ virusta^topere serpsit.
ut Hicron. citante tres tantum aut 4. episcopos integra^ fidem servasse sama
fuer^t Hieron. cont. Lucifer.
prophets of Aha^ to be justified; Jeremy to be abandoned and all the prophets
that were in Judah and Jerusalem, whom ^ose against him, to be followed. Nay
Christ, the truth it self, to be traduced and reproved, and the co^^cell of the
chief priests and elders held against him to be maintained and approved. Had
you lived in Athanasius his days, we know where to have had you, questionless
not of his side, who had all the world in a manner against him, as the speech
of the Arrian Emperou^ to Liberius imports. Wh^^ a petty part art thou of the
world? Who art thou, that ^ette^^ thy self against the world? In S. John^ time,
the whole world was set on wickedness: and in Athanasius his time, upon
heresy; ^o^us m^^dus (says S. Hierom) gemuit se fact^ Arr^anum; the whole
worl^ gr^aned, because it became Arria^. What becomes now of your note of
universa^itie? To this point I earnestly desire particular satisfaction, which
I have not ye^ received from any Rom^ catholic; or universalist, (as they
would be called.)

PAR. XIII. Where the true church was when the Roman fell.
CHALLENGE.
Or if they cannot do this (as we well know they cannot) let them labor to
assign us another catholic church distinct from the Roman, when she (as they
falsely suppose) fell from her first truth.

Answer.
We cannot prove our true church by the false marks you have set down: neither
can you prove your false church by the true marks set down by us. Eminent
visibilitie, and illustrious ample unversalitie, and antichristian combination
under one head, the Pope, are no marks (as has bin showed) of the true church.
And what then if we cannot prove our doctrine by them? Then you say, let them
labor to assign us another catholic church distinct from the Roman, when she
(as they falsely suppose) fell from her first truth. I have already showed a
church more ample than yours, and not only distinct from your Roman, but
opposite to it as much as we in the most sundamentall point, to wit the papacy;
yea so opposite, that the first sunday in Lent, when they solemnly curse all
heretics, as Arrius, Macedonius, Eutyches, Nestorius, Apollinaris, etc. they
pronounce in like manner an Anathema to the Pope. But what an argument is this?
If you cannot prove your church by the forenamed false marks, then assign us
some other church distinct from the Roman, in which these marks are
conspicuous? To pass by this your lame inference, and make the best of such
poor stuff as you bring; out of your own words a man may pick out such an
argument; either the Roman church continued still the church, or when she sell
away, some other church must be assigned, which persevered in the truth, else
there should be no Church in the world. If this be that you would say, the
answer to this your objection is very easy on our parts; for we charge not the
Latin church with defection from the true faith universally, but the chief
governo^rs and leaders thereof, or (to speak more fully) that prevalent and
predominant faction in the church of Rome, that has born sway for some
hundreds of years, which we say is plunged into many dangerous and pestilent
errors and superstitions: yet not into all errors at one leap, but they sunk
into them by degrees; when then this faction in the Roman church, which we call
the papacy, or the kingdom of antichrist, or the Mystery of iniquity, threw
it self into an open gulf of error or heresy, we say, that that part of the
Roman church, and elsewhere, which both secretly and openly impugned such error
and heresy, and in as much as in them lay stopped such corruptions at the
entrance, were the true church: as for example; when the forenamed faction by
Boniface the third, and Phocas his means, brought first into the church the
Luciferian title, Plat. in Bonifac. 3.
and antichristian power of oecumenicall or universal bishop, and head of the
whole church, they in the Greek and Latin church which opposed it, were the
true church. When the same faction, by Irene and Pope Adrians means, decreed
the worshipping of images in the second council of Nice, those who made head
against them, and opposed this idolatrous decree in the council of
Frankenford, and synod of Paris, together with Jonas bishop of Orleans, and
Charles the great, and many in England who wrote against that blasphemous and
idolatrizing synod, were then the true church. When by the strength of the same
faction, transubstantiation first stole in secretly, and after was openly
established by a decree in the council of Laterane, Scotus Erigena, and
Bertram, Elfricus, Guliel. Neubridg. lib. 2. Histor. Angl.
and Berengarius, and their scholars in the Latin church, which were in number
like the sand of the sea, were the true church. When Hildebrand began to
restrain the clergy by a law from marrying, Nicetas the Abbat, and the bishops
of Italy, France, and Germany, who withstood him, they (holding no fundamental
errors in any point of faith, for ought can be showed) were the true church.
Lastly, when the same faction prevailed so far in the council of Constance, as
to decree the mutilation of the holy sacrament, and depriving the laity of the
cup, contrary to Christ's institution, and the practice of the primitive church,
John Husse, and Ierom of Prague, and the lords of Bohemia, and the known
remainder of the Waldenses, besides many millions of christians both in the
Greek and Latin church, who oppugned and resisted openly or secretly that
sacrilegious sanction, many of them to the effusion of their blood, were the
true church; whose followers i^ ^^h^mia and in France, and elsewhere, continued
even till Lut hers time, who was expected before he came, and came not alone
into the Lords battle, as your Alfonsus a Castro testifies in these words:
No^ pr^diit Alfon. a Castro, epist. Nuncupat, ad Philip. 2. Hisp. Reg. edit.
Paris, 1564.
solus Lutherus, tanta est hujus seculi infoelicit^s, sed mult^ hareticorum
agmine, seu quodam satellitio stipat^^ processit, qui ill^ expectasse videntur,
ut sub illius vexille postea milit^t: illi (...) nomina dederunt Philipp.
Melancthonus, Faber Capito, Lambertus, Conradus Pelicanus, Andreas Osiander,
Martin Bucerus, allique progessis temporis catervatim, se illius fa^iliae
inseruerunt; neither came Luther out alone (such is the unhappiness of this
age) but guarded with a great troop of heretics, who seemed to look for him,
that afterward they might fight under his banner: for presently Philip
Melanc^hon, Faber Capito, Lambert, Conrade Pelica^, Andr. Osiander, Martin
Bucet, gave their names unto him, and others in process of time in great
numbers inserted themselves into his family.

PARAGRAPH. XIV. Of protestants in the age immediately before LUTHER.
CHALLENGE.
Or at least they must show us who were the true professors of protestancy in
the immediate age before Luther beg^^, in what city, town, or country they
dwelt, and what writers speak of them which lived before our times.

Answer.
First I answer, that we need not give any particular or punctual answer to
this your demand: a question grounded upon a wrong supposall is sufficiently
answered by overthrowing the ground; now the ground of this question is this
supposall, that if there were any protestants before Luther, there must needs
be some authentical and particular record of them producible by ^s at this
day. Protestants there might be then, yet not now extant, at least for (...) to
come by. I pray, how many millions, not only of right beleev^, but heretics
also have been since Christ's time, who were never upon a particular record?
Were there not a kind of heretics called Acephali, because their head and
first author could never be Photius biblioth. in S. Eph^. Theop^litano.
known? Again, how many records and writings, especially of this nature, have
perished, either by commands of authority, or by casualty? restore us the works
of Wickliff which you burnt, and many other authors whom you have either
extinguished, or of late by your Index Expurgatorius clipped their tongues, or
you keep close prisoners in the Vatican, and this question of yours will soon
be answered. In the mean while, as Petrus Molineus says wittily, you deal with
us herein as if a thief, who has stolen away a man's purse, and made away the
money, should demand of the true man, what is become of your money? If you had
any such sums of money, in what bag, in what purse? where are those bags and
purses, etc? If such a question as you make here had been put tothe prophet
Elijah, to wit, who were those 7000. the oracle of God speaks of, 1 Reg. 19.
18. R^m. 11. 4.
who never bowed the knee to Baal? In what city, town, or country dwelt they?
the prophet could not have satisfied at that time this demand, for he thought
himself to be there left alone: the children of Israel (says he) have forsaken
thy covenant, thrown 1 Reg. 19. 10. 14.
down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword: and I, even I only
am left, and they seek my life to take it away. If I should put the like
question to you, who were thosein the age immediately before Christ came in the
flesh, who sincerely expounded the law, and gain-sayed the Scribes and
Pharisees, their corrupt glosses refuced by our Savior, Matthew. 5. 21. in what
city or town dwelt Matthew. 5. 21. Matthew, 23. 16.
they? What writers speak of them which lived before Christ's time? I know you
would be to seek for answer. When the woman Apoc. 12, 6.
in the Apocalypse fled into the wilderness, where she was fled one thousand,
two hundred and threescore days; and the saints, Heb. 11. wandered in
wildernesses, and lay in dens and caves of the earth, can you tell me into what
wilderness she fled, or they wandered? In what caves and dens they lay? Yet
have many worthy champions of our faith met with you even in this field, and
come off with credit, as Abbot against Hill. Usher do succes. ecclesi^. Fox
acts and monuments. Field of the church. Humphrey his answer to Campi^n his
third reason. The author of Catalog^^ test. veritatis. Doctor White in his way.
Johan. Munster in Vortleg. nobilis discursus. Ioachimi Camerarii, histor.
narratio de fratrum orthodoxorum ecclesia in Bohemia, Moravia, and Polonia.
Ioh. Lidii Waldensis, The publisher of the history of the Waldenses in France,
for 400 years and more. Nichol. Vignier eccles. histor. Birkeck the protestants
evidence. Peruse AEneas Sylv. his story of the Bohemians, Fascic. rerum
expetendaru^ and fugiendarum, and you ^hal find more for the continuance of our
Church till Luthers time, then ever you will be able to r^^ell. Verily,
Rainerius the inquisitor, though entcrtained against us, yet speaks so much
for us that he deserves Rainer. contra Wald. cap. 4. Inter omnes sectas quae
ad^uc sunt and fuerunt, non est pernitios^r eccles. Leonistaru^ idque tribus de
ca^sis, 1. quia est diuturnior: aliqui enim dic^n^ quod duravit a tempore
Sylvestri; alij (...) tempore apost. 2. quia est generalior, fere enim nulla
tetra est in qua haec secta non sit. 3. qui cum omnes a^i^secta immanitate
blasphemiarum in Deum audientibus horrorem inducant Haec scilicet Leonistarum
magnam habet speciem pietatis, co quod coram omnibus just vivant, and been
omnia de Deo creda^t, and omnes articulos qui in Symbolo continentur: solummod^
Roman. Eceles. blasphe^ant, and elerum.
a fee of us: the sect (says he) of the Waldenses or Lionists is more
pernicious to the church of Rome then all other sects. First, because it has
been of longest continuance, for some say it has endured ever since the
apostles time. Secondly, because it is more general than any other, for there
is almost no country into which is does not creep. Thirdly, for that all other
sects do bring an horror with the heinousness of their blasphemies against
God, but this has a great appearance of godliness, because they live justly
before men, and believe all things well concerning God, and all the articles
which are contained in the creed, only they speak evil of the Roman church and
clergy.

^o this popish inqui^^tor I will add another Romish nomenclator, namely
Conradus Wimpina ex fagis, who summeth up all his Sectarum, er^^rum, etc.
A^acephal^e^^s edit^ Fran^^s. 1528.
wits and readings to make a recapitulation of all heretics and sectaries (as
he terms them,) indeed such as have opposed the corrupt doctrine and practices
of the Roman church, and of these he gives us this pedigree; the Lionists begat
the Waldenses, the Waldenses the Dulcinists, the Dulcinists the Wickliffists,
the Wickliffist^ the Hussites, the Hussites the Lutherans. You say these were
all bnethren in iniquity, and joined hands against the church of Ro^e; but yet
they agreed not among themselves, not held the same doctrine which the
protestants do at this day.

These are your shifts, but Wimpina will beat you out of these dodges: for
first, for the doctrine of the Lionists and Waldenses, ^e delivers it as
follows:

That the church of Rome is spiritual Babylon, and a harlot; that in the altar
after consecration there is not the body of Christ, but only consecrated bread,
which by a figure is said to be Christ's body, as it Anacephalaeosis l. 3.
haeres. Romana ecclesia Babylon est and meretrix; in altari post consecrationem
non est corpus Christi, sed d^^ taxat panis benedictus, qui in figura corpus
Christi dicitur, sicut de Petra dicitur quod erat C^ristus; sansti nihil sciunt
quae in humanis aguntur; solus Deus invocandus est; non est purg^torium, nec
ullum est veni^le peccatum; consecratio se^ benedictio aquae, salis, cinerum,
etc. nihil utilitatis habet: indulgentiae, peregrinationes, jubilei, nullius
sunt valoris: imagines sanctorum nequ^quam sunt in templis habendae, nec ull^
modo venera^dae; exorcis^i sunt vani and inutiles, etc. Cont. Waldens. c 5.
canonem missae non recipient; dicunt quod ^blatio quae ^it in missa a
sacerdotibus nihil sit, neque proficit; horas canonicas reprobant; dicunt quod
ecclesia erraverit matrimonium clericis prohibend^: sacramentum confirmationis
and unctionis reprobant: dicunt quod latina oration nihil laicis prosit,
legendas sanctorum non credunt; sanctam crucem reputant ut simplex lignum;
dicunt quod suffragia non prosunt animabus, and quod doctrina Christi and
apostolorum sine statutis ecclesiae sufficit ad salutem.
is said of the rock, that it was Christ; that the saints understand nothing of
humane affairs upon earth, that God alone is to be called upon; there is no
purgatory, no venial sins; the benediction of salt, ashes, holy water, etc.
has no profit in it; indulgences, pardons, and jubilees are of ^o worth; the
images of saints are not to be kept in churches, nor to be worshipped;
exorcisms are vain and unprofitable.

Whereunto Rainerius adds, the Waldenses do not receive the canon of the
mass; they say that the offering which is made in the mass by the priest is
nothing, nor does any way profit; they dislike canonical hours; they say, that
the church did err in forbidding priests marriages; they disallow the
sacraments of confirmation and extreme unction, they condemn latin prayers, and
say they do the people no good; they believe not the legends of saints; they
esteem the holy cross no other then simple and bare wood; they affirm, that
prayers for the dead, do not at all profit the souls of the departed; and
lastly, that the doctrine of Christ and the apostles without the ordinances of
the church is sufficient to salvation.

If any desire to read more concerning the doctrine of the Lionists, Albigenses,
and Waldenses, and their agreement with the present reformed churches, in every
point of moment, I refer him to the confession of the Waldenses exhibited to
Uladislaus King of Hungary, in the year of our lord, 1508. extant in Orthwin^s
Gr^tius, and to the writings of Lucas Tudensis, Plichdor^ius, and others
against the Waldenses set forth by James Gretzer at Ingolstad, An. 1613. Now
that Dulcinists and Wickliffists received their doctrine from these Waldenses or
Lionists, the same Wimpina clearly testifies; Wickliffe, faith he, sucked
heresies which he endeavored Wimp. ana^^ph. l. 3. in prol. Wickliff, quas
anglis infer nixus fuit baeres^s ex Waldensibus Iohanneque Lugdunensi
d^suxit. Dulcinus prioribus Waldensium erroribus infectus totam ferme Europam
instuporem vert^^; and quamvis discerptus, and ossa ejus concremata sint and in
ventum dispersa nec propterea haec pestis omnino deleri potuit, quin adhuc in
Triden^inis montibus ubi idem Dulcinus initia haerescos jecit, aliquae ejus
extant reliquiae. Wimp. l. 4. in prologo. Perspectum ex h^^ tandem
a^^cep^al^^si habes, si rite memoria recorderis, ex Anglia in Bohemiam, ex
Bohemia in Saxoniam, hoc est, ut vetustiora mittamus, ex O^ionia Pragam; ex
Praga Wittenberga^ ^^reses ^^^cessisse: ad^o ut illas sibi ipsis velut
successionariis vicibus per manus, Wickliff, H^^ and Lut^^r tradidisse
credantur, ut sit nihil dictum nunca Lutheranis, quod dictum ^^n ^^^ra^ (...)
Wickliffistis Hussitisque.
to bring into England from the Waldenses, and John of Lion, ringleaders among
heretics. And in the same book, p. 21. he says, That Dulcinus in the year of
our Lord, 1306. was tainted with the errors of the Walders^s; and that he put
all Europe into a kind of amazement; and that in the mountains of Trent there
is a remainder of the Dulci^^sts even to this day. And in the prologue of his
fourth book, he casts up the total sum in this manner, out of this
recapitulation of he^esies, ^f thou keep it well in thy mind, thou may see
how heresies came out of England into Bohemia, out of Bohemia into Saxony, that
is, ^o let pass those things which are more ancient, how they made a progress
from Oxford to Prague, from Prague to Wittenberg; so that Wickliffe, H^ss, and
Luther delivered them successively from hand to hand; whence it appears, that
there is nothing uttered by the Luthera is at this day, which was not before
spoken of and taught by the Wick^^ffists and Hussites. This confession of
Conradus Wimpina a very learned Romanist, and a witness beyond exception
against them, is worth gold, and may be fitly compared to the Bufonites, a
pretions stone well known, yet taken out of the head of a toad; for no better
is this Wimpina, full himself of the poison of popery, and swelling with malice
against the Lutheran and all other reformed churches.

PARAG. XV. Divine faith not to be built upon humane stories or records.
CHALLENGE.
If they cannot satisfy us in all these demands (in which alone we offer to
join issue with them) then do we think the day to be ours. If they can name any
who did both believe and profess the protestant doctrine in all points, let
them do it; and then, if we do not disprove them, the day is theirs. And
seeing all is brought to this issue, we wish your learned to encounter us in
this only point, and whatsoever they shall return for answer not belonging
hereunto, we shall account impertinent and unworthy reply, as not direct to our
purpose: which is, to find out a true catholic and visible church.

Answer.
To answer you in the doctrinall point, though we could not satisfy you in
these your historical demands, neither should your faith gain any thing by it,
nor ours lose; for the main and leading question between us, is, which church,
yours or ours, holds the true undoubted christian faith without which no man
can be saved; and in a second place what are the proper notes of the true
church, of which St. Cyprian speaks truly, Deum non potest habere patrem, qui
ecclesia^ non habet matrem, he cannot have God for his father, who has not the
church for his mother; these are quaestiones de fide, in a different degree:
now quaestiones de fide cannot be determined by humane stories, as Ballarmin
rightly deduceth; for humane Bellar. lib 2. de sacra^. cap. 21.
stories or records faciunt tantum fidem humanam, cui falsum subesse potest,
that is, make or beget an humane faith, or rather credulity subject to error,
not a divine and infallible belief, that must be built upon surer ground.
Although you could prove your present Romish belief to be as ancient as the
Sadduces heresy, and as universally spread as the Arrian, or of as interrupted
continuance as the Nestorian, this would not win you the day; did all the
ecclesiastical stories which are extant give in evidence not only for the
visibility, but also for the sincerity of your present Romish church; yet such
a proof being meet humane, would not amount to a divine infallible argument to
build divine faith upon: on the contrary, if we can prove evidently by the
written word of God, that our faith, and not yours, is that precious faith once
given to the saints, and that the doctrine of our church at this day perfectly
accords with the harmony of the apostles and evangelists, and consorteth in
all points with the undoubted orthodoxal church in their times, we need not
allege any stories or records for the continuance of our church; for we have
Gods promise in the old, and Christ's in the new, that the church professing
entirely that faith grounded on Gods word, shall continue to the end. And the
redeemer shall come to Sion: as for me this is my covenant with them, says the
Lord, I^^. 59. 20, 21.
my words, which I have put in thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth,
nor out of the mouth of thy seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed for
ever. And this is the word of faith which we preach. And behold I am with you
unto the end of the world. Wherefore Romans 10. 8.
since all in the end must be brought to this issue, whether our Deuteronomy. 13, 14.
church or yours has kept safe the most precious depositum of the apostolic
faith; we wish your learned to encounter us principally in this point, not but
that we will be ready to answer you in all other points whatsoever, but because
it is to small purpose to contend merely about the outworks, and leave the
main forts and castle untouched. As for your challenging words (If, etc.) I
return them upon your self, because you speak of all points, I say, if you can
name any that professed the present Romish doctrine in all points within 1000.
years after Christ, let them do it; then, if we do not disprove them, the day
is theirs: and for the most points of greatest moment, show me any for 600.
years, and let the day be yours, Hic rodus hic saltus; as for us we are in no
danger of your (if, etc.) for we say it is needless to name any such who in
all points taught our doctrine; it is sufficient to produce some eminent persons
in all ages who endeavored to stop the inundation of your Romish errors and
superstitions, as it continually brake into the church, especially if they held
no substantial doctrine of faith contrary to that which we now believe and
teach; besides these eminent persons and standard-bearers of the Gospel, we
doubt not but there were many thousands others, both in your Romish church, and
elsewhere, who never bowed the knee to B^^l, nor received any ^^rk of the
beast. At this last answer of some of our men you ^ibble, saying.

PAR. XVI. Of making open profession of faith in time of persecution.
CHALLENGE.
Rediculous it is to answer hereunto, as some do, that there were true
believing protestants when Luther began, but durst not for fear of fire
profess their faith; this we say is to condemn them to have had no faith at
all, but to be a dissembling company of such as were neither hot nor cold,
Christ saying of such, He that denies me before men, I will deny him before my
father in heaven.

Answer.
Bellarmin upon the by acknowledges that the Hussites and Waldenses continued
till Luthers time, who (as appears by the rubricks of your own stories)
signed the faith we now profess, not Bellar. de S^^. lib. 2.
only with ink, but with blood; which has proved so fruitful seed of the
church, that if the harvest of the next century be answerable to the last, you
will be constrained to blot catholic out of the title of your church, and
leave only Roman. Besides many noble standard-bearers of the protestant
religion, who bad defiance to the whore of Babylon, we say, (and disprove it if
you can) that there were many thousands who refused her cup of abominations,
and (in private) detested her fornications, howsoever they made no open
profession of the faith; neither will it hence follow that they were
hypocrites; this is too hard and uncharitable a censure. Nicodemus was no
hypocrite, though he came to Jesus but by night, and (as it were) by stealth.
Nor Joseph of Arimathea, though he made no open show of his love to Christ till
after his death; much less were the Disciples hypocrites, who according to
Christ's commandment fled from city to city, and sought by all means to keep
o^t of the eye and walk of their persecutors; what public or open profession
of the christian faith made those saints, S. Paul and S. Helary speak of, who
lived and dyed in deserts, and hid themselves in caves and dens of the earth? It
is the judgment of some of your divines, that in the dreadful and dismal
persecution of antichrist, the Pope himself shall profess his faith in secret.
If to make no open profession of faith is to be a Suarez, lib. 5. cont sect.
Ang.
lukewarm hypocrite, what hypocrites shall the Romish priests be, who shall
not dare openly to celebrate mass in the great persecution of antichrist
toward the end of the world, as your Rhemists and Tapperus imply? You your self
and those of your religion, especially Tapper. artic. 16. de Sacrif. M^ss^.
R^em. Annot. in A^^^. 12. 6.
priests and Jesuits, make no open profession of your faith here in England,
yet you would not be thought to be hypocrites. Be not too rash in your
censures, lest you slander your own mothers children. Those God threatens to
spew out of his mouth who are neither hot nor cold, that is, those who have no
zeal of Gods truth burning in their hearts; those deny Christ before men, who
being called to make a goodprofession, as Christ did before Pontius Pilate,
either directly or indirectly deny the faith, as your Jesuited equivocators do
renounce their priesthood and calling; such as deny Christ in this sort, we
deny them, protesting against such protestants, who are nothing less then what
they are named.

PAR. XVII. Of the first conversion of Britains, and English to the faith.
CHALLENGE.
Or if your men fly this difficulty, we will join issue with them in the
maintenance of that faith and religion, unto which we Englishmen were first
converted by Austin a monk, a man of God, sent by Gregory the great, bishop of
Rome, more than a 1000. years since.

Answer.
The Philosophers contend not more about the head and springs of Nilus: than
our English antiquaries about the source or rather the golden conduit which
first conveyed the water of life into this Island; some derive this (...) from
Simon Zelotes; Gold-fl^^ing vain, Men^log. Gr^c. decim^ die Ma^^ festi Simonis,
Simon qui and Nathaniel dictus Africa^^ percurrens pr^dicavit Christ. and
multos, etc. Bed. hist. Ang.
some from S. Paul; others from Joseph of Arimathea; and some few from King
Lucius, who^ Beda calls the founder of the faith among the Britains; all
fetch it from a higher and more noble pipe then you. You are the first whom
ever I read to affirm, that we Englishmen were first converted to the christian
faith by monk Austin, who, when he came first into this Island, found among the
Britains an archbishop and 7. bishops, and 2000. monks in Bangor, and what a
world of christian people may we think besides? Even in Kent it self, where he
first and most labored in Gods vineyard, he found a christian church bearing
the name of S. Martin built to his hand, and a way made for him even to the
court by Lethardus, chaplain Greg. lib. 5. ^p. 59: Ad nos perlatum est Anglorum
gentem, Deo annuente, velle fieri Christianam.
to Queen Berta or Aldiberga. Greg. himself, Austins master, does us this
right, he acknowdlgeth it thirsted after the water of life, before he thought
of sending Austin and Melitus to quench this thirst; whence was this thirst,
but from some knowledge and fore-tast of this heavenly liquor? Nemo currit ad
gratiam nisi per gratiam; no man follows after grace but by the power of
grace. S. Prosper de vocat. gent. Chrysostom ser. d^ Pen. ec. Hist. Sacr. l. 2.
Saint Chrysostom some hundreths of years before Austin the monk received his
commission from Gregory the great, speaks of the efficacy of the word
preached, and the power of the christian faith in this Island. And Sulpitius
Severus reports, that in the council of Ariminum, assembled An. Dom. 359.
three Britain bishops were present, and before this council Athanasius makes
mention of certain Britain bishops, who subscribed to the council of Sardi^a,
An. Dom. 347. And before this council King Lucius wrote to Eleuther. bishop of
Rome to assist him in establishing the christian faith in his dominions, which
work God so blessed in his hands, that Dicetus and Read affirm, that in the
place of 28. heathenish priests, called ^lamines and archiflamines, there were
substituted in his time so many bishops and archbishops. To go up higher yet,
and to come even within sight of the apostles: Theodor^^. affirms, that S.
Paul after his first imprisonment at Rome, preached the Lib. 9. de^^rand. grac.
affect.
Gospel among the Britains, and it is not unlikely that then he converted
Pudens and Claudia his wife our countrey-woman, not so much enobled by the
praise of Martial, Claudia c^ruleis cum sit Ruffina Britannis Epig. l. 11.

Edita, cur Lati^ pectora plobis habet?
as by the mention of her in the sacred scriptures, Eubulin saluteth Romans 16.
thee, and Pudens, and Claudia. Some yet ascend higher, and from Gildas
collect, that England received the faith of Christ about the ^ild. deexcid.
(...).
death of Tiberius. What other construction can you make of these his words,
interea glaciali frigore rigenti Insulae and velut longissime terrarum secessu
soli visibili non proximae: vetus ille non de firmamento solum temporali, sed
de summa etiam coelorum arce tempora cuncta excedente universo orb
praefulgidum sui coruscum oftendens tempore ut seimus Tyberii Caesaris summo,
etc. By this account it should seem that Britain received the christian faith
before Rome; which as I will not ave^^, so I dare confidently affirm on the
other side, that Britain had a christian king before Rome had a christian
Emperor residing in it; neither do we ow so much to Ro^^ for Austin the monk,
as Rome owes to our nation for Constantin^ the Emperor. Neither can you
blanch this your error by restraining the name of English, when you say, we
Englishmen were, etc. to those Anglo-Saxones, who entered this land about, or a
little before Austin the monks arrival; for who takes the word Angli, or
Englishmen now in that restrained sense? How know you that we Englishmen now
living are descended from those Anglo-Saxones, rather then from the Britains,
or Dan^^, or Nor^ans, who all successively inhabited this land? And what if
these Angli or Anglo-Saxones in Beda's time distinguished from the Picts, then
also inhabiting here, were not first converted to the christian faith by Austin
the monk? I am sure Bid affirms, that the Eastern Angli or English were
fir^^ gained to Christ by F^lix, the Northern by Paulinus, and the
middle-landers by (...); find me ou^ if you can a fourth sort of English first
converted by Austin the monk. To conclude, if it b^ (...) which you affirm,
that there is but one true, divine, and infallible faith professed by the
church of Christ, and it has been proved that the christian faith was
professed in this Island many hundreths of years before Austin the monk his
time: it follows, that we Englishmen were ^^t first converted by Austin to
that faith and religion of which you speak, without which no man can be saved:
but of Austin and S. Gregory more hereafter.

PAR. XVIII. Of the faith of Gregory, and Austin the monk.
CHALLENGE.
Or if etc. a faith confirmed by miracle from heaven, and therefore must needs
be true, and never noted to differ from the common received faith of
Christendom in those days, as appears by the several epistles of the said S.
Gregory, to the bishops of Europe, Asia, and Africa, with all whom he held
communion of faith; so as if Christ had a catholic church on earth (as needs
he must) S. Gregory was of it, and being then a true church, we say, (holding
still the same tenets) it must needs be so now, Gods truth being like unto him
without change. And therefore if (...), angel should some from heaven, to
(...) us any other (...) th^^ we first received, we are not to hear him, the
good seed being ever first sowed; and the Galatians were worthily reprehended
by S. Paul, for not constantly retaining the first pl^^ted faith.

Answer.
If by S. Grego^ies care, and Austin the monks pains, the wells of salvation
(which long before that time had been dug in these countries, but in diverse
places were ^ed up by barbarous Pay^^ms, sworn (...) to the cross of Christ)
were any whit opened, and the water clean^^^ from (...) ^^nish filth and
superstition, we bless God and (...) the instruments for it. The miracle you
speak of if any were wrought, it was to confirm the common christian faith, not
any R^mish additions thereunto or superstiti^ns. For the monk himself, he
stands or falls to his own master. The water, as S. A^^stin notes, which
passes through a leaden (...) into a garden, waters the garden, and makes it
fruitful, yet it produces (...) such good effect upon the pipe: even so
ofttimes it falls out, that the instruments of much sanctifying grace to
others, retain not the like measure in themselves. Somewhat it was that the
British monks, could not persuade themselves that this Austin was (as you say)
(...) ^an (...) from God^ his insolent and B^d. hist. Aug. lib. 2. cap. 2.
irrespective carriage toward them argued in their judgment, that he could be
no scholar of Christ, the great master of humility. And for S. Gregory
himself who sent him, though he were a great light and ornament of that age in
which he lived, yet the Latin proverb Greg. l. 18. in Job. e. 14. Omne quod
loquitur ad divinae autoritatis fundamentum revocet.
was verified even in him, omnibus Punicis malis putridu^ granu^ inesse. No
pomgranat so sweet, and sound, in which a curious eye may not find one rotten
grain. Some rotten grains your own critics have observed in him, but not near
the coat, there he is sound. In the substantial points of faith now in
controversy between us, which he had occasion to touch upon, he is truly
orthodox and clearly ours: I will instance in many several points, and all of
them of importance.

1. Then for the title of oecumenicall bishop, and supreme head Popes supremacy.
over all bishops, he declaimeth against it, as profane, sacrilegious,
perverse, proud, insolent, antichristian and Luciferian, contrary to the
Gospel, contrary to the canons, and what not? And very ridiculous is the answer
of cardinal Bellarmine hereunto in his second book de Romans Pont. cap. 31. That
universal bishop may be taken two ways, either as it signifietha power and
jurisdiction over all bishops, not excluding them from being bishops, but
making them subject and subordinate to their head; or, as it may import, that
this universal bishop should be the only bishop in the world: ita ut caeteri
non sint episcopi, sed vicarii tantum illius, that is, so that all other who
hold the name of bishops, should indeed be no bishops, but only his vicars.
This answer no way heals the wounds and gashes made by S. Gregory's sharp
style, in inveighing against the title of universal bishop: for neither did
John of Constantinople, at whom S. Gregory strikes in these epistles, desire to
be the only bishop of the world, nor does the word universal import any such
thing. Neither did Lucifer to whom this Gregory compares this John of
Jerusalem, affect to be the only angel; but as S. Gregory speaks, Epist. lib.
4. Epistol. 78.
spretis in sociali gaudio angelorum legionibus ad culmen co^ est
singularitatis erumpere. Despising the rank of his fellow a^gells, h^
endeavored to aspire to the top of singularity: and this is that which S.
Gregory charge this John withal, that he affected, ^^ulli S^b^sse and
omnibus praeesse, to be under none, but above all. That he went about Epist.
lib. 4. Epist. 82.
cuncta Christi membra sibi universalis appellatione supp^^^re. That is, by the
title of universal to bring all Christ^ members in subjection unto him. From
which passages of S. Gregory I frame this argument, he, who usurps the title of
universal bishop, in such sort that he labors to be under none, but above
all, is a sore-runrer of antichrist, an imitator of Lucifer in the singularity
of his pride; but the bishop of Rome affects to be under none, but above all;
ergo, by S. Gregory's logic he is a forerunner of antichrist.

2. For justification by inherent righteousness and the perfection Inherent
righteousness.
thereof, S. Gregory renounceth it, as we do; nay, he goes farther then we in
vilifying humane righteousness, we say no more but that our best works are not
free from some stain of sin; he says in express terms, that if they be
examined according to the rigor of justice, they are sins. Upon the ninth of
Job thus he commenteth, Cap. 11.
ut saepe diximus, omnis humana justitia injustitia esse convincitur, si
districte judicetur; that is, all righteousness of man (as we have often said)
is convinced to be unrighteousness, if it be strictly judged; as in the same
book sanctus aute^ vir, qui omne virtutis nostrae meritu^ Cap. 12.
esse vitium conspicit, si ab interno arbitro districte judicetur: recte
subjungit, si voluerit contendere cum eo, non poterit ei respondere unum pro
mill; that is, the holy man, because he sees all the merit of our virtue to be
vice, if it be strictly scanned by the inward searcher of hearts and reins;
therefore he well adds, ^f he will contend with him, he cannot answer one for a
thousand. And the 18 chap. Si enim remota piet at^ discutimur, opus nostru^
poena dignum est quod remunerari praemiis Cap. 18. in Ioh.
praestolamur: If we are examined without mercy our work for which we look for
a reward, will prove to be worthy of punishment; and chap. 19. sed tamen
sciendum est quia mundos nos ad perfectum reddere, vel vita vel lachrymae non
valent, quousque nos mortalitas nostrae corruptionis tenet; that is, we must
know, that neither our life, nor our tears can make us perfectly clean, as long
as we continue in this frailty of corruption. With what face can you affirm,
that the church of Rome holds still the tenets which it did in S. Gregory's
time? Your tenet now is, that you c^ fulfill the law of God in this life; that
by good works you can merit heaven, and more: that you may trust to your
inherent righteousness, and that you are justified by it; which if you can
reconcile with S. Gregory's assertions above related, I doubt not but you may
(in good time) reconcile all christendom.

3. For perseverance of saints in grace, S. Gregory is as firm as any
Perseverance,
of the reformed protestant writers: in his 34 book upon Job, he propounds a
kind of objection, how it should come to pass that Leviathan has such power
to trample gold, that is, (says he) men Cap. 13.
shining with the brightness of sanctify, (...) if it were dirt, by defiling
them with vice: sed citius respondemus, quia ^urum quod pravis diab^li persua
f^on^bus sterni sicut lutum potuerit, aurum ^te oculos Dei ^unquam fuit, and
qui seduci quandoque non reversuri possunt: quasi habitum sanctitatis ante
oculos hominum vide^^tur amittere, sed eam ante oculos Dei nunquam habuerunt;
that is, but we speedily ans^er, that that gold, which by the wicked persuasion
of the devil, may be cast down as dirt, was never gold in Gods eye, etc.

4. For private ma^^es without communicants, wherein the priest rehearses the
words of Christ, take, eat, and drink ye all of this, Private Masses. Dialog
lib. 2. cap. 23. T^e^^ Dialogues have many things in them unworthy S. Gregory,
and therefore are justly excepted against by many learned Critics, yet they
are ancient and bear his name, and are alleged for his in many points ag^i^st
us, and therefore the testimonies alleged out of them are good against the
adversary. and militant contra hominem (...) non contra rem.
yet eats and drinks all himself, and celebrateth a strange kind of supper
without any guest at all. I say, in S. Gregory's time, this corruption had not
crept into the church, as appears by those words; cum que in eadem ecclesia
missarum solennia celebrarentur, atque ex more diacon^s clamaret: si quis non
communicate, de^ locum: and when in the same church, the solemnity of the masses
were celebrated, and the deacon cried out after the custom (...) if any man
communicate not, let him depart or give place. If you here snatch at the word
masses, I answer, that the masses S. Gregory and the fathers before him spoke
of were nothing but our communion, and the service thereunto belonging, so
called, either a ^ttendis muneribus, for the offerings that were then made, or
a* di^^ttendis catech^enis, sending away such as were not thought fit to be
admitted to the holy sacrament, of which we shall have further occasion to
speak, in answer to your promised reply.

5. For the princes authority over ecclesiastical persons, S. Gregory
acknowledges not only ordinary priests and bishops, but even the bish of Rome
also himself to be subject to the emperor sacerdotes meos tuae ma^^^ comisi, I
have committed my priests into thy hands. And afterward in his own person, ego
indignus famulus vester. I your unworthy servant. Ego quidem in^imus subjectus,
eandem legem per diversas terrarum parts transmitti seci, and quia lex ipsa
omnipotenti Deo minime concorder; ecce, per suggestionis me^ pag^^am,
ferenissimo Dommino ^unciavi; utrobique ergo quae debut exolvi, qui et
imperatori obedientiam praebui, and pro Deo quod sensi m^n^^e ^^^ui; that is I
your lowest subject have published your command. And here you tray see in what
terms the empire and papacy stood, when the Pope held it his duty to publish a
decree of the emperor, though it were against his heart and conscience.

6. For the canon of scriptures, S. Gregory holds the book of Maccabees in the
same rank as we do, profitable to he read for the edification of the church,
but not to be produced as inspired by God, and of infallible authority for the
confirmation of any point of faith; for being to allege a testimony out of
those books, he makes way for it by this preface, de qua re non inordinate
agimus, si Job. lib. 19. cap. 13.
ex libris, licet non canonicis, sed tamen ad adificationem ecclesia editis
testimonium proferamus; touching which matter, we do not amiss if we bring
forth a testimony out of those books, (viz. the book of Maccabees there cited)
which though they are not canonical, yet they are set forth for the
edification and instruction of the church.

7. For adoration of images, he detests it as much as we: see his epistles upon
record, si quis imaginem facere voluerit, minime prohibe; Epist ex regist. lib.
9. cap. 9.
adorare vero imagines omnibus modis devita. If any man will make an image,
forbid him not; but by all means avoid the worshipping of images. Who will now
be a papist, when, we see, the Pope is become a zealous Calvinist?

8. Touching merit of works, S. Gregory teaches as we do, that In (...).
(...)* 7.
we ought not to repose any confidence in our own merits, non in fletibus, non
in actis nostris, sed in advocati nostri allegatione confidamus: let us not
trust in our own weeping, and bewayling of our sins, nor in our own acts, but
in the intercession of our advocate: and upon Lib. 9. c. 11.
Job, si ad virtutis opus excrevero ad vitam, non ex meritis, sed ex venia
convalesco, If I grow to any work of virtue, I am restored to life, not by
merits, but by pardon. I forbear to alledgemore testimonies out of S. Gregory
touching this point, because those many clear passages, which I have produced
out of him before, against the perfection of inherent righteousness, by a
necessary consequence overthrow all merit of works also.

9. Touching certainty of salvation, S. Gregory conspireth with the doctrine of
the reformed church; for having alleged certain promises of Christ in the
gospel to found it upon, thus he concludes; Lib. 6. Epist. Indict 15. Ep. 33.
hac it aque fulti certitudine de redemptoris nostri misericordia nihil
ambigere, sed spe debemus indubit at a praesumere: non enim muneris sui
largitate frustrabitur Deus, sed vires obtinendi prorsus indulget, qui velle
concessit, nam jam ipsum desiderant, oppetere donum est: that is, therefore
being supported with this certainty, we ought The challenge of councels. Lib.
1. indict. 9. Expla. ^6. The cour^^, Camp. Ratione ^^^tia. In Cant. canticorum,
The Lo^ds ^^ppe.
not to doubt, etc. Gregory's doctrine, like ours at this day, is a doctrine of
faith and confidence; whereas the doctrine of the church of Rome at this day is
a doctrine of distr^ of diffidence.

10. Touching the power of calling synods or ecclesiastical assemblies, which
you now arrogate to the Pope; in S. Gregory his time, as a^^ay before, it was
in the emperors and christian princes, agreeable to the t^^et of the present
church of England. S. Gregory takes notice of the emperor his masters
command, for the assembling of a synod in Rome it self; juxta Christianissimi
and serenissi^i rerum domini jussionem, ad beati Petri apostoli limina cum tuis
sequacibus venire to volumus, ut, Authore Deo, aggregata synodo, de eaqua inter
not vertitur dub^etate quod justum fuerit judicetur. According to the command
of our most christian and ^ra^ions Lord, we require thee to appear at S.
Peter's, etc.

11. Touching the definition of the church, you scoff at us for ^efining the
true and most proper church of Christ, which we believe in the creed to be the
whole number of Gods elect. You term it an Idea Platonica, or an ae^reall and
invisible body, a Chymaera or Phantasme: and yet S. Gregory describes the
church as we do. Christus secundum praescientiae suae gratiam sanctam ecclesiam
de sanctis in aeternum permansuris extruxit; Christ, according to the grace of
his foreknowledge, has built on holy church of saints eternally persevering
in grace: and upon Ezck, una ecclesia est electorum praecedentium atque
sequentium. There is one church of the elect, going before and following after.

12. Touching the blessed sacrament of the Lords Supper, to be administered in
both kinds, it is evident, that in Hom. 22 in Evang. Sanguis super utrumque
postem ponitur, quando non solum ore cordis, sed^tore corporis christi sanguis
hauritur. Quid sit sanguis, non audiendo sed bibendo d^^. cistis. The blood is
put upon both posts, whethe blood of Christ is drunk with the mouth of the
heart, and the mouth of the holy; you have learned what is blood, not by
hearing but by drinking: and again, sanguis non in manus fideliu^, sed in ora
funditur. The blood (of Christ) is powered, not into the hands, but into the
mouth of the faithful.
S. Gregory's time, the whole congregation, consisting of the laity as well as
the clergy, participated of the holy cup: his words are, pretiost sanguinis
effusione genus humanum Chris^us redemit, and sacro-sancti vivifici corporis
sui and sanguinis mysterium membris suis tribuit; cujus perceptione corpus suum
quod est ecclesia pascitur and potatur, abluitur and sanctificatur. Christ, by
the effusion of his most precious blood redeemed all mankind, and gives to his
members the mystory of his most holy quickening body and blood; by the
participation whereof, his body, (which is the church) is nourished with meat
and drink, and is washed and sanctified. Mark I beseech you, that S. Gregory
^ith not, (lib. 4. Dial. cap. 58.) he gives to his members in the
participation of the sacrament, his body and blood for meat and drink, but the
mystery of his body and blood, as elsewhere he speaks, in Evang. Hom. 14.
Realiter passus Christus i^cruce, in mysterio patitur, quoties ecclesia mil^^ns
sacr^^ (...) celebrat, and hoc facit in servatoris sui com^^morationem: Christ
having suffered really upon the cross suffers in a mystery, as (...) as the
church celebrateth his holy supper, and this she does in remembrance of her
Savior. By comparing of which places, any man may perceive, what S. Gregory
means by a mystery, when he opposes it to that which was done really; I
leave it to you to make the inference. And now to point these weapons drawn out
of S. Gregory's armory, and rub them over with the oil of your eloquence; the
says of S. Gregory was never noted to differ from the common received faith of
christendom in those days, as appears by the several epistles of the said S.
Gregory, to the bishops of Europe, Asia, and Africa, with all whom he had
communion of faith, so as if Christ had a catholic church on earth (as needs
he must) S. Gregory was of it, and being then a true church, (...) say,
(holding still the same tenots) it must needs be so now, Gods truth being like
unto him without change, and therefore if an angel should come from heaven to
teach us any other doctrine, then that which we have received from S. Gregory,
we are not to hear him. If an angel therefore from heaven, teach that the
books of Maccabees are canonical; or that the Pope or any other bishop may
have the style of oecumenicall bishop, or supreme head over all bishops; or
that our best works are not imperfect or defective, if God strictly examine
them: or that true holiness and sanctifying grace may be lost; or that masses
may be celebrated without communicants; or that princes have not authority over
ecclesiastical persons; or that images are to be adored; or that men may merit
by their works eternal life; or that a child of God ought to doubt of Gods
mercy, and may not be assured of his salvation; or that it belongs not to
princes to call ecclesiastical assemblies: or that the church, in the most
strict sense, consists not of the elect only; or that the whole church
consisting of laity as well as clergy may not participate the mysteries of the
body and blood of Christ, entirely drinking of the holy cup, as well as eating
of the bread: Let him be accursed. Methinks I hear you already cry out with her
in the Poet, Heu patior telis vulnera facta men's!


O^ with the eagle, in Iulians m^tto, feeling her self deadly wounded with an
arrow feathered out of her own wing, Nostris configimur alis.


PARAG. XIX. Concerning the faith of Constantine.
CHALLENGE.
Or lastly, if you desire to go nearer to the times of the apostles, we will
join with you to prove our faith in the days of Constantine the great, who
first built and opened christian churches, and gave freedom for christians to
come together, and to know and publish to the world what was held by them,
which before could not so well be done, by reason of the perfec^tions in which
the church had been (...) then generally eclipsed.

Answer.
From S. Gregory you step up immediately to Constantine the great, and at once
stride over 300 years, in which time the prime and flower of the Greek and
Latin fathers lived and dyed; would none of them father your Church? You take
an oath, if you be magistri in theologia, to expound scripture, non ^isi juxta
una^ c^^sensum patrum, according to the unanimous consent of the fathers; this
joint consent can very hardly be found in the interpretation of the ^ures
before Constanti^^s time, because few before that time commented upon the holy
scripture, at least, whose works are come to our hands; and therefore you
should have especially instanced in the fathers from Constantines time to S.
Grego^^s: but as Festus answered Paul, so think I fit to answer you, Ca^em ^
appell^ ^d C^sarem ibis, you have appealed to Constantine, and to Constantine
you shall go; of whom I may say truly, that which the Fre(...) sometimes spoke
before him glo^ingly; tu no(...) ill^^ (...) faci^, (...) the Britains by ^^y
(...); for though Li^, he^ not Iustus, goes about to rob us of this brouch,
and brightest luster of our nation, denying us the honor of his birth, as you
do of his faith; yet I doubt not but to make good against him and you, that
Constantine is ours, body and soul: and to resolve you in point of his birth
and native soil (which was this our Island) I refer you to Baronius: for his
faith, to Eusebius, Socrates, Sozomen, Arnobius, Lactantius, Minutius Foelix,
Athanasius, Epiphanius, and Greg. Nazianzen, and diverse others who lived in the
same time, or not long after him. Let the faith generally believed and received
in the age wherein this blessed Emperor lived serve as a touchstone to examine
our pure and precious, and your drossie and counterfeit faith: and first let us
begin with the ground of all faith, the holy scriptures.

1. We teach, that the canon of the old testament consists of 22. books only,
excluding the apocryphal which your council of Trent confounds with the
canonical. Let the first quaere then be, whether did the church in
Constantines time hold with your canon, or ours? To this let the council of
Laodicea speak, qua autem Can. 59. Non ^p^^tet in eccles^ libros qui s^^t extra
Ca^^^e^ legere, sed solum Canonic^s veteris and n^vi Testamenti. Qu^ autem,
etc. A^hanas epist. ^v. (...) (...) (...)(...) (...)(...) (...). Epist. de
In^t. verbi. Greg. Nazia^. de veris and ^ S. Srip. V^o. ul^. I^tina. Nazi^.
(...). Paris.
oporteat legi and in authoritatem recipi, haec sunt, Genesis, Exodus, etc.
These books which ought to be read and received as authentical and canonical,
are these following, Genesis Exodus, etc. In which catalogue none of the apocryphal
books are mentioned. Let Athanasius inform us, who reckons but 22. books of the
old testament, as we do: and after him Greg. Nazian. most expressly brandeth the
apocrypha with a note of bastardy. (...)
(...),
(...).


Which Greek verses a wel-willer to your church has translated into Latin,

At tua ne libris fallatur men's alienis,
Hunc habeas certum numerum a me, lector ^^ice,
Tot nempe Hebr^^, quot sunt elementa, loquelae.
Quicquid pratorea est, hand inter certa loc andu^.
The Greek, word for word, is thus to be Englished: I have s^^ down 22. books
of the old testament, agreeable to the number of the Hebrew letters, ^^d (...)
^e found any besides these, ^ to be counted among the true and genuine books of
the old Testament. T^rtul advers. Hermog. Chrysostom. 2. ad Corinth. Hom. 13.
(...). Athanas. cont. Idol. vid Athanas. de Syn. A^^m. and de incarnat.
Christi. lib. 5. divin. institut. c. 4. Cyprianus raptus eximia eruditione
divinarum literarum, vt iis solis contentus ess^^ quibus fides constat.
Theodoret. hist. Eccles. l. 1. c 7. (...). S^issel. Archi^pis. Tarin, contra
wald. Detestantur signum crucis quod nos ad^^d^^a^^us.


2. We with Tertullian, adore the ple^^tude of scriptures, a^^ibing to them
this perfection, that they contain in them all things necessary to salvation.
You maintain on the contrary, that the written word alone is not a sufficient
and perfect rule, and therefore you add unto it the unwritten word which you
call crad^ion. Which part did Constantine take and the church in his time? let
Athanasius be heard in this case, Sufficient per se sacroe and divine us
inspiratae lu^rae ad veritatis indicationem; The holy inspired scriptures are
sufficient of themselves for the declaration of the truth; let ^a^tanti^^ be
heard, Cyprian was so ravished with the excellent knowledge of the holy
scriptures, that he was content with them alone, upon which faith is built. Let
us hear Constantine himself, who sitting in a golden chair as president and
moderator in the first and most famous council of Nice, recommendeth the books
of the old and new testament to the fathers assembled in that council in these
words, the books of the evangelists and apostles, and the oracles of the
ancient prophets do plainly instruct us what to conceive of divine matters,
therefore setting aside all enmity and discord, let us from the words inspired
by God, take the resolution of those things that are in question; which most
christian direction of this most noble Emperor swayed much with the fathers in
that synod: yet cardinal Bellarmin makes light of it, and gives the Emperor a
slurr for it, lib. 4. de verb Dei non scripto cap. 11. Respondeo hoc
testimonium non esse tanti faciendum, erat enim Constantinus magnus. Imperator,
non magnus ecclesiae Doctor; I answer, that this testimony is not of so great
moment, for Constantine was indeed a great Emperor, but not a great Doctor of
the church.

3. We teach, that the wood of Christ's cross is not to be worshipped at all,
much less with divine worship; you teach on the contrary, that the cross of
Christ is to be adored, cultu latria, that is, with the highest kind of
worship, which is proper to God; so Aquinas determines, Par. 3. quaest. 25.
^r. 2. Illi exhibemus cultum latriae in quo ponimus ^^em salutis; clamat enim
ecclesia, O crux ave, spes unica hoc passionis tempore auge pi^s justitiam,
reisque dona veniam: and ibid. Crux Christi in qua Christus crucifixus est tum
propter, representationem, tum propter. Christi membrorum coutactum (...)
adoranda est. We yield divine worship to that in which we put our trust, but we
repose the trust of our salvation, says he, on the cross of Christ; for so
the church sings, all hail, O cross, our only hope in this time of passion,
increase righteousness in the godly, and grant sinners pardon; and hereupon
concludes, that the cross on which Crist was crucified, as well because it
represents Christ, as also because it touched the members of his body, is to
be adored with divine worshop: by which reason all christians which then lived
were bound to worship with divine worship Malchus his ear, and Judas his lips,
and the asses back on which Christ rode, and the dust in the floor on which he
wrote, and the water in which he washed, and the ointment which was powered upon
him, and the soldiers fists that buffered him, and what not that touched any
part of his body? Yet Andradius is not ashamed to follow Aquinas Ort^od^^.
Aplic. lib. 9.
his steps, non diffi^emar nos praeclarissimam Christi cruc^m adorare cultu
latriae, we do not deny but that we worshop the most excellent cross of Christ
with divine worship. And Gretzer treads in the same path in his book De Cruce.
And Cardinal Bellarmin scorns to follow any of these, he runs before them all
in the idolatrots Lib. de Imag. sanct. cap. (...).
worship, not only of the wood of the cross, on which Christ hung, but also of
all crosses whatsoever made after that fashion, Nos omnes cruces adoramus, quia
omnes sunt imagines verae crucis, we adore all crosses, because all crosses are
images of the true cross. Was this the belief or practice of the church in
Constantines time? Let us enquire of S. Ambrose, and he will tell us that S.
Helen the mother of Constantine, was far from worshipping the wood of the true
cross which she found by miracle; ^^^enit ^itulum, Amb. O^^at. de ob^^^ Theod.
^mp.
Rege^ adoravit, non lignum utique; quia hic gentilis error est, and vanitas
impiorum, sed adoravit illum qui pep(...) lig^^ (...) she found the title, she
adored the king, not the wood verily; that is an heathenish error and wicked
vanity, but she worshipped him who hung on the wood. Let us enquire of M^^utius
Foelix whether the church in those days worshipped or had crosses in their
Dialog. ^ctav.
oratories. The heathen^ indeed, as he there brings them in, objected it to the
christians, that they worshipped the cross, col^nt quod ^erentur: to which
jear of the heathens Mir^ti^^ answers, cruces nec colimus, nec optamns; we
^^ither worship crosses, nor desire them.

4. We teach with the apostle, that marriage is honorable among all men, and
that it is the doctrine of devils to prohibit marriage in any condition of men,
be they of the clergy, or of the laity. You maintain the contrary both in your
doctrine and practice: Johan. Epist. ad Dracon. multi ex epis. matrimonium non
in iet unt. Monachi contra parents liberoru^ facti sunt: quee^admodum vicissim
episcopos filioru^ pat^es and Monachos generis potestatem non quae sivisse
animadvertas.
priests among you are tied to a single life, and some of you bl^sh not to say,
that a clergy man had better keep a concubine than his married wife, praestat
concubinam alere, quam uxerem. Was this the judgment or the practice of the
church in Constantines age? did not bishops and priests then marry? Let
Athanasius inform us, who in his epistle ad Dracontium, writes thus, you may
observe many unmarried bishops among us, and many married monks; and again,
many married bishops, and unmarried monks. By which testimony of Athanasius it
appears that in his time, not only bishops, but monks also might and did marry.
Sozomen makes mention (hist. lib. 1. cap. 11.) of Spiridion the bishop of
Cyrus, his wife and children, (...). He was married and had children, and it
was no disparagement unto him in his ecclesiastical function (word for word,)
but he was not therefore Bapt. Mant. in Fast. Ecclesiast hist. lib. 3. cap. ^0.
Hist. eccles. l. 1. cap. 8. iuxta lat. version. et in Grac. c. 11.
worse or inferior in those things which belong to God. No more was Hilary the
famous bishop of Poictou. Nor the father of Nazianzen, who lest his bishopric
to his son Gregory, the flower of all the Greek fathers, of whom thus Mantuan
Praesule patre satus, ^a^ tune id jura sinebant,
Pastorale pedum gessit post funera patris.


We see the practice in Constantines time, let us now hear the (...).
judgment of the church touching the practice: Eusebius brings in Clemens
inveighing against the despisers and contemners of marriage, in this manner.
(...); that is, what will these (marriage haters) condemn the apostles? for
Peter and Philip gate children. And Socrates has a remarkable story to this
purpose; there being a motion made in the council of Nice, to deprive married
priests of society and conversation with their wives, old Papnutius, though
himself an unmarried man, yet mainly opposed that motion, dissuading the
fathers of the council from laying such a heavy yoke upon the clergy,
alleging, that marriage is honorable among all men, and the bed undefiled.
That all men could not bear such a restraint: that too much strictness in this
kind would be hurtful to the church: that the company of a man with his lawful
wife, is chastity.

5. We teach, that the elements of bread and wine are types-and figures of the
body and blood of Christ, which we truly receive in the sacrament of the Lords
supper spiritually by says, not carnally with the mouth. You on the contrary,
that the bread and wine are turned by transubstantiation into the true body and
blood of Christ, which you believe that you receive with the mouth and chew
with the teeth. Did the church of Christ in Constantines time believe
transubstantiation, or carnal manducation? Let us heat what Ser^^^ in (...)
quis di^^rit v^^ b^.
Athanasius, and Eusebius, and Greg. Nazianzen, and S. Ephrem have delivered
touching this point: Athanasius illustrating those words of our Savior in the
6. of John, it is the spirit which quickneth, the flesh profits nothing, etc.
says. Hic de utroque, ^ar^^ si^ct P^s in bib^. (...). ^0. E^. ^^eo^^
patri^^^^^: (...).
and spiritu suo locutus est, and spirit^ a c^r^e discrim^n a vit. ut: non
solum in eo quod oculis apparebat sed naturam quoq^^ invisi^^le^ credentes,
disceremus ea quae loqueretur non car^^lia esse, sed spiritualia: quot enim
hominibus corpus ejus suffecrffe^ ad ^^bu^, ut universi mundi alimonia fieret?
Sed propterea ascensio^^^ s^^ in c^lum mentionem fecit, ut eos a corporals
intellect^^ abstraheret, ac deinde carnem suam de qua locutus erat, cibum e
supernis ^^lestem and spiritualem alimoniam and ab ipso donanda^ intelligerent;
quae enim loquutus sum vobis, inquit, spiritus and vit^ su^^. Quod perinde est
ac si diceret, corpus meum quod ostenditur and datur pro mundo in cibum;
dabitur, ut spiritualiter unicuique tribuatur and fiat singulis tutamen
praeservatioque ad resurrectionem vitae aeternae. Here he speaks both of his
flesh and spirit, and distinguishes his spirit from the flesh, that beleaving
not only that which appeared to outward sense, but also his invisible nature,
we might learn that those things which he sp^ke were not carnal, but
spiritual: for to how many men would his body have sufficed for meat, that it
might be the food of the whole world? But therefore he makes mention of his
ascension into heaven, that he might withdraw them from the corporal
understanding of his words, and that they might understand, that the flesh of
which he spoke was a supernal meat, a celestial and spiritual food to be
given by him unto them. The words (says he) which I have spoken unto you, are
spirit and life, which is all one as if he had said, my body which is given for
the world, shall be given for meat, that every man may receive it spiritually,
and that it may be made to each a strengthening and preserving them to the
resurrection to eternal life. Eusebins writes thus of the sacrament, Christus
cum Dem^. (...). vang. lib. 1.
se^^sum singular sacrificium patri obtulisset, statuit (...) (...), quam
memoria^ (...) in mensa ejus celebramus. Christ when he had offered himself
once for all a sacrifice to his father, appointed us to offer the memory of
that sacrifice to God: which memory we celebrate by the sacred signs (...).
or symbols of his body and ^loud upon his table, and in like man^^r in his 8.
book he says, that Christ delivered to his dis^iples the sy^bol^ of his divine
dispensation, viz. bread and wine, that is, co^ding them to make an image or
representation of his own body. S. Basil, and S. Greg. Naz^anz. accord with
Eusebius: S. Basil in his Liturgy calls the sacrament all bread (...)
co^poris domini, that is, a type (...) figure resembling Christ's ^ody, or
answering unto it. And Greg. N^z^a^z. Ep^tap. soror. Gorgon. (...).
pleases himself with the same word (...), If her hand treasured up at any
time any part of the holy signs or antityp^^ of the precious body and blood of
Christ, that she mingled with her tears, etc*

Out of these and the like phrases of the fathers, thus I frame an argument
against you: no types, figures, images, representations of Christ's body, are
^is very body. But the church in Constanti^^^ age believed the elements of
bread and wine to be images, as Eusebius* types or anti-types, as S. Basil and
Nazianzeu calls them; to whom Bellarmin adjoyneth Theodoret in his first
dialo^ne. A^^* carius Egyptius in his Homilies, and Dionysius in his Hierar^h^*
B^lla^. lib. 2. de sacramentis cap. 16.
and confesses that they spoke of the elements of bread and win^ after
consecration, therefore the elements of bread and wine after consecration are
not the very body and blood of Christ. The mi^^ in this syllogism is confessed,
the major is strongly ^ounded on tha^ axiom. Opposit^ (...) cide^^ ^imul
attribui ^equeunt; that is, opposite things cannot be affirmed at the same time
of one and the same thing, but a shadow and a body, an image and a face, (...)
^^gn and the thing signified by it are among the rank of those opposites which
Logicians call relative opposita, and therefore as it i^ a good argument, this
is Alexanders picture, therefore it is not Alexander himself; this is
Nebuchadnezz^r^ image, therefore it is not Nebuchadmezz^^ himself; this is a
shadow, therefore it is not a body* so likewise it follows necessarily, the
bread and wine after consecration in the judgments of Eusebius, Ba^^, Na^.
(...), D^us, Theodoret, and others of that ag^, are types, images, shadows,
figures of Christ's body and blood* the^^ore they are not turned into the very
body and blood of Christ.

6. We teach with the apostle to the Hebrews that now (to wit) since Christ's
offering himself upon the altar of the cross for the redemption of the whole
world, there remains no more sacrifice for sin. You teach on the contrary, that
there is daily offered in the mass, a true, real, and properly so called
propitiatory sacrifice for the sins of the living and the dead. Whether did the
church in Constantines time celebrate your mass, or our communion? I am sure
Minutius Foelix implies, that in his time the christians had no altars. Putas
(says he) nos occultare quod col^mus, si delubra and aras non habemus? Do
thou think what we conceal what we worship, because we have no images nor
altars? And as they had no material altars in his time, so neither corporal
sacrifices. Hostias domino offeram (says Minutius) cum sit lita^ilis, etc.
Hostias domino offeram, cum ^it litabilis hostia bonus animus? qui innocentiam
colit, Deo supplicat; qui ^ustitiam, D^o libat, qui hominem periculo surripit,
optimam victima^ cedit; haec nostra sacrificia, haec Dci sacra sunt.
Shall I offer sacrificeto God, to whom* good mind is an acceptable sacrifice?
he that keeps innocence supplicates to God; he who does justice, offers to
God; he who saves a man from danger, slays the best sacrifice: Lactan. lib.
6. divinar. Institut. cap (...). Rep^diata victimaru^ legalium mult^tudint,
unam requirit Hostiam: ni^^ru^, ut quisque se concil^et and offerat Deo seipsum
sistens Deo in hostiam ^^ventem per rationale obs^q^ium immolans sacr^ficum
l^^dation is, quandoquid^m multitudo illaru^le^alium victimarum ^xp^osa f^i^
un^ in h^c s^culo^^ fine app^obata est semel oblata in abolitionem peccati.
these are our sacrifices. I wonder how he forgot the sacrifice of the mass:
certainly if Christ be there really offered, he is opti^^ a victima, the best
sacrifice that ever was offered. Lactantius enameleth the former golden
sentence of Minutius; Hic verus cultus est in quo men's colentis seipsam Deo
immaculatam victimam sistit: this is the true worship wherein the mind of the
worshipper offers it self as an ^^spotted sacrifice to God. If these
testimonies are not of strength enough to demolish your material altars, and
abolish your sacrifice of the mass; behold, Eusebius, Saint Chrysostom, and
Saint Basil offer us, as it were, axes and hammers to beat them down. Saint
Basil on the 1. of Isay writeh thus; refusing the multitude of the legal
sacrifices, he requires this one, that every man should reconcile himself, and
offer up himself to GOD as an holy and lively sacrifice by his reasonable
service, offering unto God the sacrifice of praise; forasmuch as the multitude
of those legal sacrifices is now abolished, one sacrifice in this end of the
world is approved, once offered for the abolishing of sin. Eusebius Demonst.
Evang. l. 1. interprets the clean obla^ion fore-spoken by the prophet Malachy
(which all papists take for the sacrifice of the mass) to be our hearts
purified by faith, and the incense there mentioned to be the (...) (...),
incense of prayer, and the sacrifice of the new testament to be a contrite
spirit, and speaking of the Lords supper; he says that therein we offer (...),
a memorial of Christ's sacrifice; Homil. 17. in epist. ad Heb.
and S. Chrysostom, we offer the true sacrifice of Christ, (...) (...), or
rather we offer a commemoration of that sacrifice. I^ S. Chrys^stome had
believed, as you now do, that the true body of Christ is properly offered, and
his blood truly shed in the daily sacrifice of the mass, he should have
corrected his former correction of himself, and said, what said I, we rather
offer a memorial of Christ's sacrifice? nay rather we offer the very sacrifice
it self, Christ's body and blood, and that truly and properly.

7. We teach, that images may not be set up in churches to worship Epiphan* Io
Hierosol. ^p^st. ex tat inte^ opera sancti Hieron Tom. (...). Cum venissem ad
villam quae dicitur Anabla^^ra, vidissemque ibi pr^teriens lucerna^ ^rdentem,
and intrassem ut o^arem, in ven^ ibi velum pendens in ^^^ibuse^usdem ecclesiae
tinctu^ atque d^p^ctum, and habens imagine^ quasi Christi vel sancti cujusdam:
cum ^^go hoc vidisse^ in ecclesia Christi contra au^oritatem scripturarum
hominis pendere imagine^, scidi illud velum; and magis, dedi consilium
custodibus ejusd^m loci ut paupere^ m^rtuum obvolverent, and deinceps pr^cepi
in ecclesia Christi istiusmodi v^la quae contra relig^onem nostram veniunt non
appendi. In epist. ad Constant. Augus^. ^^ds igitur glori^ ^j^smodi, and
dignitatis splendores lucentes and f^lgur^^tes eff^giare m^^t^is and inanima^^s
coloribus and ^^bratili pictura possit? Di^log^ Octavius.
God by the^, much less to worship the images themselves; you on the contrary
maintain the erecting, censing, clothing, kissing, kneeling before, and
worshipping of images. From which idolatry and superstition, how fat the church
was in Constantines age, appears by the canon of the council of Eliberis, the
act of Epiphanius* the judgment of Eusebius, and the joint testimony of
Minutius Felix, and Lactantius. The 36 canon of the council of Eliberis is
very express against images and pictures in churches, placuit picturas in
ecclesia esse non debere, ne quod colitur aut adoratur, in parictibus
depingatur. It seemed good to us, or we have determined, that no images or
pictures be in churches, lest that which is worshipped and adored be painted on
the walls. When S. Epiphanius saw that canon neglected* and the law of God
violated in that point, his zeal kind^ed within him* and he tare down a v^il
and rent it in the middle, which he found hanging on the church walls at
Anablathra, because it had on it an image as it had bin of Christ or some
saint. More* over, he gave charge to those of that place, not to hang up any
more such veils against the express command of God. Eusebius was no better
affected to images then Epiphanius; for in his epistle to Constantia, who
desired him to send her an image of Christ, he contendeth by many arguments,
that no true image of Christ may be drawn, neither according to his divine
nature, nor according to his humane: not according to his divine, because no
man has ^ver seen or can see that* not according to his humane, because we
have learned that his humane nature or form of a servant is ^ingled with, or
Lib. 2. de origerroris cap. 19. Quare ^on est dub^um quin religio nulla sit,
ubicunq simullac^um est; nam si religio ex divinis rebus est, divini autem
nihil ni^^in coelest^^us; carent ergo religone simulac^a* quia nihil potest
esse coeleste in ea re quae ^it ^x t^rra* Dei autem cujus spiritus and num^n
ubique diffusum, abesse nunq^a^ po^e^^ semper utique im* go su^ervacan^a. lib
6. de ver^ Cultu. cap. 2. Accendunt lum^na Deo ve^ut in teneb^is agenti. Number
mentis comp^s p^tandus est qui auctori and datori l^mi^is candelarum a^
cereorum lumen offert pr^ muncr^? Council. Elib. ca^on ^7. Probib^ndu^^ ne
Lucerna^ public acce^dant: si sacere contra interdictum vol^erint, ab^^inca^^
a comm^ni^^^
united to the glory of his divine dignity: and who will undertake with dead
colors to express the brightness of that glory and dignity? Minutius Felix,
upon another reason, dislikes the dedicating of any image to God: put a^ nos
occultare quod credimus si delubra and ar as non habemus? quod enim simulacrum
Deo fingam, eum, si recte existimes, sit dei homo ipse simulacrum? Do thou
think that we conceal what we worship, because we have no place for images nor
altars? I pray what images shall I make to God, seeing if we judge rightly, man
himself is Gods image? Lactantius is warmer in the cause, he concludes
peremptorily, that religion and images cannot stand together: wherefore out of
doubt there is no religion where there is an image, (therefore out of doubt
none in your church where there are so many images) for if religion be a divine
thing, and there is nothing divine but in things that are heavenly, images
therefore are void of religion, because there can be nothing* hea^enly in that
thing which is of the earth. The same Lactantius, lib. 2. divinarum institut.
cap. 2. excludes all images, even of the true God, as needless and
super^^uous; the image of a man seems then to be needful when the man himself
i^ away, but it is of no use when he is present, therefore the image of God is
ever superfluous and of no use, because his spirit and deity being every where
present, can never be absent from us. You see he lays hard at your images, and
he endeavors as vehemently to blow out your wax lights. They light candles to
God as if he were in the dark: can he be thought well in his wits who offers
candles or wax lights to God for a gift, who is the author and giver of all
light? If this strong breath of Lactantius, being but single, cannot blow out
the lights that burn continually in your churches: yet methinks the joint and
conspiring breath of all the fathers assembled in the council at Eliberis
cannot but puff them quite out. It is to be forbidden that candles be publicly
lighted; if any do presume to do otherwise, let them keep from the communion.
In fine, to draw the arrow you have put into Constantines bow to the head
against the errors and superstitions of your present Romish church, prove to me
by any good and uncontrolable testimony, that public service in an unknown
tongue, or masses without communicants, or communion of the laity without the
cup, or making images of the three persons of the Trinity, or worshipping
images, or crosses, or selling pardo^^ for the release of souls out of
purgatory, or elevation, or circumgestation of the host in pompous procession,
or praying upon beads or hallowing meddals, and Agnus Dei's, or blessing salt,
spittle, water, etc. or christening bells, and galleys, or going on pilgrimage
to the images of Christ, our Lady, and other saints, or whipping themselves in
penance for their own sins, or the sins of others, or such like customs and
fites of your now Romish church were in practice in Constantine his time. Prove
that the treasury of saints merits, and works of supererogation, or unwritten
traditions in matter of faith, or justification before God by inherent
righteousness or any sin in its own nat^re venial, and not against the law of
God but only beside it, or esteeming the Apocryphal books of the old testament
for canonical scriptures, or equalizing the Latin vulgat translation of the
old and new testament to the originalls in Hebrew and Greek, or seven
sacraments properly so called, or the Popes infallibitie, or his transcendent
authority, to gratify or disannull the acts of general counsels, to canonize
saints, to dispense with oaths and vows, to depose kings, and dispose of their
kingdoms, or the suspending the effect of the sacrament upon the intention of
the priest, or accidents without subjects, or rats and mice eating Christ's
body, or the putting it in many thousand places at once, or any the like
assertions of your Romish doctors were any part of Constantines belief, and the
day shall be yours.

In the mean time, if, as your challenge, and the promise of your friends
deeply engage you, you shall think of a reply to this my answer, I require
three things of you.

First, that according to our Savior his rule, you mete the same measure to me
which I mete to you, by setting down my whole answers in my own words, that the
reader may see what you answer to each particular, and what you balk, as also
how direct and pertinent your replies shall be.

Secondly, that you be not guilty of that which Pythagoras Contra sole^ n^
l^quitor* ne de pelle and Hydra labores, Herculem omittas.
strictly forbad his scholars, viz. speaking against the sun, that is,
gainsaying most clear and evident truth.

Thirdly, that you forget not Tully's caveat, that you spend not your skill,
and waste your colors upon the lions skin, and omit the pourtraying the body
of Hercules; that is, that you spend not your pains and paper in carping at
circumstantiall passages on the by, and leave the main unto^ched.

If you duly observe these conditions, I doubt not but that God in the farther
search into these points will an^int your eyes with the eye-salv^ of the spirit,
as he did the eyes of Albertus Pighius, in perusing the works of Calvin; which
Minutius Feli^ in Dial. Oct^vius. vicimus uterque, n^ ut ille ^e^ v^ctor est,
ita ^g^ triump^ates ^^r^ris.
though he read with set purpose to resute them, yet he was himself refuted by
them and reclaimed from d^verse errors, especially in the main point of
justification, and thereby being conquered by his adversary, obtained the
noblest victory of all over himself, in conquering his own errors.

Deo laus sine fine.
FINIS.

