The Fanatic in his Colors. OR, The Rise, Height, and Fall, OF FACTION AND
Rebellion, From 1648, Unto 1661.

With an Appendix concerning Allegiance, Government and Order.

By T. F.

LONDON: Printed for H. Marsh at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane near
Fleet Street, 1661.

The Death of CHARLES the first, a Horrid-murder, and greatest of any except
the Son of GOD.
THE cruelty, rage, inhumanity, and butchery committed against our late King,
was damnable in its own nature, and unparralleld in any former age; yet termed
by bloody Assassinates, and Raviliacks, an act of Justice, and of the highest
Justice; but by all knowing persons who have any thing of Christianity, or
Morality (for that natural light of Heathens abhorred such Barbarism) cannot
choose, but reflect upon that sacred Blood with sorrowful hearts, and they who
had a hand, or were willingly consenting to that superlative murder, are men of
black Souls, and seared consciences, and without unfeigned remorse, must
descend lower then the grave, being the greatest of any except the Son of God:
that act was Citills term.
horribile crimen, a fearful sin; excellens malignitas, a superlative
wickedness; Nicepho: censure. Aust.
opus damnabile, a damnable act, a sin out of measure sinful; such, as the
Devil entered into him for the doing of it, so egregious, prodigious, that
Christ calls him a Devil, and ever after, Judas the Traitor. Its true, Kings
Treachery odious. But against the Innocent the act is execrable.
have been disgraced, and degraded, yea, deprived of life by their Subjects, as
Julius Caesar, Nero, Galba, Vitellius, Domitian, Heliogabalus, our Edward the
second, and Richard the second, and many more, Heathen and Christian, yet never
any the worst of men so boldly impudent, as under the color of Law to doom
their Sovereign to death. When the Duke of Guise The Duke of Guise.
was slain by Poltrot, Duraeus a Papist could say of it, that the Christian
world had not seen a fact, funestius, luctuosius, more doleful, more direful;
its said of the Gunpowder The Gunpowder Plot.
Plot, it was a Tipe of Tophet, a petite Synopsis of Sodom, and Gomorrah, and
of that fearful conflagration of the World at the day of Doom, such an
intended Massacre as never Man on Earth, or Fiend in Hell devised; but behold A
greater, and acted.
a greater! what ear hears it, but must tingle; what tongue tells it, but must
tremble, and what heart quakes not at the thought of it? the murder of a wise,
pious, learned, and mild King your Liege, Lord, and Sovereign; I will not say
with Jeremy, go to the Isles of Chittim, and send to Kedar, and see if such
things be there: but look if Turks, if Tartars, if all Heathen A treason
unmachable.
Lands can pattern such an act; I will say with Is. Quis vidit? quis audivit?
what eye has er'e beheld, what ear has ever heard so egregious, so prodigious
and monstrous a deed? Hyppolitus says in Treason a fearful and prodigious
evil.
Seneca, Nullum caruit exemplo nefas, never was so vile a villainy, but it had
example; Ask all Antiquity, ab orb condito, the Rolls, and Records of all
Countries, of all Times, caruit exemplo nefas, the world cannot sample it;
David's absit, shows how heinous this is, God forbid, I should lay my hands on
Gods anointed; yea, his heart smote him, that he cut off but the lap of Saul's
garment. Treason, (...), is the greatest crime amongst the Romans, says a
Greek Historian. Amo proditionem, odio proditorem.
Augustus hated the betrayer of his enemy. In punishing treason, says Tully,
no Judge can be too cruel; Nunquam Cassiani inventi sunt Christiani.
Never was true Protestant traitor to his Prince; Rebels are right Esau's
(red) of bloody dispositions (hairy) of savage natures, and extraordinary
cruelty; Catuli Catilinarii, Statizing Jesuits, that turn all Religion, into
Statisme; yea, into Atheism, a monstrous, menstruous brood, truth hating
pleaders, pioners of the Temple, maintained by the spoil and pillage of it,
like the great Behemoth, they draw He a sea of water, they of blood.
up whole floods of blood into their bellies; happy are they who Barbarians
would blush at it.
had no hand in such an abominable and detestable act (a shame that such were
ever baptized into the faith of Jesus Christ,) but remain in the world to
declare their innocence, and celebrate their Kings death with lamentations and
regrets.

And what ensued upon this cursed Act?

Anarchy, disorder, confusion, all villainies and iniquities, as it was in the
Jews time, Non erat Rex, Judge. 19. 22.
there was no King in Israel, but every man did that which was right in his
own eyes; the murder Clamitat in coelum vox sanguinis, etc.
of Nobles, of Gentlemen, of Commons, a sin that cries loud in the ears of the
Lord of hosts: sacrilege; their motions being commonly, What shall we take
away from the man of God, pricking Saul's was otherwise. 1. Sam. 9. 7.
the Churches veins, and suffering her to bleed to death, and enriching
themselves by her spoils, pulling down Gods Churches and Temples, trampling
under feet his Ordinances, discountenancing of able Orthodox Preachers, opening
a door of encouragement to schismatics, and heretics, the bane of Church and
State; taking away men's estates and livelihoods, exposing many families (and
those no mean ones) to penury, and much misery; oppressive exactions upon the
people, Law being what the power of the sword made it; innocence was no plea?
tell them of injustice, they Pilate-like answered, Quod feci, feci; jura
perjura, defraud, dissemble, swear, forswear, kill and slay, the Language of
their tongues, destruction was in their paths, and the way of peace they did
not know, growing proud of their victorious mischiefs, flesht with fortunate
Their very path ruin: and they ruin themselves.
wickedness, triumphing in their unblest gain, riding over men's heads, mocking
innocence, preying on estates; Quo tendit soeva Regicides, are Regnicides.
libido? whither will their madness run, none knows what further mischiefs they
intended, had not God who puts bounds to the Sea, limited their fury, and put a
Job 38. 11.
hook in their nostrils, and a bridle in their mouths, who whips the rebellious
with a rod of Iron, and the backs of Atheists with Scorpions, never long
suffering those to prosper, that cannot endure to see his Churnh prosper.

But blessed be the name of God, and ever blessed, that has opened Cause of
joy after a long sadness.
a door of Hope, that these clouds will be dispersed, and the nasty door of
Janus Temple shut, by restoring Tacitus censures Galba that he was capax
imperit, misi imperasset.
our gracious Sovereign, King Charles, to his undoubted right, who is,
Dignissimus Regno, si non natus ad Regnum, worthy of a Kingdom, if he were not
born to a Kingdom.

There are three ways of choosing Kings:

1. By an immediate nomination from God.

2. An election of the People; the former is ceased, the later has been found
dangerous.

3. A succession of Blood, as when this Honor comes of Blood, and one Prince
is born of another, this is more usual, and in appearance Lips. Pol. l. 2. c.
4. Tacitus 2. Hist.
the better, because there is less danger in acceptance, then in the election
of a Prince, and it hinders commotions, when the change of things gives
opportunity, to great and strange attempts, and disheartens the hopes of
ambitious persons, In corrupt Monarchy there can be but one Tyrant.
when they are assured they cannot succeed; and as Kingly government is best,
so this is the best and safest way: For Aristocracy, In Aristocracy more then
one.
which is the government by the Nobility, as in the Signory of Venice; and
Democracy, which is In Democracy many.
popular, and consists of many, as of Genoa, and Cantons of the Switzers, have
their inconveniences, and those no small ones; the former, through
covetuousness, ambition and cruelty of the persons, turns In Anarchy all are
Tyrants.
to Tyranny: for as Maecenas says, the State of a few Lords, is the State of
Tyrants. The other is converted into a licentious liberty and is much subject
to alterations through its inconstancy; the truth of this we have lately seen
by sad experience, so that Kingly government is the best; more the Authority,
greater the obedience, fewer their determinations, firmer their Councels,
speedier their resolutitions, and more prompt the execution of their designs.
It is best, first, because the most ancient: all Nations of former Ages did
first Cic. 3. deleg. Salus. Cat.
yield obedience unto Kings; and this government was first spread on the earth,
in the beginning of things, the dominion of Countries and Nations was in the
hands of Justin. l. 1.
Kings.

2. Most agreeable to nature, and this, other living creatures teach, in whom
we may behold this Image of government: Amongst the Cranes, there is Dux, a
Captain; in a flock of Sheep a Leader: amongst Birds, the Eagle; amongst
Beasts, the Lion; amongst Serpents, the Basilisk; amongst Fishes, the Whale;
amongst Bees, the master Be: the Pismires have their governors; the
Grasshoppers go forth by bands; and has not God, who has made an order in
nature, made a chief and Supreme amongst men? without doubt, and it concerns
the common quiet of all, Lips. Pol. l. 2. c. 2.
that all Authority be given to one; the power of many, and concord, can never
long dwell together, and there is no better remedy to appease discords and
dissentions, then by men submitting to the govenment of one.

3. It consents most with reason, (the body is ruled by one soul) and comes
nearest to unity, and has similitude with what is divine, Per me Reges
regnant, per me Principes imperant, by me Kings rule, and Princes decree
justice.

4. It is most lasting and durable, freest from faction, confusion, and
tyranny: for whereas no Aristocraticall, or popular State has lasted longer
then six hundred years, and few so long; many Monarchys have continued twice as
long in the same estate; I mean not an absolute Monarchy, (for command is a mad
man, and power lunatique) but such as must be tied to the Laws, as far forth as
it is comprehended under the Law, have the advice of sound Judgments in their
undertakings; therefore this Kingdom is happy in its constitution, not shufled
into a popular government, nor cut in pieces by a headless headstrong
Aristocracy.

5. It Is the most flourishing; for never came Rome to be Mistress of the world,
till she was reduced to a Monarchy in the times of Aug. Caesar.

And now, for answer to some 2. Object. Answ.
Fanatic spirits, let me tell them, First, that the spiritual Kingdom Christ's
kingdom and Caesar's distinct.
of the Church, and the civil kingdom of Caesar, are distinct and separate,
each of them being included in his bounds, may not enter upon the borders of
the other; the Scripture shows evidently, that The one abrogates not the other.
the Kingdom of Christ abrogates not the kingdom of Caesar, but that the Gospel
is a good friend to kingdoms, teaching Princes how to govern, and the people
how to be subject. It was a question propounded to our Savior, Mat. 22. 17. Is
it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar or no? he replies, v. 21. Render unto
Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things that are Gods. This
I add, to confute their madness, that say, We own no King but Jesus, whether
this be more impotence, or impudence, I will not dispute, the best conviction
is the Magistrates power, who bears not the sword in vain.

Others say, Kings stand not 2. Ob.
with the peoples liberty; thus did Corah and his Accomplices, Number. 16. The
language of some men amongst us. Kings stand with liberty.
3. they said unto Moses and Aaron, you take too much upon you, seeing all the
Congregation are holy, every one of them and the Lord is amongst them,
wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the congregation of the Lord? But
how is this act esteemed, to be a gathering together against the Lord, a
murmuring against God v. 11. as it was not ordinary, they did not dye an
ordinary death, 29, 30, 31. The Argument here used is sottish and seditious;
must one that is holy have none to be over him, may there be no Magistrate
where the people are all Saints. Vain men.
St. Peter says, omnis anima, let every Soul be subject, not all Saints only,
but all Souls must be subject to the higher powers. he that will say with the
sons of Belial, who is Saul that we should serve him? will ask also with the
Atheists, who is the Almighty that Jobe 26.
we should serve him? Libertines plead Christian liberty, it frees them from
this bondage of obeying Kings. Foolish men! Kings crave not bondage but
ingenuous Then liberty and obedience to Kings are consistent.
subjection, not servitude, but obedience; Good subjects are not Tributaryes
but contributaryes, their taxes, not forced exactions; but ingenuous grants.
Not constrained, but of conscience, Romans 13. 5. Away then with those
discontented, and Rebellious spirits that grudge him his outward rights whether
tributes of money, or Attributes of supremacy. And fly off in a rage, what
Portion have we in Charles? Let such enemies perish, and upon his own head let
his Crown flourish. May not the Scepter depart from Jacob nor a seed from his
loins till Shiloh come again, let his Posterity have a Crown on Earth when
himself has a Crown in Heaven.

It is not the name of a King, a nominal King that I commend unto you, like
those sometimes in France who had nothing but the bare name, preter nomen
nihil. Nor like the King of Samaria who was no more but paululum Spumae a
frothy bubble: I speak of one who is great in name, in office, in parts, of
Auhtority, majesty, and qualified in every respect for the discharge of his
government, such an one as shall honor the Nobles, council the Counselors,
grace the Universities, encourage Orthodox Ministers, defend the rich, relieve
the poor, restore justice, advance religion, usher in peace and plenty, and
make a sweet spring wheresoever he goes.

1. And of all this you may be assured: first from his word, he that is truly
regal will be real in Verbum regis Rex regi.
words and actions, and as the people proclaim their love to their King, the
King has proclaimed his Love to his people in a pardon of all past offenses,
except what cannot stand with honor, religion, The praise of it Lips. l 2.
pol: c. 14.
and justice; and that referred to his Parliament, there is no question but he
will see that faithfully performed for which his royal word is engaged; it
being not like the More precious then a Kingdom.
Lesbian rule which changes and alters it self according to the building,
and is crooked, and straight, short and long, according to the bigness, and
proportion of Words are not comendable, if deeds be not answerable.
the stone or timber. He knows no man can expect faithfulness from others that
is not faithful himself.

2. You may be assured from his gentleness and sweet temper of spirit,
levelling the unevenest and crookedest dispositions, that which made Alexander
the Great so memorable, was not his Conquests, but that excellency of mind in
pardoning offenders. It is storied of that great Captain of the Jews, that he
was vir mitissimus, the mildest Numb 12. 3.
man upon Earth. Of Jacob, that he was homo lenis a smooth Gen 27. 11.
man, so in his Countenance, of a peacable disposition: of David that he was
pulcher aspectu, of a 1 King. 16. 12.
lovely and gracious aspect, mild, affable and pleasing presence. This made
Polibius say, that a courteous Prince conquers all. It no ways lessens his
Authority, but adds to Read Lipsius pol. l. 2. c. 13.
his greatness. The King of Bees, says Basil, has no sting, the greater
power the less Passion. Regis clementia virtus, a King is Gods A gentle
entreaty more forceable then imperious command.
Lievtennant on Earth, and must be merciful, as his Father in heaven is
merciful; it is the part of a Tyrant, in imperio nil nisi imperium cogitare,
to glory with Lewis the eleventh King of France that he passed his time in
making, and undoing Comineus lib. 6. c. 8. Cont: Faust. l. 22. c. 56.
men, as if he were placed in his throne non ut prosit, sed tantum ut praesit,
as Austine speaks. When a Tyrant comes abroad, all seek to hide themselves,
but when a mild King shows himself, all flock to him, the streets and ways
are filled Pro. 28. 28.
with people, and the air with acclamations of joy, which either has been, or
will be in all parts of Pope Sixtus delighted in bloody wars, when he heard of
peace he dyed.
this Kingdom. Our King is Filius pacis, the son of Peace, made of Peace, and
well knows, that to sluice out the blood of his subjects, is to empty his own
veins. It is said of Alexander the Great to his eternal infamy, he entered
like a fox; he reigned like a lion, and therefore worthy to dye like a dog.

3. You may receive Assurance, and encouragement from his wisdom, sagacity,
and quickness of apprehension, to judge of true and false colors, and who they
are that have run along with all changes, Temporisers. Prudence, a proper
virtue for him that governs.
and shifted Sail with every wind.

Macro saluted Sejanus as long as he was in Tiberius favor, many follow more a
Princes fortune, then his person. Again, he knows bad servants to God can
never be faithful to men. Theodoritus one of the Emperors of Rome was an
Arian, one of his Courtyers desirous to engratiate himself with his Master,
forth with became an Arian, leaving his former way of religion; the Emperor
hearing of it straight commanded his head to be chopped off, saying, he that will
not be faithful to God, will never be faithful to man. There is a necessity,
that a Ruler be wise, nullu^ animal majori est art tractandum, quam homo;
there is not any creature Seneca lib de Clem. 1. c. 17.
like unto man, most mutable in his opinions, most deceitful in his words, of
more colors fouldings, doublings, worst to be known, hardest to be ruled, most
ingrate and unthankful unto him that is set over him, for whose government,
more art, more prudence, more wisdom, more discretion and sagacity is
required; his wisdom was never yet questioned by any, he is a wise King.

4. You may be assured from that obligation that lies upon him, and that Oath
that he will take at his Coronation, impartially to administer Justice; the
greatest style of honor that could be bestowed upon the Roman Consuls,
Generals, Which he dare not violate, as some have done.
and Emperors, was Pater patriae, to have a fatherly care over, and to bear a
fatherly affection to Elius Ad.
those that are under them: Non mihi, sed populo, said an Emperor. Princes are
not ordained for their own sake, but for the peoples, that they might have to
whom to resort, and upon whom to depend for help, succor and relief in their
necessities, their breast being that Ocean into which the cares of private men
should empty themselves; Remota justitia, quid Aust. de civit. Dei. l. 4. c. 4.
sunt regna, nisi magna latrocinia? take away Justice, and what are kingdoms
but Latrocinations? under this name, is comprehended all kind of virtue; in
this sense, (says the Philosopher,) Justitia est omnis virtus; but
particularly, it is one of the Cardinal virtues, which has for its object and
end, the giving to every man that which is his right and his due: It is
constans Vlpian.
and perpetua voluntas, quae tribuit cuique suum, a constant and perpetual
will, attributing to every man his own; it is, singular, and unicum donum,
etc. the only singular gift, and greatest good that God communicates Lib. 3.
de off.
unto men. Cicero calls her the Queen; and Firmianus, the mother of all
virtues; and therefore, without question, our gracious King, being a true
Steward, This is the end of their office.
very well knows, he must give an account of his stewardship, and that his
account may be in some reasonable proportion answerable to his receipts, he will
make his primum No greater ornament then justice.
and ultimum, the foremost of his desires, and utmost of his endeavors to do
Justice; this he knows, is columna and corona regni, a He will establish the
reign of Astraea in this age of iniquity.
prop to make a kingdom subsist firm in it self; and a crown to render it
glorious in the eyes of others. Our Sovereign will be a Constantine, an
Arcadius, and a Theodosius to his Church, a shield for their defense and
protection, scutum Christianorum, the buckler of his people, as Plutarch called
Fabius In vita Marcelli.
Max. scutum Romanorum, the target of the Romans: Rulers are called shields,
Hos. 4. 18. Her shields love to say, Give ye; a Tyrant is a Butcher to his
people, but a good King, a Buckler.

5. You may receive assurance from his tenderness of spirit toward the
oppressed and afflicted. The wisest King that ever was, complains of a mighty
oppression, that he beheld the tears of the innocent, and they had no
Comforter, Eccles. 4. 1. The first words of the first King Kings must be
nursing fathers, not cursing Tyrants: Deliverers, not devourers.
whom God chose for his people were these, What aileth the people that they
weep? 1 Samuel 2. 5. Kings are Gods Lievtenants; and as they assume the name of
gods, so they ought to have the property; not to pill and poll their subjects,
but to be nursing fathers. Alphonsus, King Is. 49. 23.
of Naples, used this Emblem, A Pelican feeding her young with her own blood,
and the Motto, Pro rege, pro grege. Achilles in Homer Iliad. l. 9.
is said to love his countrymen, as the careful bird her unfeathered brood.
The gracious Apothegme of our noble Sovereign King James, to his son Henry, is
worthy to be written in letters of gold, Basil. Dor. l. 2. p. 99.
and will not be forgotten by his grandchild, who treasures every lesson that
be speaks his subjects good: Enrich not your self with exactions upon your
subjects; but think the riches of your people, your best treasure. We have seen
and heard of some lately, that were so cruel, and incompassionate, as if the
Rocks had fathered them, and the Wolves of the Wilderness had given them suck,
there being no other comfort to the oppressed, then that advice Albertus
Craucius gave to Luther, when he thought a reformation impossible; Frater,
frater, abi in cellam, and ibi dic miserere mei Deus, Brother, brother, go into
thy cell, and do no more, but sigh and say, Lord have mercy on me. Was it not
too common to stop innocence in the mouth with disaffection, and a true lover
of the kingdom, with the odious name of a Cavalier, for so they intended it,
and so I find it used above thirty six years ago, Bark on the 6. Com. page 246.
by which means it came to pass, that Justice was suspended, and the innocent
became a prey to cunning subtle Foxes, who, Proteus-like, could transform
themselves into any shape, as the Devil into Saul's mantle, or into an Angel of
light; grieved hearts had never more cause to say, and sadly to complain,
Mundum dolens circuivi; fidem undique quaesivi, etc. Men were used as Vetronius
Thurnius used Alexander Severus his poor suppliants, The Author had sadly
experimented it, for seven years.
to kill them with lingering excuses, and delays, and by their cunning
subtilty, to decline the force of any just and reasonable request, rendering
the lives of many uncomfortable to themselves, and a burden to others. Worse
then the unjust Judge, or Gallio. Act. 18.
Now, can it be imagined by any sober discreet persons, that our gracious
Sovereign, who has been so sorely afflicted, (almost from his infancy)
undergone the contradictions of men, scorns, contempts, revilings, has drunk
deep of the cup of His sufferings unexpressible by any Pen.
persecution, beheld (with a sad heart) the horrible oppressions committed in
this Land, and cruelties exercised against persons of all ranks, to the
violation of divine and humane Laws; I say, it cannot be imagined, that he can
want the bowels of compassion toward the oppressed and afflicted; besides,
there is not any thing more repeated in Scripture, Psalm. 12. 5. Psalm. 72. 2.
Exodus 3. 7, 8.
(in which the King is very conversant) then the particular care which God
(whom he owns for his, and whose Lieutenant he is) has of the oppressed; and
when God is a pattern, it is safe following; by this he will be immortalized,
and his throne surely established, Prove. 29. 14. the King that faithfully
judges the poor, his throne shall Over you in dignity: For you for profit.
be established for ever; and such a King you may be assured of; who knows, he
is not only over you, but for you.

6. You may be assured from his Majesty's constancy in Religion, wounded with
the sword of manifold temptations, being sorely thrust at, that he might fall;
she that made the Kings of the earth Rev. 17. 2.
drunk with the Wine of fornication, could not make him drink the least drop,
but continued in the faith, grounded and settled, not moved from the hope of
the Gospel: such a constancy appeared Col. 1. 23.
in his royal Majesty, that neither temptations on one hand, threatenings on
the other, the graceless behavior of his subjects, and undutifull dealing from
Pretended Professors, but real Atheists.
those of the same Profession, could in the least shake his faith, the God of
constancy working this grace in his royal heart, and giving him this comfort
in his saddest and darkest night of troubles; that he who trusts in the Lord,
shall be as mount Sion, which cannot be removed, Psalm. 125. 1.
but stands fast for ever; he knew irresolution, and unsteadiness hateful to
his Master Christ, who is Heb. 13. 8.
semper idem, ever the same; he is of a noble and uncommon nature, it being the
property of the double-minded man, to be unstable in all his ways: Christian
James 1. 8.
Religion is a Ring, and the Diamond of this Ring is Constancy, Vincenti
dabitur, that wears the Crown. Some are ever turning till nothing be left, but
to turn Turk.
Some have derived sanctum, quasi sancitum, an established nature, and such is
his royal Majesty's, who has remained unmoved, unshaken, and would not lose
his conscience to gain three kingdoms, nor forsake that Religion in which his
father dyed a Martyr. I will upon this occasion, add one thing only to the
perpetual honor of Englands Kings; Constantine the great, our Countryman,
was the first Christian Emperor; Lucius our Countryman, the first christened
King; Henry the 8th, the first that shak'd off the Popes unlimited power; King
James the first of his rank, who opposed Antichrist with his One terms him,
hujus seculi miraculum.
own Pen; Charles the first, (through the inhumanity of a bloody sort of
people) because he would not betray the liberty of his Subjects to the lust and
ambition of Tyrants, the first martyred King, a glorious Where true faith is,
there is true martyrdom. This red must be grounded on white.
King; candidatus innocentia purpuratus martyrio, white and red; white, by his
sanctity in his life; red, by his martyrdom in death: and our gracious King
Charles the second, though Deo secundus next to God, yet nulli secundus, not
inferior to Tert.
any for his admirable parts and abilities, and undaunted resolution and
constancy in the faith, truly meriting the name, and title. Defender of the
Faith

Lastly, you may be encouraged that he will be a glorious instrument of
Reformation, both in Church and state, he is a good pious King, and may avow
boldly with Nerva, se nihil fecisse, quo minus possit Christi Phili: in vit:
Nervae.
imperio deposito privatum tuto vivere. And glory with Samuel: whose Ox, 1 Samuel 12. 3.
and whose Ass have I taken? or to whom have I done wrong? or whom have I hurt.
His enemies being Judges cannot justly accuse him, his life is so strict and
austere, that wicked Endued with piety.
men can draw no pattern from him, much less can they hope, that he will let
loose the reins to sin, Virtue necessary says Lips. pol. l. 2. c. 8.
and give countenance to the impudent fury of profaneness. Greatness is a
copy which every Their actions are instructions 1 K. 15. 30. and 16. 19.
action, every affection strives to write after, Regis ad exemplum totus
componitur orbis. The son of Nebat is never without this brand, he made Israel
to sin: For the most part every man emulates the manners of his Sovereigne;
mobile mutatur Claudia. Confessor Papa, Confessor populus.
semper cum principe vulgus. When Leo lived because he stood well affected to
the stage, all Rome swarmed with Juglers, Singers, Players.

The Common People are like tempered Wax whereon the vicious Seal of greatness
makes easy impression; no such thing may be feared to proceed from him being a
pious King himself, and therefore Kings beget a likeness of manners. Bonas
omnium mensura.
will be a happy father to his Country and take no part with the enemies of his
Heavenly Father. Can you think, that he who has swept his own heart will
suffer the weeds of impiety so to be nourished in the hearts of his subjects?
he is not ignorant that God has said, If ye walk contrary unto me, I will
bring your sanctuaries unto desolation Lev. 26. 31.
God has doubtless ordained him for the punishment of evil 1 Pet. 2. 14
doers, and praise of them that do well. And that we may live quiet and
peaceable lives in all godliness and honesty. 1 Timothy 2. 2.


Those that lately Usurped the Throne, might be (as indeed they were)
instruments of Gods Justice, but not of Reformation: Wasters not builders of
Gods Temple.
It was in my mind says David, to build an House to the name of the Lord my
God, not to pull it down, but to build. 1 Chronicles. 22. 7. but (says he) the word
of the Lord came to me saying thou have shed blood abundantly, and have made
great wars, thou shall David must not, and why.
not build an House to my name, because thou have shed much blood: but Solomon
thy son shall do it, who Solomon shall.
shall be a man of rest, he shall build an house for my name, I dare affirm,
that there is no King in the Christian World (except our Gracious King Charles
the second) that has not caused war, nor occasioned the spilling of their
subjects blood and therefore he, amongst all, the fittest, and most suitable
for the work of a glorious Reformation; and truly I speak it without flattery
Loyalty a duty.
(for I expect nothing where no more is done out duty) that if Plutarch were
now living to write Lives by parallels, he would be troubled exceedingly to
find a There was no King like unto him. 2 K. 23. 25. A right comparison
betwixt them.
parallel for our Josias, both in respect of his Majesty's moral endowments,
and Princely virtues.

Doubtless God would never have preserved him from so many Plots, such eminent
dangers, witness his wonderful escape from the Fight at Worcester, which
Victory seemed to have no life, because it wanted his death, and was In every
mercy a wonder.
not completed with the Sacrifice of his Sacred blood his wonderful protection
in the Land of Captivity, being tossed from Post to Pillar, hurld from one
Kingdom to another, exposed to penury and misery, yet sustained by a
wonderful providence, living at Gods immediate finding, and expecting his
morrows breakfast from his bountiful hand; wonderfully restored beyond the
thoughts and expectations of man, and after such a manner as may be admired,
and all conclude it is the hand of God. All these are strong arguments to
persuade us, that God has designed him for his glory, and will make him
isntrumental for a glorious reformation.

What now remains, but

1. That we pray for him: every important action requires prayer, much more
that which concerns three Kingdoms; Moses prayed for the choice of his
successor, Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all Numb. 27. 16.
flesh set a man over the Congregation. It is not fit that he who is chosen for
God, should be chosen without God; those which in a due proportion must
represent God to the world, ought to be consecrated to that Majesty which they
represent, pray for Gods presence to go along with him, to be a cloud in the
day for direction, and a pillar of fire in the night for consolation, to defend
him from all implacable enemies, and fit him with all suitable graces for the
discharge of his weighty employment; and besides, let us bless God for him, and
hold our selves blessed in him.

2. If there be occasion, fight for him, spend your dearest blood to preserve
the breath of your nostrils.

3. Rejoice heartily, that you see this day, that Israel has crossed the Sea
with dry feet, and the returning waters drowned their pursuing enemies.

4. Beware, lest your sins and provocations rob you of blessings, and once more
turn your flourishing kingdom into an Akeldema, or field of blood; Impietas ad
arma vocat, if we fight against God, we provoke God to fight against us; If we
lift up the hand of wickedness, we shall meet with the hand of Justice; if
transgression beat the Drum, destruction will begin the Fiat justitia, and
halebis pacem, Aust.
march. Live righteously, and live peaceably; the Lord fix all our hearts upon
himself, that neither our selves, our children, nor their generations may ever
see war in Psalm. 147.
England: strengthen the bars of our gates, and establish peace in our borders,
we beseech thee, O Lord.

5. Study to be loyal: Treason is a fearful and prodigious evil; they that
resist, shall receive to themselves damnation. Remember Corah, Dathan and
Abiram. If murder be a crying sin, Treason may be termed a roaring sin. To
conclude, the time commands a period; be once more persuaded, to be instant in
prayer for his sacred Majesty, that God would be pleased to give him, Vitam
longam, regnum prosperum, prolem faelicem, vitam eternam, a long life, a
prosperous reign, a happy progeny in this world, and in the world to come life
eternal; with expressions from loyal hearts, and dutiful affections cry out,
Long live King Charles the second, happily and prosperously, to the terror of
his enemies, and comfort of his Subjects.

Long live Charles the IId.
FINIS.
This Speech was ended with the general acclamations of all the comers, there
being no small concourse of gentlemen, God could never endure a lukewarm
affection.
who discovered, fervorem in affectu, cheerfulness in their affection,
deserving wreathed Coronets for their willing and cheerful obedience, their
hearts being toward the Governor of Israel; nor a small number of Commons,
praise worthy too, all discharging Go on, step not back.
their pistols and muskets, that the very skies echoed to their joys.

This Speech, as it was faithfully delivered, was with much civility, and
loyalty entertained, and is now drawn to the Press, through the pressing
desires, and prevailing importunities of many worthy Persons, whose favors do
oblige me to comply with their requests, who otherwise might command; By some,
I know it will be censured, for there was yet never any truth so happily
innocent, as to free it self from calumny, and no man so blessed, (if it may be
so termed) as not to be scowr'd and scourged by malevolent tongues.

CHAP. I. That civil Government is necessary, it is better not to be, then to
be without it.
I Need not to spend time to show you that government is necessary, God has
appointed order in all things, and set a Captain over them: Among the Fowls,
the Eagle; among the Beasts, the Lion; among the Serpents, the Basilisk; among
the Fishes, the Whale; among the Bees, one Master; among the Sheep, one Leader;
Rex unus est Apibus, and Dux unus in Gregibus; Cipr. de vaniat. Idol.
among the Cranes, one Chief, Quem ordine literato sequuntur, that Hier. Epist.
ad Rust.
goes before the rest: the Pismires have their Governor, and the Grasshoppers
go forth by bands; among the Planets, a Sun; among the Angels, Prove. 30. 2.
Cherubims, and Seraphims; and in Hell, the kingdom of confusion; there is
distinction of persons, and orders, otherwise Beelzebub could Luke 11. 15.
not be the chief of Devils; and has God left man ungoverned, appointed no
Ruler amongst men? far be such thoughts from any man endued with Reason; take
away government, destroy order; and where there is no order, ibi ruinae ostium
patet, the door is open to ruin, and destruction; malum quidem est, ubi est
nullus principatus, etc. it is an exceeding evil, where there is no government,
for order is the good of every creature; and it is better not to be, then be
without it; all Lips. Pol. l. 2. c. 1.
civil life consists in society, and society in traffic and government. The
first is an argument of another discourse, the other is defined to be a certain
order, as well in commanding as obeying, which is so necessary, that it is the
only stay of humane affairs, without which, no house, no City, no Nation, Cic.
3. de leg.
neither the whole state of mankind, nor the universal nature of things, nor
the world it self can stand, and continue; it is that chain Seneca. 1. l. de
clem.
by which Societies are linkt, and vital spirit by which men breath. The rod
of Circes, which tames man and beasts that are touched therewith; yea, there is
no greater mischief Live. l. 6.
in the world, then the want Sopho.
of government; and therefore they are led by a strange spirit, and void of all
reason, that are enemies to government; the Apostle calls them, Filthy
dreamers, that despise Jude 8.
government, and speak evil of dignities, i. e. of those in authority. In
Germany they would have framed a politic body, but found it impossible, like
the body of Poliphemus, Bulling. adv. Anabapt. fol. 95.
without his eye, or like the confused Chaos, when height, and depth, light and
darkness were mingled together; popular equality is the greatest inequality,
void of all name, nurture, and nature of a Commonwealth; for some must be
subject, other sovereign, some low, some high, some rule, some obey; let us be
of the number that desire to move orderly in our own sphere, and keep our right
ubi, rather wishing our harmlesness should suffer then not to give passive, and
patient obedience to lawful Authority; for take away order and degrees of
persons, and what will follow, but a licentious Ataxie, or confusion? God has
ordained some Masters, other servants; to Some Masters, some servants.
repine at others greatness, and our meanness, is to cavil with God; as if he
wanted wisdom, and equity in disposing these inferior creatures, it is a
savage and popular humor to malign and enveigh Levellers.
against men in eminent places; that rhyme, when Adam delv'd, and Eve span; who
was then the Gentleman, seemd to be made amongst Jack Straw's followers, and to
savor of rebellious discontent. Anarchy and disorder have ever been the bane
of Kingdoms: confusion, misery, all the villainies, and iniquityes of Israel
are imputed to this, non erat rex their was no King in Israel. Judge. 19. 20.
21 chap.


CHAP. II. That King is a name not only of dignity but of office, and that
troublesome.
THe word King in its several Languages makes this good* Rex regendo. Heb.
Raga. amongst other accept: signifies to feed, from hence is derived Rex rego,
or Regno.
Rex a regendo from governing; and its usual among the Prophets, and Poets,
for regere and pascere to signify the same, Homer, Virgill, and David put no
difference betwixt reges, and Pastores, styling Ps. 23.
Kings shepherds; and shepherds Kings. And where the vulgar Latin reads
Dominus regit me; Hieroms translation has it Dominus pascit me, the Lord is my
shepherd. Pastores Populi, an usual name for Kings, showing, that they must
carry a gentle hand over their subjects, feeding, not fleeceing of them, that
they must be watchful, and defend them from wolves and thieves. A King is not
for himself but for his People; his subjects houses are guarded, and secured by
his vigilance, their ease procured by his labor; their delights enjoyed by his
industry, and their merry vacations, by his painful employments. After Saul
was anointed, Samuel declares unto him 1 Samuel 10. 25.
the obligations of his office; a King is not to sleep, and take his ease, to
sway the Scepter Royal at his will and pleasure, but to govern and maintain
the People in peace, and justice, to Protect and defend them from their
Enemies, being not for himself but for them a King; Adverte (says Seneca to
the Emperor Nero) Rempublicam Seneca lib. de clem. 1.
non esse tuam sed te reipublicae, the Commonwealth is not thine, but thou, the
Commonwealths, that thou might apply they self wholly to the common good.
Rex eligitur, non ut sui ipsius curam habeat, and sese moliter curet, sed ut
per ipsum, ii qui eligerunt, been, beateque vivant; they are made choice of,
that People may live well, and happily under them. In the Greek tongue, a King
is called, (...), quasi basis populi, as the basis and foundation of the
people, Some conceive this name was given from the Basiliske, but that is no
ground for such an etymology
who sustains the weight, and bears the load upon his shoulders, the burden
and cares of his kingdom; but more of this in the third Chapter, which treats
of the duty and office of Kings. It is a name of office, not dignity only, and
requires much wisdom, prudence, discretion, and sagacity, Nullum animal majori
est art tractandum quam homo; Seneca lib. de cle. 1. c. 17.
it is the art of Arts, most difficult to learn; and a Father gives the reason,
Quia inter omnes animantes, homo maxim, and moribus varius, and voluntate
diversus; Nazianz. in Apolog.
amongst all living creatures, man is most various in his manners, and most
diverse in his will, most mutable in his opinions, most deceitful in his
words, of more colors, doublings, and fouldings then any other, worst to be
known, hardest to be ruled, and above all, most unthankful to him that is set
over him; and therefore, Inter arts omnes vivendi, regendi ars amplior, and
superior est; of all offices, the highest and greatest, is regal, a burden, To
rule, a great burden.
as well as a dignity; a noble servitude, an honorable slavery, whose fetters
are of fine gold, as the Emperor Commodus Commodus Emper.
said, but though of gold, they are still chains; though honorable, still
servitudes; and the rather chains, because they tie men under color of honor;
and the rather servitudes, because they oblige us to serve all, under the title
of commanding all; as they possess a rank of more height and Salust. ad Ca.
Caes. de Rep. Ordin.
eminency then others, so they are obliged to a greater care then others, which
ought to be an attendant on Power. This was well understood by Antigonus King of
Macedonia; who checked his Sons immoderate government; An ignoras (fili mi)
regnum nostrum nobilem esse servitudinem? art thou ignorant, my Son, that our
kingdom is a noble servitude? I speak this without any unmannerliness, or
thought of the least disesteem to that high and supreme office, but to draw
from us all due respect, and obedience, and How greatly should we value them.
how far we stand obliged to those that undertake the charge and burden of so
weighty an employment; as the protection, conservation, peace and safety of his
subjects, trouble, vexation, inquietude This many Kings have confessed.
both of soul and body; and therefore the Crown and Scepter have the face of
dignity, but the body of much care; and perplexity, this is evident by Moses,
when God made him his Viceroy, (instead of giving him thanks for so honorable
a charge) makes his moan, and complaint, for laying so heavy a load upon his
shoulders; Number. 11. 11.
Wherefore have thou afflicted thy servant; and wherefore have I not found
favor in thy sight, that thou layest the burden of all the people upon me?
proceeding further, says, Have I conceived all this people? v. 12.
have I begotten them, that thou should say unto me, Carry them in thy
bosom, as the nursing father bears Worth observing.
the sucking child; all God said to Moses, was, that he should be their
Captain, their Ruler; yet he sticks not to say, that he laid the burden of all
the people upon him, with Regere and portare, are synonomies.
this Motto added thereunto, Porta eos, Carry them; there is not any
government, that is without its Prior in donis major imperio.
burden. Upon those words of Jacob to Reuben, Judge. 49. 3. Thou, art my
firstborn, the excellency of dignity, and excellency of power; Hierome
renders, Major ad portandum, the greatest to bear; Potestas accepta, non honor,
sedonus aestimatur, Dominion Greg. l. 24. Mor. c. 26.
and Signiory, is not to be esteemed an honor, but a trouble, a mixture of a
little honor, and much trouble, Ovid. Met.


Laetus erat, mixtoque oneri gaudebat honor.

The Latin word which signifies honor, does but differ in one letter from that
which signifies a load, or burden, onos and onus, for H is but Honos. onus.
an aspiration.

I shall conclude this chapter by way of advice. That the greatest offices have
need of the greatest supports, God commanded Moses that he should make choice
of the Number. 11. 16.
Elders of Israel to rule his People. The greatest offices need the greatest
supports.
Heavie-headed men, accompanied with much virtue, aproved life, soundness of
Religion, much prudence, furnished with qualities suitable to their office, are
only worthy to give counsel, and those which Kings are to make choice of for
their service, they are to have many eyes, ears, and hands, as Xenophon wrote
in his Institution Agamemnon wished for ten Nestors.
of Cyrus, many subordinate Counselors, Ministers and assistants by whom to
discharge the burden of their places; It was a saying of Seleucus, one of the
kings of Syria, That if men did considerately Seleucus saying.
know, how troublesome it were only to write, and read so many letters of so
weighty affairs, if the Crown were thrown at their feet, they would not take it
up. Let a King be never so 1 Kings 10.
wise, he has need of helps to advise, and counsel: Solomon had his Solomon
his ancient counsel.
ancient Counsel, it was Senatus indeed, because it consisted of grave and old
men, but his Son not so wise, provided Counselors like himself, young in
years, and in discretion, which howsoever they were friends to Rehoboam, they
were not friends to the King; though perhaps they loved his person well, yet
they were enemies What qualifications necessary in subordinate officers.
to his kingdom; the qualities of persons for such employment are numbered in
the 18. of Exodus and 1. of Deutr. to be seven: First, men of courage: Secondly,
fearing God: Thirdly, men of truth: Fourthly, hating filthy lucre: Fifthly, the
chief of the Tribes: Sixthly, wise: Sevently, known men, such as had experience
of the people, and the people of them, and without these conditions they are
very unfit helpers: For what is Magistrate without courage? but a Lion without
his heart, or courage They will do no good, unless thus qualified.
without the fear of God, but armed injustice? or what fear of the true God,
where his truth is neglected? or how can truth consist with filthy gain? or if
their persons be contemptible, how shall the people regard them? or if they
have not wisdom, what are they but as an eye without seeing? and lastly, they
must be tried, and approved by the sight of their virtues. May our May our
Sovereign be blessed with a good Council.
gracious Sovereign be blessed with such a Council, that will make Gods Law the
stern to guide all their counsels, the end, the good of Church and State, and
their progress by continual prayer, to enlighten their hearts, illuminate
Bonum est consilium, sed bonorum. B. Lat.
their understandings, and dictate unto them what they are to do; for there are
so many contingencies in humane things; that man's wisdom is not always
sufficient to Alex. Sever. never determined any thing of moment, without twelve
or twenty Lawyers.
determine the best, or hitt aright in Councils, unless the Holy Ghost be
intervenient, interpose it self, and assist in them; for let them beat out
their brains with plodding and plotting, never so vigilant, never so studious,
they shall err in their aim, and shoot beside the Butt, if he direct not the
error of their counsel, and wisdom. When men lay their heads together A wicked
Council.
for the dishonor of God, defacing of his Religion, discountenancing Orthodox
Ministers, study Machavil more then the Gospel, mind policy more then Gods
worship; when his fear lies at the threshold of their Council-house, is to make
themselves such Counselors as Alecto called in Claudian.

Concilium deforme vocat, glomerentur in unum.
-- innumerae pestes erebi.
These are not pillars and props of No more such, sweet God.
a Commonwealth, but mischiefs, and plagues which hell has cast up; from
which, Good Lord deliver this Land. Charles the fifth used to Emp. Chapter 5.
say, that Princes should be served by men that were learned and virtuous, as
only fit for employment. Alexander Severus made choice of honest and virtuous
Counselors, Aetas senecturis, vitae immaculata.
displacing the vicious and unjust. We will not with Fredericus Furius dispute
their age (not under thirty, nor above sixty,) Certainly, age is a great
Master, which does graduate men in the knowledge of things; it is the mother
Young wits cannot weild weighy matters.
of Council; in the ancient is wisdom, and in much time prudence, says Job;
therefore some have thought that the shadow of an old man, is better then the
eloquence of a Seneca, Baldus, and others.
young. But alas, these sayings, with which men delight themselves, how ever
they may seem rational, yet it must be considered, that good counsel is not
in our heads, but in Gods hands, who can bring all counsel to naught, and make
all devices of Princes of none effect; this our eyes have lately seen, and Gods
immediate hand is to be admired. The Saduces, Herodians, and Pharisees,
sectaries of diverse, adverse factions, all combined in one against God, and
his anointed; Nimrod and Achitophel laid their heads together, Herod and the
Jews agreed, but blessed be God, who has caught them in their own craftiness,
and overthrown all their wicked Counsels, insomuch, that we must give him the
glory, and say, It is thy hand, thou Lord have done it. Psalm. 109. 27.


CHAP. III. The Duty of Kings deduced from their several names, and how they
are called Gods, By Analogy, Deputation, Participation.

GOD is an invisible King, the King is a visible God, I have said, ye are Gods,
Psalm. 82. 6.
Gods in name, not in nature.

By Analogy.
1. By Analogy, as God has his seat of Judgment in Heaven, so these, their
tribunalls and thrones on Earth, Tanquam in hoc Deum imitantes, as it were,
imitating God in this: their Authority is without the control of any, save of
the King of kings, Regna a Deo, and Reges dari; Theod. in Psalm. 82.
They are Stewards of Gods appointment, whom he judges fit to be employed, and
must only to God give an account.

By deput.
2. They are Gods by deputation, in that they judge not for men, but for the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. The Judgment is Gods, says Moses, being his mouth to
pronounce, and his hands to execute it. Appointed to this very end says the
Appostle to be the Ministers of God for good, R. 13. 4.
and the Revengers to execute wrath, upon him that does evil.

By participation.
3 Gods by Participation, God dealing with them, as Kings with their children,
to whom they communicated some part of their Glory, Participando sunt dii. Aust.
As Stars participate their Light from the sun, the primum Lucidum, so these,
their Authority from the suprem majesty. Being the Sourse and Fountain from
whence their Power proceeds insomuch as all the descendants bear a certain
character, and show a kind of Luster, causing all men to acknowledege them,
authorizing them without further trial of their sufficiency, then this only
honor, an heriditary title; we read that Joseph and Azarias pricked with 1
Mac. c. 5.
an Envious emulation, conceived a design to gain reputation as the Macabees
did, but faild, and It Was so lately in England.
were foyld; for, says the text, they were not of the race of them from whom
the safety of Israel ought to come, a bastard brood, and not those instruments
he designed for Charles of the blood royal.
the common safety of Kingdoms, nor of the Lion Race, and Family picked out
above all others. He made choice of that Family of Abraham to conserve the
worship of his name, that of Levi for the Priesthood, and that of Judah for
Vain ambitious men why do you aspire.
the Crown. Aspire not then you Mushrooms; whither will your Ambition lead
you, will you allways climb, and nevor forecast how to come down? consider how
glad your carkases would once have bin of a warm covering, that are now richer
then Lillyes, more gorgeous then May, Solomon in all his glory not arrayed like
one of you, resolving with Agripina, Neroes mother, let your sorrow be what it
will, so your Sons may succeed in your new honors. But alas, no Honor is
durable that is purchased with villainy, nor any power lasting, founded in
Atheism and irreligion, your fall was forseene without consulting with Stars
and Planets. Your acting so long of a pleasing Commedy might tell you, there
would follow a woeful tragedy. God I say is the Fountain of all Power, let
every Soul be subject to the higher Power, Romans 13. 1.
for there is no Power but of God, the powers that be are ordained of God.
Gualter in loc.
Not every Soul, to show, that we must obey, not only outwardly but really,
and in truth, ommis anima, quoniam ex animo, and the reason is drawn from the
threefold good:

Ab honesto.
1. Ab honesto, which the Apostle shows,

A bonitate,
Ordinantis, There is no power but of God: Ordinationis, The powers are
ordained, or ordered.
Ab utili.
2. Ab utili, to resist is evil,

Malum
Culpae, Whosoever resists, resists the Ordinance of God. Penae, They that
resist, shall receive damnation.
Ab jucundo.
3. Ab jucundo, to submit is good, because the Magistrate is the Minister of God
for our good; the good of peace, protection, justice, Religion, and the like;
we must obey for conscience; unto the disobedient is a perpetual hell, v. 5,
unto such as obey, a continual feast: the powers then are ordained of God,
and there is no power but of God, sive jubente, sive sinente, Aust.
either by Gods commission, or permission; the persons sometimes are intruders,
as in case of usurpation, sometime abusers of their authority, as when they
tyrannize; so that the potens, the ruler is not Hos. 8. 4.
always of God; they have set up Kings, but not by me; they have made Princes,
and I knew it not, and the manner of getting kingdoms is not always of God.
Alexander the sixth obtained the Balaus in vita Alex. 6.
Popedom, by giving himself to the Devil. Phocas, by blood and Tileman in Romans
13.
sedition, got his Empire. Richard the third came to the Crown of England, by
butchering his Nephew, Pol. Virg. hist. Ang. l. 25.
and others of the royal blood; yet the power is ever of God; By me Kings
reign, Prove. 8. 15. Thou could have no power, says Christ to Pilate, except
it had been given thee from above. Joh. 19. 11.


2. Besides, this honorable title of Gods; they are called shields, Hos. 4.
18. her shields, love to say Shields.
with shame, give ye, i. e. her Rulers love brihes. Almighty God has ordained
higher Powers to defend his Church on earth, as it were with a shield, being
scuta Christianorum, the bucklers of Gods people, as Fabius Maximus is called
by Plutarch, scutum Romanorum, the target of the Romans. Constantine, Arcadius,
Theodosius, John Frederick Duke of Soxony, and many others, have been shields
to the Church of God. A Tyrant is a butcher to his people, but a good King is a
buckler, a defender; he that rebelleth against his Sovereign, hacketh and
heweth, as it were, his own buckler of defense.

3. The name, Kings; Rex a regendo, from governing, shows their duty; and it is
usual among the Kings, or Shepherds.
Prophets and poets, for regere and pascere, to signify the same thing: Homer,
Virgil, and David, put no difference betwixt reges and pastores, Kings and
Shepherds; see more of this in Chap. 2.

This was the end, why they were made choice of for common good, and
administration of Justice, to be as watchful over their people, and as
solicitous for their A public and common Sheepherd.
good, as a father of his children, or a Shepherd of his sheep. Princeps est
pastor publicus and communis.

4. They are often termed patres reipublicae, fathers of their country; the
Sichemites called their King (Abimelech) which is as much as to Fathers.
say, (my father) and Antiquity, when it was willing to throw its greatest
honor upon an Emperor, it called him, The father of the Commonwealth, which
was more then Caesar, or Augustus. Titus Vespasianus had the gentle, and
affectionate Epethite of Deliciae humani generis. Justinian the Magnifique
title of Pius Faelix, inclytus, victor, ac triumphator: Theodosius of, Vestra
aeternitas, vestrum numen; vestra clementia, vestrum aeternitatis numen;
Valerian the elder (...).
of King of kings; diverse other Emperors of Optimus, Maximus, Divus, and the
like; but that which they esteemed their greatest honor, was, The public, and
common father of the Commonwealth. Plato styles a King, Pater familias, a
father of a family; and Zenophon, Bonus Princeps nihil differt a bono patre,
the only difference is this, that the one has fewer, the other more under his
command. In a word, reigning, or bearing rule, is nothing else, but a paternall
government; many a care attends on greatness; Christ's Crown was all thorns, no
crown without some thorns.

If private persons should not What is expected from Kings.
mis-imploy their talents, what shall we say of public persons, who are
advanced to the Throne; they are obliged to cause their virtues to appear, and
be more eminent in all good acts; the rank they are in, sufficiently shows what
they ought to be, and what manner of persons they ought to appear. Peter
Martyr, Allegorizing on the seat of Solomon, says, that the height, the gold,
the Ivory of the seat, must put the Magistrate in mind of his eminency, purity,
and innocence. The celestial bodies raised on high above the rest, as upon the
fane or pinnacle of this beautiful temple of the world, have more splendour then
all other bodies; among the elementary bodies, that which holds the highest
place, is most pure; in the body of man, the head is most eminent, more
adorned, more animated; all which are secret instructions from nature, What is
learned from their title of Gods.
that those who hold the highest dignities, should shine forth in the greatest
virtues and grace: more particularly,

1. To acknowlodge him more 1. Duty.
especially, being obliged by a more particular tie, then the generality of
men; all waters come from the Sea, and return thither, so all all Power comes
from God, and should return from them to God, by homage.

2. To be more humble, grateful, and religious, then others; the higher a tree
shoots up his branches toward Heaven, the lower it sinks its root into the
Earth; its depth supports its hight, and the hight would become its ruin, were
not the depth its firmest solidity; if humility be not the foundation, and
support of greatness, their hight of Pride will be their destruction, and God
will debase them, as he did Nebuchadnezzar, and others. They who lay the
foundation of their greatness in Atheism, and irreligion, shall in the end see
they build Towers of Babel, and will leave marks of follyes, in their
confusions; and of his wrath in his revenge and just punishment.

3. They stand more in need (and therefore should be more earnest to God in
Prayer) for his illumination in their counsels, of his conduct in their
enterprises, of his strength in their executions, of his Providence in their
various occurrents, dangers and difficulties.

4. As they stand in his place, so they should walk in his path, to be
followers of him, as dear children; to be merciful, as he is merciful; to be
holy, as he is holy, bountiful, as he is bountiful, just, as he is just.

1. In distributing justice impartially; for Magistrates should have two hands,
one for mercy, the other for justice, habet praemium, and poenam, ut apis habet
mel, and aculeum, he has reward, and punishment, as the Be has honey, and a
sting: Ye shall hear the small as well as the great: Wrest not Dan. 1. 17.
the Law, nor respect any person, Deuteronomy. Deuteronomy. 16. 9.
16. 9. The Scripture that should Lev. 19. 15.
be the rule of all men's actions, is Prove. 24. 23.
full to this purpose. The Thebans Job 29. 14.
usually pourtrayed their Prince blind, with ears; and the Judges 1 Samuel 12. 8.
assisting him in justice, without hands, (blind) lest he should have respect
of persons; (with ears) that he might hear both parties indifferently: (the
Judges without hands) that they should not be corrupted with bribes. The Law
without just execution, is like a Bell without a clapper; and made use of,
sometimes as cobwebs to catch little Flies, and sometimes, as Foxnets, to take
great ones in a trap; Oh, how few are there, that sit in the seat of Justice,
whose consciences can prompt them a comfortable answer to that question of
David's, Psalm. 58. Are your minds set upon righteousness, Oh ye congregation?
they are of Gallioh's temper, Acts 18. and such as the Psalmist deciphers,
Psalm. 82. 5. It is written to the commendation of Marcus Aurelius, that
dividing the hours of the day for the business of his Empire, he allotted one
hour to hear the complaints of the grieved, and do justice.

2. In punishing offenders; and to this end, he is appointed for the punishment
of evil doers: as they carry 1 Pet. 2. 14.
a balance, so a sword; for bad Romans 13. 4.
members (as dangerous to the body) must be cut off, (as Surgeons do limbs
infectious) ne pars sincera trahatur. (You may see more of this in the Speech.)
In a word, Justice is the supreme perfection of royal greatness, the strongest
arms to subdue men; the most sacred Majesty to imprint reverence, and the
happiest conquest a King can atchieve, it is a princes beauty, perfume, and
luster; yea, he who is the States eye, Justice is the apple of their eye, it is
the rampart of his Palace, the bulwark of his Kingdom, and prop of his Crown.
Shields.


But to conclude this, if Shields, this instructs them, they are a refuge for
the Innocent, a shelter for the Oppressed, a Sanctuary of safety, liberty,
defense, and protection. Shepherds.


All they do, should tend to their subjects good, having the love and
affection of a father; the Fathers.
care and vigilance of a Shepherd, respecting more them then themselves, not to
tyrannize, as if only command were the thing hateful in their eyes, and
punishable by a Tyrants. Antiochus.
just God, evident by sad examples. The name of Antiochus stinks on the earth,
and he cries to persecutors, (take heed.) Herod consumed Herod.
sum'd with Worms, Memprisius, Momprisius.
King of Britain, devoured with Wolves, Anastasius the Emperor, Anastasius.
killed with Thunder, a Saxon, King of England, was killed by the Devil,
Seldred.
as he was banqueting with his Nobility, Pharaoh drowned in the red Pharaoh.
Sea; Nebuchadnezzar cast down Nabuchadnezzar.
from his throne, and companion with beasts.

Ozias stricken by God with a leprosy; Ozias.
Joram with an incurable Joram.
Flux. God, says David, is terrible to the Kings of the earth, and appears
Psalm. 75.
so by strange punishments, inflicted upon them for their cruelty and impiety.
It was a notable saying of Pelopidas, King of the Phocians, who sent Alexander
word, he marvelled, he put his Citizens to death, and not himself; Alexander
asked him, why he made such haste to dye, replied Pelopidas, to the end that
thou being yet more hated of God, and man then thou art, may the sooner be
destroyed. He that turns Tyrant, turns hateful to God and man: Nero wanting
one to kill him, was glad to kill Idonibezek. Judge. 1. Eglon. ch 3. Abimelech,
chapter 9. Ahab, 1 Kings 22. 38.
himself, saying, Turpiter vixi, and Turpiter morior. Caius Caligula, who had
conspired the death of many, and exercised inhumane cruelties, was killed.
Nabis the Tyrant, who usurped the government of the Lacedaemonians putting
eighty of Innumerable examples in this kind.
their princes to death, was killed by Alexamenes, and indeed; not only
Tyrants, but their wicked counsel, and bloody instruments, who corrupt and
seduce, ought to smart, and have often felt a divine hand, the reward of such
murderers has been to be murdered themselves: wickedness is often
recompensed, suo genere, in its own kind; evil men drink of their own brewing,
are scourged with their own rod, and drowned in the pit which they dug for
others. Haman hanged on his own gallows. Perillus tormented in his own Engine.

-- Nec enim lex justior ulla est.
Quam necis artifices art perire sua.
Abels blood spilt on earth, cries for the blood of Cain, Justice must cause
them that sow blood, to reap blood.

CHAP. IV. Several objections of Fanatique persons answered, lovers of
confusion, not order.
THe wickedness of man discovers it self in a perverse rebellious will, loath to
subject it self, either to the Laws of God or man; like an untamed Horse, he
lifts up his heel against government; no King is a judgment, Isa. 3. 6. there
Isa. 3. 6.
follows confusion, and disorder, Judge. 17. 6. Popular equality burdensome,
Judge. 17. 6.
and destructive, yet however, he will be nibling at the heels, and if he can,
cut off the head of lawful Authority.

1. Ob. The Apostle calls powers, humane ordinances, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake; whether to the King, as
Supreme, etc.

Answ. The Apostle calls them humane ordinances, not in regard of the substance
of government, but in regard of the several forms. Kings are beams of the
Deity cast into the several corners of the Regna a Deo. and reges dari. Just.
Lips.
earth, appointed by God himself. I have provided me a King amongst the sons of
Jesse, 1 Samuel 16. 1. And concerning the revolt of the ten tribes, in the rent
of the Kingdom of Israel, 1 Kings 12. 24. This thing, says God, is done of me.
Magistrates are the fingers of that great hand that rules the world, and with
his all-powerfull hand has engraven a touch of extraordinary Majesty upon
their foreheads, whom he intends to authorize, and make useful for humane
Society, and the conduct, and advancement of public good, all higher powers
are from Romans 13. 1.
the highest powers, to whom all creatures must be subject; and adds, the
powers that be, are ordained of God, insinuating, that the Magistrate is not
from God after any common manner, but ordained after a more special sort, By
me Kings rule; they hold their Prove. 8. 15.
Scepters from him, therefore was their usual style (formerly) and (blessed be
God) now is, Charles by the grace of God, King, etc.

2. Ob. Libertines and others, wrest that Text of St Paul, 1 Timothy 1. 9. The Law
is not given to the just and righteous man, therefore good men are exempted
from obedience to Laws.

Answ. The just man does well, not for fear of punishment, as compelled by Law,
but of grace and mere love toward God and goodness, justo, lex non est
posita, Melanch. in loc.
neque ad condemnationem, neque ad coactionem, albeit there were no King, or
Law to command him, he would be a King and Law to himself, obeying higher
powers of his own accord.

But why frame you Arguments of disobedience, when the Apostle tells you, you
must needs obey, not Romans 13. 5. Observe the words. Must needs obey.
only for wrath, but for conscience sake, (you must needs obey) because all
powers are of God, because it is a sin to disobey; because temporal and eternal
judgment accompanies this sin; necessary, ex necessitate finis and praecepti;
for thereby we do that which is acceptable to God, enjoining obedience, and
that which is profitable to our selves, enjoying Government, That 1 Timothy 2. 2.
we lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty.

And this must be for conscience For conscience sake.
sake, says the Apostle, tuta conscientia praestari possunt, quae propter
conscientiam praestanda sunt, a man may do that with a safe conscience, which
he must do for conscience, and therefore they are far from good men (seem what
they will) that pretend conscience for their disobedience to the Civil
Magistrate; the freedom you talk of (if any) must be spiritual, liberi, John
8. 36.
quia liberati, because made free by Christ, a discharge from the whole bondage
of the Law, sin, and Satan, and not a liberty to do what every man list, and
live under no obedience: Gods people (notwithstanding their liberty) must
perform duty to whom duty belongs.

3. Ob. The Kings of Judah were figures of Christ, and figures are now ceased
and abolished.

Answ. Its true, in part they were shadows and figures, yet more then figures,
for the Levitical Priesthood took an end, but the Political Government has no
end; for the office of Kings is established, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Honor the King; and
God has promised to his A blessing to the Church in the New Testament. Isa.
49. 23.
Church in Gospel Times, That Kings shall be their nursing fathers, and Queens
their nursing mothers, Isa. 49. 23.

S. Paul counsels to pray for Kings, and all that are in authority, 1 Timothy 2.
1, 2. Why should any study Arguments against those, from whom so much good has
proceeded, they maintain the Church, and the Church maintains them, they hold
up the Crown of Religion, and Religion strengthens their Crowns.

I might allege the happy Government of many well disposed Kings. The piety of
Antonius pius Antonius Pius.
is very commendable for his gracious Decree, that none should accuse a
Christian, because he was a Christian. Constantius the father Constantius.
of Constantine made more reckoning of those that professed Christianity, then
all his treasures. Jovianus (after Julian) refused to be Jovianus.
Emperor, unless he might govern Christians. Great Constantine had Constantine.
that name, not so much for his greatness in authority as godliness. I will
not insist on the happy Theodosius, and many others, too many to be named.
and glorious Reigns of David, (Solomon before his prevarication) Hezekiah,
Josiah, those that make them only shadows, have not the least shadow of
Reason, or any substance of Honesty.

4. Ob. With God there is no respect of persons, Jam. 2. 1. Romans 2. 11. and
this is often repeated, Ephesians. 6. 9. Col. 3. 25. 1 Pet. 1. 17. and many other
places.

Answ. By person is not meant the substance, but the quality, viz. whatsoever
is about or without a man, as birth, education, honor, wealth, and the like.
God respects Acts 10. 34.
not any, because they are high or low, rich or poor, but in every Nation,
(whosoever he be) he that fears him, and works righteousness is accepted
with him, and in this sense no respecter of persons, in giving favor, and
forgiving faults, he regards not the rich more then the poor, the Jew more
then the Gentile, a man of peace more then a man of war, nor Peter a Jew born,
more then Cornelius an Alien.

I confess all are fellows in respect Jam. 2. 1. Part. Answ.
of grace and the common faith, but all are not fellows in respect of authority
and place, but this answers it self; Have not the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ in respect of persons; in a word, it is a common saying, Nec regna
socium far, nec tedae sciunt.

Love and Lordship can abide no fellowship. That Commonweal where many will
rule (except sub ordinately) is like Plinies Amphisbena, a Serpent which had an
head at each end of her body; and while both strive which should be the Master
head, the body is miserably torn.

When one comforted a poor widow which had lately lost her husband (for that he
was an unthrift, and unkind) replied, although he were but a bad husband, he
was an husband, and such an one, is better then none; for the commodities of
Government are so great, that a very bad husband to the Common wealth, is
better then none; the Anabaptists in their confusion and disorders (contrary to
their own Doctrine) thought it Sleidan. Com.
best, to choose a head, a King, and so they did, and a worthy one, a renowned
Tailor, John Berold.

CHAP. V. The Duty of Subjects, and how it consists in Obedience, Reverence,
Maintenance, Prayer for them.

SAint Peter names one, which 1 Pet. 2. 17.
includes others, Fear God, Honor the King, the fear of God is a fit
Introduction to the Kings Honor, they are homines Deo secundi, next to God,
the fearers of God Tert.
Honor the King most, we must Honor him; for God himself honors him, in
stiling him by his name: God and the King have interchangeably borrowed names,
God is a King in heaven, the King a God on earth, he must therefore be honored.

Saint Paul names but one too, and that is subjection, including Romans 13. 1.
the whole duty of Subjects.

1. Obedience, and that general, none exempted; for that universal note (every
soul) omnis anima, Romans 13. 1. confutes the seditious Papist, and tumultuous
Anabaptist.

The Papist would exempt Clergy Bilson against the Jes. p. 118. Epist. l. 2.
Epist. 100,
men from obedience to secular powers, a Doctrine not heard of, till 1000 years
after Christ. Gregory the Great, one of the most learned Popes, says, That
power over all men is given to my Lord Mauritius the Emperor, and lest any
should imagine Priests exempted, he says in the same place, and to the same
person, Sacerdotes meos luce manui commisi. Howsoever the Popish Clergy hold
themselves free from obedience to the Civil Magistrate, yet Christ aliter
jussit, aliter gessit, and the best interpreter Bern in Romans 13.
of Gods Law (our Savior) shows, both by precept and practice, It lies on all
persons.
That Clergy men ow subjection and Loyalty to the Secular John 19. 11.
power. Our Savior, who was a Priest and Prophet, submitted himself to the
Roman Magistrate, confessing the Presidents power from heaven; The Apostle Paul
did tread in his Masters steps, appealed unto Caesar, and appeared Act. 25.
before Caesar as his lawful Governor, and Saint Peter exhorts all 1 Pet. 2.
13.
men to submit to Gods Ordinance, Whether to the King, etc.

I wonder the Papists (before this time) did not purge the 13th to the Romans,
as being more Lutheran then Catholic, and others (besides them) may blush and
be ashamed to wrest (as they do) that Scripture.

1. Quere. Though it be over all persons, must this obedience be in all things?

Answer. Kings sometimes bid, what God forbids, in that case our Apostle
enjoins to obey God rather; all consent to this, Acts 5. 29. Princes must be
obeyed, but inter limits disciplinae, within the bounds of Religion, if their
command Tert.
cross Gods, Peter's rule must overruled; Deo magis quam hominibus, it must be
in things agreeable to the mind and will of God.

2. Qu. May there be resistance, and may the Subject disobey in such a case?

Answ. Though he cannot obey actually, he must passively; the Kings will must be
done, aut a nobis, aut de nobis, either of us, or on us; either we must be
patients, or agents; patients, when he is tyrannous and wicked, and agents,
when he is good, and godly. The Apostle says not, Be subject to Christian and
holy Governors, but indefinitly, to Potentates, not to the good, and courteous,
but to the froward; 1 Pet. 2. 18.
Si bonus, nutritor est tuus; si malus, tentator tuus est; if a good King, he
is thy nurse, receive thy nourishment with obedience; if evil, he is thy
tempter, receive thy trial with patience. But this I intend to speak fully of
in the sixth Chapter.

3. Qu. Whether the Princes power extends to all causes, as well as over all
persons.

Answ. It is part of the Kings style, (In all causes) in spiritual as well as
temporal; in both he must be obeyed, so he countermand not God; none will
doubt this, if he consider the doings of Josiah, his Authority in
Ecclesiastical causes. The state of this question is very significantly laid
down in that speech of Constantine to his Bishops, Vos intra Ecclesiam
Episcopi, ego extra Eusel. de vita Constable. 4.
Ecclesiam, you are Bishops within the Church, and I a Bishop without the
Church, they in the proper and internal offices of the Word, Sacraments, and
Ecclesiastical Censures; and he for outward authority, and presidence; theirs
limited to the soul, consisting in Preaching the Word; his to the body in
bearing the Sword.

Second Duty.
A second Duty is Reverence, and this is threefold,

Mentis, Oris, Corporis.
Subjects must have an high esteem In thought.
of their Kings, and hold them solo Deo Minores, none above them, but God,
Elutherius wrote to Lucius, a Britain King, vos estis Dei Vicarius, you are
Gods Vicegerent in your Kingdom, against whom we are not to harbor an ill
thought, but have a Eccles. 10. 20.
Reverent esteem of them, befitting their Regality, Highness and Majesty, and
as the Lords Anointed.

Reverence in tongue, Thou shall In tongue.
not revile the Ruler of thy people; for Subjects to rail against their
Sovereign is unchristian, yet used by Romanists and Separatists, what Base,
Reproachful Speeches have been given out against our late gracious Sovereign,
I tremble to think of, a King that in the whole world had no Peer, and yet how
vilified and disgraced by black mouths, and had they not wiped all shame from
their faces, and banished Religion from their hearts, they durst never have laid
such an heap of disgraces on Gods Anointed.

Reverence of Body, this is usual Of body.
in Scripture; it ought to bow to a mean Magistrate, but fall down to Regal
Majesty, Ahimaaz did to David, David to Saul, the Kings son to his father, 2 Samuel 14.

They have three special Ensigns of Honor; A Crown of gold for their
sublimity, for which they must be Reverenced; a Scepter of Righteousness for
government, for which they must be obeyed, a Sword for vengeance, for which
Romans 13. 4.
they must be feared. Honor them we ought, as the Romans 13. 4
Ministers, and 2 Samuel 14. 17. Number. 27. 17. Ps. 47. 9.
Angels of God, the Shepherds, and Shields of his people, under whose shadowing
boughs Ezekiel. 31. 3. 6.
we may sit and repose our selves.

A third Duty is maintenance, by Third Duty.
way of Tribute, this our Savior did, when the Ruler was a Heathen, and knew
not God; Give to Caesar the things that are Caesar's, he Matthew. 2. 21. His
Precept
says not, Date, but Reddite, because Tribute is a due Debt unto Caesar, and
if to a Painym Emperor, much more to a Christian King; he says not reddite
quae petit, sed quae sunt illius, which Principals are Honor, obedience,
Tribute.

He paid Caesar Tribute, and to His Practice
that end willed Peter to go to the Sea, and to cast in an angle, and take the
first fish that comes up, and in his mouth he should find a piece of twenty
pence, that take V. 27.
and give unto them for me, and thee; it is observed that though our Savior
wrought many Miracles, yet never any about honor or money, but that of
Tribute; rather then that should go discharged he will work a miracle. By
Tribute I mean all Sesses, Custom, Subsidy, or whatsoever else due to Kings,
either to sustain their States, or support the public charges of the Kingdom,
being his stipend or pay; for he is the Minster of Romans 13. 6.
God, serving for the same purpose, says the Apostle.

A fourth duty that Subjects ow, Fourth Duty
is Prayer. Saint Paul wills and enjoins to pray for them, and that 1 Timothy 2.
1.
when (like Manasseh) they poured out blood like water; the Jews are commanded
to pray for Nebuchadnezzar, Jer. 29. 7.
and the peace of Babylon. Nebucadnezzar deserved not the name of a man, but of
a beast, yet as a King he is called the servant Dan. 4.
of the highest God, in his peace they have peace.

Tertullian shows the love and affection In Apologet.
Christians bore to their Magistrates, Oramus Imperatoribus, ut det Deus illis
vitam prolixam, imperium tutum, aulam securam, exercitus fortes, orbem pacatum,
Senatum fidelem, etc. we pray for the Emperors, that God would give them a long
life, a safe Government, a sure dwelling, valiant Soldiers, a peaceable world,
a faithful counsel, etc. and yet the Christians then were as sheep appointed
for the slaughter, their Rivers died with blood, as August. says, alii De
Civit, Dei, 22. c. 6.
ferro perempti, alii flammis exusti, alii flagris verberati, alii vectibus
perforati, alii cruciati patibulo, alii vivi decoriati, alii vinculis
mancipati, alii linguis privati, and so goes on, some slain with the sword,
some burnt with fire, some scourged with whips, some stabbed with forks, some
fastened to the gibbets, some drowned in the Sea, some their skins pulled off,
their tongues cut out, some stoned to death, killed with cold, starved with
hunger, and the like, yet then, even then did they pray for them. So Ambrose,
and the Christians resisted not Valentinian and Justinian in the rage of the
Arians, but cried, rogamus Auguste, non pugnamus, hic, hic, occidito, si
placet, arma nostra sunt preces and lachrymae. We pray, oh Emperor, we fight
not, here, here, kill us if you please, our weapons are Prayers and tears, If
impious, pray for them, if Tyrannous, pray for them, yea though they be such as
live Optatus Mileni.
Heathenishly.

And must we do no more, yes, if there be occasion serve them with our lives,
and spend our dearest blood for their defense: the people in the second Book of
Samuel, 2 Samuel 18. 3.
would not have the least hurt befall King David, and therefore when they went
to war would not suffer him, though he were forward in offering himself to go
forth with them, but would put their lives in hazard, to save him harmless.
God could never endure forced service, what you do, do with willingness of
heart, if thou do it heavily and grudgingly, it is wrought upon thee, not by
thee: thou art rather a Patient then an Agent, and therefore offer willingly
(if there be necessity) not only thy head and hand, but life, for the good of
King and Kingdom. Go forth with Courage in the fear of the Lord, and God be
with you, suffer not your King and glory of his Kingdom to be eclipsed, if you
can add luster to either, think of the prowess of your Ancestors, how famous
English men have been, and show your selves the legitimate and true born
children of such Parents; remember, imprint in your heart,

Pax populi, patriaeque salus, and gloria Regni.

The peoples peace, the Countries helath, the Kingdoms glory.

CHAP. VI That a King may not be resisted upon any pretense whatsoever, against
Papists, and Scismatiques, old and new Enemies.
THough this be touched in the first branch of the Subjects Duty, yet I will
more particularly here speak of it. Dare any say, a Prince may lose Jus Regni,
the Right of his Kingdom, per injustitiam Regnandi, by reigning with injustice
and cruelty, and so be absolved from their obedience; how is it, that the
Scrip. never knew this distinction. Saul though guilty of al sins against the
first table, yet ex solo indelebili unctionis charactere, might not be deposed,
but David calls him Christum Domini, the Lords anointed. If he be an
offfender, must the people punish? who gave them that Authority? no, sufficit
ei in paenam, quod deum expectet ultorem, it is enough for him if he look for
God to be his Judge, to leave him, to him that placed him, and can (when he
sees good) scourge him. Ahab the most wicked of the Kings of Israel, who sold
himself to work 1 K. 22. 38.
wickedness, did not escape unpunished, nor shall any King on Earth that
abuses his trust to cruelty and impiety, as they have their power immediately
from God, so are only accountable to him, to whom vengeance does belong.

Let us examine a little the doctrine of Papists, who bids kill the King:
quatunque art, any way; and of Scismatiques who teach, and practiced it; did
kill the King. The primitive Church never taught this Divinity, they rose not
against their Emperors though never so bloody Persecutors, when Saint 1 Pet.
2. 17.
Peter wrote that precept, a most wicked Tyrant reigned, a ravisher of his
Sisters, a Slayer of his Senators. Though a Tyrant, yet a King; Tyranny loosens
not the bond of allegiance, but we must obey as well Nero, as Augustus; as well
Domitian, as Vespatian; Julian, as Constantine Nor does impiety null our
allegiance, why rose not Israel against David in the cause of Vrias? why not
against Solomon in a worse cause, Idolatry? why not against Saul? not a murth
ring only, but a Massacring King. Nothing, nothing, can dissolve our bond of
alleagance.

Bellarmine teaches that Kings De Romans Pontif. c. 7. l. 5.
may be deposed in case of Heresy, or Infidelity, not to tolerate such cum
evidenti periculo religionis, and the reason why Christians in times past (an
Argument lately used) deposed not Nero, Diocletian, Julian the Apostata; Valens
the Arian and others; id fuit, quia deerant vires temporales christianis, was
because, they wanted power and force, and were not strong enough for that
attempt. But they that will Confessed by Fathers. and Historians.
consult the story of those times, will find the number of Christian Soldiers
many, and little inferior to their Enemies. Their valor being the support of
the Roman Empire.

The doctrine and practice of Papists, Papists preach the Doctrins of deposing
Kings.
is undeniable, notoriously known; which teaches the deposeing Kings, and
disposing of their kingdoms. Gregory the 9. Excommunicated Hen. 4. And
animated his Subjects to rebellion. Vrbane the 4. Dispossessed Conrade Son to
Conrade the Emperor of the kingdom of Sicilia, and gave it to Charles Earl of
Anjou. Boniface the eighth offered the French King Philips Kingdom to Albertus
the Emperor. Zachary deposed Childerick the French King, and placed Pipine.
Celestine crowned the Emperor Henry the sixth with his fool, and with his fool
pusht it off again, Hildebrand caused Henry the fourth to stand three days at
his Gates barefooted, and bare-legged before he would open his Gates unto him;
I might be large in presidents of this kind; but observe, they go a further
fatal step, and say, they may, and ought, nay it is meritorious to kill an
heretical King; one that is not a Papist, Heretica princeps non est princeps.
says Sanders of Queen Elizabeth; Lib. 2. c. 4. monar. Of murdering King.
and what follows but the Queen being a Heretic may be taken away, and many
attempts there were used to that end. Let the Gunpowder Treason speak; let the
French King Henry the third murdered by a Jacobine, Henry the fourth murdered
by Raviliack, Charles the first of blessed memory, murdered by Jesuited
Scismatiques, Papists, under another vizor, there is no treason but has issued
from hence, though under disguises quite contrary. Rebellion is no fruit of
the Gospel, nor was any true Protestant Traitor to his King. A King (upon any
color and pretense whatsoever) ought not to be resisted, for if we cannot
readily submit to his commands by doing; we must and ought by suffering, when
his Laws agree with Gods, we must be Agents; but when dissonant, we must be
patients: be it known unto thee oh King, say the three Children, that we will
not serve thy Gods, nor worship the golden Image that thou have set up: the
Egyptian Midwives would not murder, though the King commanded; Saul bid
Jonathan kill David, he would not. When the thing commanded cannot be lawfully
done, we must submit to the punishment. So Hermogenes when the Emperor would
have had him to worship an Image, da mihi veniam Imperator, minaris tu
carcerem, Deus gehennam, pardon me oh Emperor, thou threatest prison; but God
Hell, Thou the confiscation of my goods, God the damnation of my soul, obed
irem tibi, nisi quod obediam Domino, I would obey thee, but I must first obey
God, then must obey good Governors willingly, or endure bad Tyrants patiently.
Julians Soldiers would readily obey his Commands against his enemies, but not
to worship Idols.

To conclude the King is wronged if but vilipended in thy thought, more if
vilifyed in speech, but if forceably opposed, that sin is superlative, out of
measure sinful, David's absit, shows how heinous that act is, God forbid, I
should lay my hand on Gods anointed. if his heart smote him when he cut Saul's
lap off his garment, what would it have done, had he cut off his head.

CHAP VII. That God has declared his dislike of the sin of Rebellion by
Remarkable Judgments.
FEW can think of that punishment of Corah, Dathan, and Numb. 16. 30. 31.
Abiram, without a trembling heart, they that cried, we will not go up, God
made the next day to go down quick ad Infernum. It was not a common sin, nor
did they die a common death, and what is written, is for our instruction.

Absalom rebelled against his father, 2 Samuel 18. 9.
Gods Vengeance followed him and overtook him, he was hanged, strangely hanged,
Gods Justice led him to that place.

Achitopel was his own Executioner. 2 Samuel 17. 23
Treason is the greatest Crime, and in punishing it, no Judge can be too cruel,
but oftentime they save the Hangman a labor.

It was truly said of Jesabel, Had Zimri peace, that slew his Master? 2 Kings
9. 31.


Who can lay hands on the Lords Anointed, and be guiltless, 1 Samuel 26. 9.

Faults that are only in the will, are no way prejudicial to civil Society, and
consequently deserve no punishment by humane Justice, but high Treason is
punishable, both the desire, the effect, the heart, the hand.

But admit, that days are prolonged, yet are they killed with a Sword of their
own, tortured with a tormenting Conscience, the remembrance of their cruel Fact
wounds them at the heart, and strikes them in a mavelous fear of Gods
Vengeance to be poured upon them, They know their iniquity, their sin is ever
before them, and in laughter their hearts are forrowfull.

Saint Paul tells us, that such R. 13. 2.
shall receive to themselves damnation, which is construed either of temporal
or eternal judgment.

By the Laws of England, a Traitor How punished by by aw.
has his Judgment to be drawn from the prison to the place of execution, as
being unworthy to tread any more upon the earth, and that backward with his
head downward; for that he has been retrograde to natural ways, hanged
betwixt heaven and earth, as being unworthy of both; his privy parts cut off,
as being unprofitably begotten, and unfit to leave any generation after him,
his bowels and intrals burned, which inwardly had conceived and concealed such
horrible Treason, then his head cut off which imagined the mischief, and last
of all, his whole body quartered, and made a Prey for the birds of the air.

How such persons have ruined themselves, their Families, all Histories are
full of Tragical examples, in which I might enlarge my self.

Acquirunt sibi damnationem, as in the Vulgar Latin, they do not only
receive, but pull upon themselves heavy Judgment.

10. This may be understood of eternal damnation, as is plain, in Corah,
Dathan, and the rest of that Conspiracy, who is said to go down quick to hell.
Numb. 16.


If murder be a crying sin, Treais a roaring sin, he that murders a Prince,
kills many, sometime a whole State, which assuredly cries aloud to the Lord in
such a sort, as it awakes him, and calls to speedy judgment, and this only
wakens the sinner, who hitherto had so little Repentance for his wickedness,
that he concluded there was no wickedness stood in need of Repentance, but
behold the sound of fear is now in his ears, the sense of a Dagger at his
heart, the error of future punishment lies at his door, he finds his Conscience
open to condemn him, and hell gates open to receive him. It was not long since
he heard nothing, but pleasure, profit, a sweet satisfaction of desires,
happiness; but now Wrath, Judgment, Torment and Sting of Conscience, Sorrows,
and Woes are reserved for their farewell of sin, God may be patient a long time,
but laesa patientia fit furor, patience too much wronged becomes rage, serior
esse solet vindicta severior, the sorest vengeance is that, which is long in
coming, and the Fire of Indignation burns the hotter, because God has been
cool in the execution, impudent, impenitent sinners will find this true by sad
Experience. They that said, What is their knowledge in the most High? shall see,
that God sees their wickedness: no place whatsoever, nor Vault in the ground,
bottom of Mountains nor holes of Rocks shall hide you from his Wrath. I shall
have no will to end with Terror, yet no time (Reader) to sweeten thy Thoughts,
with those comforts which Faith might suck from the Blood of Christ. I say no
more: the godly shall find him a Lamb, as willing to save them, as before to
suffer for them, he has purchased, promised, and prepared a Kingdom, and they
shall Reign for evermore, to whom be Eternal Glory, Amen.

FINIS.

