VVomens Speaking Justified, Proved and Allowed of by the SCRIPTURES. All such
as speak by the Spirit and Power of the LORD JESUS.

And how WOMEN were the first that preached the Tidings of the Resurrection of
JESuS, and were sent by CHRIST'S Own Command, before He ascended to the Father,
John 20.17.

And it shall come to pass, in the last days, says the Lord, I will pour out
of my Spirit upon all Flesh; your Sons and Daughters shall Prophecy,

Acts 2.27. Joel 2.28. It is written in the Prophets, They shall be all taught
of God, says Christ,

John 6.45. And all thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall
be the Peace of thy Children,

Isa. 54.13. And they shall teach no more every man his Neighbor, and every
man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall all know me, from the
least to the greatest of them, says the Lord.

Jer. 31.34. London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

Women's Speaking Justified, Proved and Allowed by the Scriptures.
WHereas it has been an Objection in the minds of many, and several times has
been objected by the Clergy, or Ministers, and others, against Women's speaking
in the Church; and so consequently may be taken, that they are condemned for
meddling in the things of God; the ground of which Objection, is taken from the
Apostles words, which he writ in his first Epistle to the Corinthians, chap.
14. verse. 34, 35. And also what he writ to Timothy in the first Epistle; chap.
2. verse. 11, 12. But how far they wrong the Apostles intentions in these
Scriptures, we shall show clearly when we come to them in their course and
order. But first let me lay down how God himself has manifested his Will and
Mind concerning women, and unto women.

And first, when God created Man in his own Image; in the Image of God created
he them, Male and Female: and God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be
fruitful, and multiply: And God said, Behold, I have given you of every Herb,
etc. Genesis 1. Here God joins them together in his own Image, and makes no such
distinctions and differences as men do; for though they be weak, he is strong;
and as he said to the Apostle, His Grace is sufficient, and his strength is
made manifest in weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9. And such has the Lord chosen, even the
weak things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty; and things
which are despised, has God chosen, to bring to naught things that are, 1 Cor.
1. And God has put no such difference between the Male and Female as men would
make.

It is true, The Serpent that was more subtle then any other Beast of the
Field, came unto the Woman, with his Temptations, and with a lie: his subtilty
discerning her to be more inclinable to hearken to him, when he said, If ye
eat, your eyes shall be opened: and the woman saw that the Fruit was good to
make one wise, there the temptation got into her, and she did eat, and gave to
her Husband, and he did eat also, and so they were both tempted into the
transgression and disobedience; and therefore God said unto Adam, when that he
hid himself when he heard his voice, Have thou eaten of the Tree which I
commanded thee that thou should not eat? And Adam said, The Woman which thou
gave me, she gave me of the Tree, and I did eat. And the Lord said unto the
Woman, What is this that thou have done? and the Woman said, The Serpent
beguiled me, and I did eat. Here the Woman spoke the truth unto the Lord: See
what the Lord says, verse. 15. after he had prenounced Sentence on the Serpent;
I will put enmity between thee and the Woman, and between thy Seed and her
Seed; it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel, Genesis 3.

Let this Word of the Lord, which was from the beginning, stop the mouths of
all that oppose Women's Speaking in the Power of the Lord; for he has put
enmity between the Woman and the Serpent; and if the Seed of the Woman speak
not, the Seed of the Serpent speaks; for God has put enmity between the two
Seeds, and it is manifest, that those that speak against the Woman and her
Seeds Speaking, speak out of the enmity of the old Serpents Seed; and God has
fulfilled his Word and his Promise, When the fullness of time was come, he has
sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the Law, that we might receive
the adoption of Sons, Gal. 4.4, 5.

Moreover, the Lord is pleased, when he mentions his Church, to call her by the
name of Woman, by his Prophets, saying, I have called thee as a Woman
forsaken, and grieved in Spirit, and as a wife of Youth, Isa. 5.4. Again, How
long will thou go about, thou backsliding Daughter? For the Lord has created
a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass a Man, Jer. 31.22. And David,
when he was speaking of Christ and his Church, he says, The Kings Daughter is
all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought Gold; she shall be brought
unto the King: with gladness and rejoicing shall they be brought; they shall
enter into the Kings Palace. Psalm. 45. And also King Solomon in his Song,
where he speaks of Christ and his Church, where she is complaining and calling
for Christ, he says, If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, go thy
way by the footsteps of the Flock, Cant. 1.8. c. 5.9. And John, when he saw the
wonder that was in Heaven, he saw a woman clothed with the Sun, and the Moon
under her feet, and upon her head a Crown of twelve Stars; and there appeared
another wonder in Heaven, a great red Dragon stood ready to devour her Child:
here the enmity appears that God put between the woman and the Dragon,
Revelations 12.

Thus much may prove that the Church of Christ is a woman, and those that speak
against the woman's speaking, speak against the Church of Christ, and the Seed
of the woman, which Seed is Christ; that is to say, Those that speak against
the Power of the Lord, and the Spirit of the Lord speaking in a woman, simply,
by reason of her Sex, or because she is a Woman, not regarding the Seed, and
Spirit, and Power that speaks in her; such speak against Christ, and his
Church, and are of the Seed of the Serpent, wherein lodges the enmity. And as
God the Father made no such difference in the first Creation, nor never since
between the Male and the Female, but always out of his Mercy and loving
kindness, had regard unto the weak. So also, his Son, Christ Jesus, confirms
the same thing: when the Pharisees came to him, and asked him, if it were
lawful for a man to put away his wife? he answered and said unto them, Have you
not read, That he that made them in the beginning, made them Male and Temale,
and said, For this cause shall a Man leave Father and Mother, and shall cleave
unto his Wife, and they twain shall be one flesh, wherefore they are no more
twain but one flesh; What therefore God has joined together, let no man put as
under, Mat. 19.

Again, Christ Jesus, when he came to the City of Samaria, where Jacobs Well
was, where the Woman of Samaria was; you may read, in John 4. how he was
pleased to preach the Everlasting Gospel to her; and when the Woman said unto
him, I know that when the Messiah comes, (which is called Christ) when he
comes, he will tell us all things; Jesus says unto her, I that speak unto
thee am he; This is more than ever he said in plain words to Man or Woman (that
we read of) before he suffered. Also he said unto Martha, when she said, she
knew that her Brother should rise again in the last day, Jesus said unto her, I
am the Resurrection and the Life: he that believes on me, though he were dead,
yet shall he live; and whosoever lives and believes shall never die.
Believe thou this? she answered, Yea Lord, I believe thou art the Christ, the
Son of God. Here she manifested her true and saving Faith, which few at that
day believed so on him, John 11.25, 26.

Also that Woman that came unto Jesus with an Alabaster Box of very precious
Ointment, and poured it on his Head as he sat at meat; it is manifested that
this Woman knew more of the secret Power and Wisdom of God, then his Disciples
did, that were filled with indignation against her; and therefore Jesus says,
Why do ye trouble the Woman? for she has wrought a good work upon me; Verily,
I say unto you, Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached in the whole World,
there shall also this that this Woman has done, he told for a memorial of her,
Matt. 26. Mark. 14.3. Luke says further, She was a sinner, and that she stood
at his feet behind him weeping, and began to wash his feet with her tears and
did wipe them with the hair of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed
them with Ointment. And when Jesus saw the Heart of the Pharisee that has
bidden him to his house, he took occasion to speak unto Simon, as you may, read
in Luke 7. and he turned to the woman, and said, Simon, see thou this Woman?
Thou gave me no water to my feet, but she has washed my feet with tears, and
wiped them with the hair of her head: Thou gave me no kiss, but this Woman,
since I came in, has not ceased to kiss my Feet: My Head with Oil thou did
not anoint, but this Woman has anointed my Feet with Ointment; wherefore I
say unto thee, her sins, which are many, are forgiven her, for she has loved
much, Luke 7.37, to the end.

Also there was many women which followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering unto
him, and stood a far off when he was Crucified, Mat. 28.55. Mark 15. Yea even
the women of Jerusalem wept for him, insomuch that he said unto them, Weep not
for me, ye Daughters of Jerusalem, but weep for your selves, and for your
Children, Luke 23.28.

And certain Women which had been healed of evil Spirits and Infirmities, Mary
Magdalen, and Joanna the Wife of Chuza, Herod's Stewards Wife, and many others
which ministered unto him of their substance, Luke 8.2, 3.

Thus we see that Jesus owned the Love and Grace that appeared in Women, and
did not despise it, and by what is recorded in the Scriptures, he received as
much love, kindness, compassion, and tender dealing toward him from Women, as
he did from any others, both in his life time, and also after they had
exercised their cruelty upon him, for Mary Magdalene, and Mary the Mother of
Joses, beheld where he was laid: And when the Sabbath was past, Mary Migdalen,
and Mary the Mother of James, and Salom, had brought sweet spices that they
might anoint him: And very early in the morning, the first day of the week,
they came unto the Sepulcher at the rising of the Sun, And they said among
themselves who shall roll us away the stone from the door of the Sepulcher? And
when they looked, the stone was rolled away for it was very great: Mark 16.1,
2, 3, 4. Luke 24.1, 2. and they went down into the Sepulcher, and as Matthew
says, The Angel rolled away the stone, and he said unto the Women, Fear not, I
know whom ye seek, Jesus which was Crucified: he is not here, he is risen, Mat.
28. Now Luke says thus, That there stood two men by them in shining apparel,
and as they were perplexed and afraid, the men said unto them, He is not here;
remember how he said unto you when he was in Galilee, That the Son of Man must
be delivered into the hands of sinful men, and be crucified, and the third day
rise again, and they remembered his words, and returned from the Sepulcher, and
told all these things to the eleven, and to all the rest.

It was Mary Magdalene. and Joanna, and Mary the Mother of James, and the other
Women that were with them, which told these things to the Apostles, And their
words seemed unto them as idle tales, and they believed them not. Mark this, ye
despisers of the weakness of Women, and look upon your selves to be so wise:
but Christ Jesus does not so, for he makes use of the weak: for when he met the
women after he was risen, he said unto them, All Hail, and they came and held
him by the Feet, and worshipped him, then said Jesus unto them, Be not afraid,
go tell my Brethren that they go into Gallilee, and there they shall see me,
Mat. 28.10. Mark 16.9. And John says, when Mary was weeping at the Sepulcher,
that Jesus said unto her, Woman, why weepest thou? what seek thou? And when
she supposed him to be the Gardener, Jesus says unto her, Mary; she turned her
self, and says unto him, Rabboni, which is to say master; Jesus says unto
her, Teach me not, for I am not yet ascended to my Father, but go to my
Brethren, and say unto them I ascend unto my Father, and your Father, and to my
God, and your God, John 20.16, 17.

Mark this, you that despise and oppose the Message of the Lord God that he
sends by women, what had become of the Redemption of the whole Body of
Mankind, if they had not believed the Message that the Lord Jesus sent by
these women, of and concerning his Resurrection? And if these women had not
thus, out of their tenderness and bowels of love, who had received Mercy, and
Grace, and so giveness of sins, and Virtue, and Healing from him, which many
men also had received the like, if their hearts had not been so united and knit
unto him in love, that they could not depart as the men did, but sat watching,
and waiting, and weeping about the Sepulcher until the time of his:
Resurrection, and so^ were ready to carry his Message, as in manifested, else
how should his Disciples have known, who were not there?

Oh! blessed and glorified be the Glorious Lord, for this may all the whole
body of mankind say, though the wisdom of man, that never knew God, is always
ready to except against the weak; but the weakness of God is stronger than men,
and the foolishness of God is wiser then men.

And in Act. 18. you may read how Aquila and Priscilla took unto them Apollos,
and expounded unto him the way of God more perfectly; who was an eloquent man,
and mighty in the Scriptures: yet we do not read that he despised what
Priscilla said, because she was a Woman, as many now do.

And now to the Apostles words, which is the ground of the great Objection
against Women's speaking: And first, I Cor. 14. let the Reader seriously read
that Chapter, and see the end and drift of the Apostle in speaking these words:
for the Apostle is their exhorting the Corinthians unto charity, and to defire
Spiritual gifts, and not to speak in an unknown tongue, and not to be Children
in understanding, but to be Children in malice, but in understanding to be men;
and that the Spirits of the Prophets should be subject to the Prophets, for God
is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace: And then he says, Let your Women
keep silence in the Church, etc.

Where it does plainly appear that the women, as well as others, that were
among them, were in confusion, for he says, How is it Brethren? when ye come
together, every one of you has a Psalm, has a Doctrine, has a Tongue, has a
Revelation, has an Interpretation? let all things be done to edifying. Here
was no edifying, but all was in confusion speaking together: Therefore he
says, If any man speak in an unknown Tongue, let it be by two, or at most by
three, and that by course, and let one Interpret, but if there be no
Interpreter, let him keep filence in the Church. Here the Man is commanded to
keep silence as well as the woman, when they are in confusion and out of order.

But the Apostle says further, They are commanded to be in Obedience, as also
says the Law; and if they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at
home, for it is a shame for a Woman to speak in the Church.

Here the Apostle clearly manifests his intent; for he speaks of women that
were under the Law, and in that Transgression as Eve was, and such as were to
learn, and not to speak publicly, but they must first ask their Husbands at
home, and it was a shanie for such to speak in the Church: And it appears
clearly, that such women were speaking among the Corinthians, by the Apostles
exhorting them from malice and strife, and confusion, and he preaches the Law
unto them, and he says, in the Law it is written, With men of other tongues,
and other lips, will I speak unto this people, verse. 2.

And what is all this to Women's Speaking? that have the Everlasting Gospel to
preach, and upon whom the Promise of the Lord is fulfilled, and his Spirit
poured upon them according to his word, Acts 2.16, 17, 18. And if the Apostle
would have stopped such as had the Spirit of the Lord poured upon them, why did
he say just before, If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let
the first hold his peace? and you may all prophecy one by one. Here he did not
say that such Women should not Prophecy as had the Revelation and Spirit of
God poured upon them, but their Women that were under the Law, and in the
Transgression, and were in strife, confusion and malice in their speaking, for
if he had stopped Women's praying or prophesying, why does he say: Every man
praying or prophesying having his head covered, dishonors his head; but
every Woman that prays or prophesies with her head uncovered, dishonors
her head? Judge in your selves, Is it comely that a Woman pray or prophecy
uncovered? For the Woman is not without the Man, neither is the Man without the
Woman, in the Lord, 1 Cor. 11.3, 4, 13.

Also that other Scripture, in 1 Timothy 2. where he is exhorting that Prayer and
Supplication be made every where, lifting up holy Hands without wrath and
doubting; he says in the like manner also, That Women must adorn themselves in
modest apparel, with shamefastness and sobriety, not with broidered hair, or
gold, or pearl, or costly array; He says, Let Women learn in silence with all
subjection, but I suffer not a Woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the
Man, but to be in silence; for Adam was first formed, then Eve; and Adam was
not deceived, but the Woman being deceived was in the transgression.

Here the Apostle speaks particularly to a Woman in Relation to her husband, to
be in subjection to him, and not to teach, nor usurp authority over him, and
therefore he mentions Adam and Eve: But let it be strained to the utmost, as
the opposers of Women's Speaking would have it, that is, That they should not
preach nor speak in the Church, of which there is nothing here: Yet the Apostle
is speaking to such as he is teaching to wear their apparel, what to wear, and
what not to wear; such as were not come to wear modest apparel, and such as
were not come to shamefastness and sobriety, but he was exhorting them from
broidered hair, gold, and pearls, and costly array; and such are not to usurp
authority over the Man, but to learn in silence with all subjection, as it
becomes Women professing Godliness with good works.

And what is all this to such as have the Power, and Spirit of the Lord Jesus
poured upon them, and have the Message of the Lord Jesus given unto them? must
not they speak the Word of the Lord because of these undecent and unreverent
Women that the Apostle speaks of, and to, in these two Scriptures? And how are
the men of this Generation blinded, that bring these Scriptures, and pervert
the Apostles Words, and corrupt his intent in speaking of them? and by these
Scriptures, endeavor to stop the Message and Word of the Lord God in Women, by
contemning and despising of them. If the Apostle would have had Women's speaking
stopped, and did not allow of them, why did he entreat his true Yoak-fellow to
help those Women who labored with him in the Gospel? Phil. 4.3. And why did
the Apostles join together in Prayer and Suppication with the Women, and Mary
the Mother of Jesus, and with his Brethren, Acts 1.14. if they had not allowed,
and had union and fellowship with the Spirit of God, wherever it was revealed
in Women as well as others? But all this opposing and gainsaying of Women's
Speaking; has risen out of the bottomless Pit, and spirit of Darkness that
has spoken for these many hundred years together in this night of Apostasy,
since the Revelations have ceased and been bid, and so that spirit has limited
and bound all up within its bond and compass, and so would suffer none to
speak, but such as that spirit of Darkness, approved of, Man or Woman.

And so here has been the misery of these last Ages past, in the time of the
Reign of the Beast, that John saw when he stood upon the Sand of the Sea,
rising out of the Sea, and out of the Earth, having seven Heads and ten Horns,
Rev. 13. In this great City of Babylon, which is the woman that has sitten so
long upon the Scarlet-colored Beast, full of names of Blasphemy, having seven
Heads and ten Horns; and this Woman has been arrayed and decked with gold, and
pearls, and precious stones; and she has had a golden Cup in her hand, full of
Abominations, and has made an Nations drunk with the Cup of her Fornication;
and all the world has wondered after the Beast, and has worshipped the Dragon
that gave power to the Beast; and this woman has been drunk with the blood of
the Saints, and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus; and this has been the
woman that has been speaking and usurping authority, for many hundred years
together: And let the times and ages past testify how many have been murdered
and slain, in Ages and Generations past; every Religion and Profession (as it
has been ^alled) killing and murdering one another, that would not join one
with another. And thus the Spirit of Truth, and the Power of the Lord Jesus
Christ has been quite lost among them that have done this; and this mother of
Harlots has sitten as a Queen, and said, She should see no sorrow, but though
her days have been long, even many hundred of years, for there was power given
unto the Beast, to continue forty and two months, and to make war with the
Saints, and to overcome them; and all that have dwelt upon the earth have
worshipped him, whose names are not written in the Book of the Life of the
Lamb, slain from the foundation of the world.

But blessed be the Lord, his time is over, which was above twelve hundred
Years, and the darkness is past, and the night of Apostasy draws to an end, and
the true light now shines, the morning-Light the bringt morning Star, the Root
and Offspring of David, he is risen, he is risen, glory to the highest for
evermore; and the joy of the morning is come, and the Bride the Lambs Wife, is
making her self ready, as a Bride that is adorning for her Husband, and to her
is granted that she shall be arrayed in fine linen, clean and white, and the
fine linen is the Righteousness of the Saints: The Holy Jerusalem is
descending out of Heaven from God, having the Glory of God, and her light is
like a Jasper stone, clear as Crystal.

And this is that free Woman that all the Children of the Promise are born of;
not the Children of the bondwoman, which is Hagar, which genders to strife and
to bondage, and which answers to Jerusalem which is in bondage with her
Children; but this is the Jerusalem which is free, whch is the Mother of us
all; And so this bondwoman and her children, that are born after the flesh,
have persecuted them that are born after the Spirit, even until now; but now
the bondwoman and her Seed is to be cast out, that has kept so long in
bondage and in flavery, and under limits; this bondwoman and her brood is to
be cast out, and our Holy City, the New Jerusalem, is coming down from Heaven,
and her Light will shine throughout the whole earth, even as a Jasper stone,
clear as Crystal, which brings freedom and liberty, and perfect Redemption to
her whole Seed; and this is that woman and Image of the Eternal God, that God
has owned, and does own, and will own for evermore.

More might be added to this purpose, both out of the Old Testament and New,
where it is evident that God made no difference, but gave his good Spirit, as
it pleased him both to Man and Woman, as Deborah, Huldah, and Sarah. The Lord
calls by his prophet Isaiah, Hearken unto me, ^e that follow after
Righteousness, ye that seek the Lord, look unto the Rock from whence ye were
hewn, and to the hole of the Pit from whence ye were dug; look unto Abraham
your Father, and to Sarah that hare you, for the Lord will comfort Sion, etc.
Isa. 5. And Anna the Prophetess, who was a Widow of fourscore and four years of
age, which departed not from the Temple, but served God with fastings and
prayers night and day, she coming in at that instant, (when old Simeon took the
Child Jesus in his arms, and) she gave thanks unto the Lord, and spoke of him
to all them who looked for. Redemption in Jerusalem, Luke 2.36, 37, 38. And
Philip the Evangelist, into whose house the Apostle Paul entered, who was one
of the Seven, Acts 6.3. He had four Daughters which were Virgins, that did
prophecy, Acts 21.

And so let this serve to stop that opposing Spirit that would limit the Power
and Spirit of the Lord Jesus, whose Spirit is poured upon all flesh, both Sons
and Daughters, now in his Resurrection; and since that the Lord God in the
Creation, when he made man in his own Image, he made them male and female; and
since that Christ Jesus, as the Apostle says, was made of a Woman, and the
power of the Highest overshadowed her, and the holy Ghost came upon her, and
the holy thing that was born of her, was called the Son of God, and when he was
upon the Earth, he manifested his love, and his will, and his mind, both to the
Woman of Samaria, and Martha, and Mary her Sister, and several others, as has
been showed; and after his Resurrection also manifested himself unto them first
of all, even before he ascended unto his Father. Now when Jesus was risen, the
first day of the week, he appeared first unto Mary Magdalene, Mark 16.9. And
thus the Lord Jesus has manifested himself and his Power, without respect of
Persons; and so lit all mouths be stopped that would limit him, whose Power and
Spirit is infinite, that is pouring it upon all flesh.

And thus much in answer to these two Scriptures, which have been such a
stumbling block, that the ministers of Darkness have made such a mountain of;
But the Lord is removing all this, and taking it out of the way.

M. F.

A further Addition in Answer to the Objection concerning Women keeping silent
in the Church;
For it is not permitted for them to speak, but to be under obedience; as also
says the Law, If they will learn any thing, let them ask their Husbands at
home, for it is a shame for a Woman to speak in the Church: Now this as Paul
writes in 1 Cor. 14.34. is one with that of 1 Timothy 2.11. Let Women learn in
silence, with all subjection.

TO which I say, If you tie this to all outward Women, then there where many
Women that were Widows which had no Husbands to learn of, and many were Virgins
which had no Husbands; and Philip had four Daughters that were Prophets; such
would be despised, which the Apostle did not forbid: And if it were to all
Women, that no Woman might speak, then Paul would have contradicted himself;
but they were such Women that the Apostle mentions in Timothy, That grew
wanton, and were busybodies, and tatlers, and kicked against Christ: For
Christ in the Male and in the Female is one, and he is the Husband, and his
Wife is the Church, and God has said, that his Daughters should Prophecy as
well as his Sons: And where he has poured forth his Spirit upon them, they
must prophecy, though blind Priests say to the contrary, and will not permit
holy Women to speak.

And whereas it is said, I permit not a Woman to speak, as says the Law: but
where Women are led by the Spirit of God, they are not under the Law, for
Christ in the Male and in the Female is one; and where he is made manifest in
Male and Female, he may speak, for he is the end of the Law for Righteousness
to all them that believe. So here you ought to make a distinction what sort of
Women are forbidden to speak, such as were under the Law, who were not come to
Christ, nor to the Spirit of Prophecy: For Hulda, Miriam, and Hanna, were
Prophets, who were not forbidden in the time of the Law, for they all
prophesied in the time of the Law: as you may read, in 2 Kings 22. what Hulda
said unto the Priest, and to the Ambassadors that were sent to her from the
King, Go, says she, and tell the Man that sent you to me, Thus says the Lord
God of Israel, Behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and on the
Inhabitants thereof, even all the words of the Book which the King of Judah
has read, because they have forsaken me, and have burnt Incence to other Gods,
to anger me with all the works of their hands: Therefore my wrath shall be
kindled against this place, and shall not be quenched. But to the King of
Judah, that sent you to me to ask counsel of the Lord, so shall you say to him,
Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Because thy heart did melt, and thou
humblest thy self before the Lord, when thou heardest what I spoke against this
place, and against the Inhabitants of the same, how they should be destroyed;
Behold I will receive thee to thy Father, and thou shall be put into thy Grave
in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon
this place. Now let us see if any of you blind Priests can speak after this
manner, and see if it be not a better Sermon then any of you can make, who are
against Women's speaking? And Isaiah, that went to the Prophetess, did not
forbid her Speaking or Prophesying, Isa. 8. And was it not prophesied in Joel
2. that Hand maids should Propesie? And are not Handmaids Women? Consider
this, ye that are against Women's Speaking, how in the Acts the Spirit of the
Lord was poured forth upon Daughters as well as Sons. In the time of the
Gospel, when Mary came to salute Elizabeth in the Hill Country in Judea, and
when Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the Babe leaped in her Womb, and
she was filled with the Holy Spirit; and Elizabeth spoke with a loud voice,
Blessed art thou amongst Women, blessed is the fruit of thy Womb; whence is
this to me, that the Mother of my Lord should come to me? for lo, as soon as
thy Salutation came to my ear, the Babe leaped in my Womb for joy, for blessed
is she that believes, for there shall be a performance of those things which
were told her from the Lord. And this was Elizabeth's Sermon concerning Christ,
which at this day stands upon Record^: And then Mary said, My soul does
magnify the Lord, and my Spirit rejoices in God my Savior, for he has
regarded the low estate of his Handmaid: for behold, from henceforth all
Generations shall call me blessed; for he that is mighty, has done to me great
things, and holy is his Name; and his Mercy is on them that fear him, from
Generation to Generation; he has showed strength with his Arm; he has
scattered the proud in the imaginations of their own hearts; he has put down
the mighty from their Seats, and exalted them of low degree; he has filled the
hungry with good things, and the rich he has sent empty away: He hat helped
his Servant Israel, in remembrance of his mercy, as he spoke to his Father, to
Abraham, and to his Seed for ever. Are you not here beholding to the Woman for
her Sermon, to use her words to put into your Common Prayer? and yet you forbid
Women's Speaking. Now here you may see how those two women prophesied of Christ,
and Preached better then all the blind Priests did in that Age, and better then
this Age also, who are beholding to women to make use of their words. And see
in the Book of Ruth, how the women blessed her in the Gate of the City, of
whose stock came Christ. The Lord make the woman that is come into thy House
like Rachel and Loah, which built the house of Israel; and that thou may
doworthily in Ephrata, and be famous in Bethlehem; let thy house be like the
house of Pharez, whom Tamer bare unto Judah, of the Seed which the Lord shall
give thee of this young woman. And blessed be the Lord, which has not left
thee this day without a Kinsman, and his Name shall be continued in Israel. And
also see in the first Chapter of Samuel, how Hannah prayed and spoke in the
Temple of the Lord, Oh Lord of Hosts, if thou will look on the trouble of thy
Hand maid, and remember me, and not forget thy Handmaid. And read in the
second Chapter of Samuel, How she rejoiced in God, and said, My heart rejoices
in the Lord; My Horn is exalted in the Lord and my mouth is enlarged over my
enemies, because I rejoice in thy Salvation; there is none holy as the Lord,
yea, there is none besides thee; and there is no God like our God: Speak no
more presumptously, let not arrogance come out of your mouths, for the Lord is
a God of knowledge, and by him enterprises are established; the Bow, and the
mighty Men are broken, and the weak has girded to themselves strength; they
that were full, are hired forth for bread, and the hungry are no more hired, so
that the barren has born seven, and she that had many Children, is feeble; the
Lord kills, and makes alive; brings down to the Grave, and raises up; the
Lord makes poor, and makes rich, brings low and exalts, he raises up the
poor out of the dust, and lifts up the Beggar from the dunghill to set them
among Princes, to make them inherit the seat of Glory for the Pillars of the
earth are the Lords, and he has set the world upon them; he will keep the feet
of his Saints, and the wicked shall keep silence in darkness, for in his own
might shall no man be strong; the Lords Adversaries shall be destroyed, and out
of Heaven shall he thunder upon them; the Lord shall judge the ends of the
World, and shall give power to his King; and exalt the Horn of his Anointed.
Thus you may see what a woman has said, when old Ely the Priest thought she
had been drunk, and see if any of you blind Priests that speak against Women's
Speaking, can Preach after this manner? who cannot make such a Sermon as this
woman did, and yet will make a trade of this Woman and other women's words. And
did not the Queen of Sheba speak, that came to Solomon, and received the Law of
God, and preached it in her own Kingdom, and blessed the Lord God that loved
Solomon, and set him on the throne of Israel, because the Lord loved Israel for
ever; and made the King to do Equity and Righteousness? And this was the lang
age of the Queen of Shebae. And see what glorious expressions Queen Hester used
to comfort the People of God, which was the Church of God, as you may read in
the book of Hester, which caused joy and gladness of heart among all the Jews,
who prayed and worshipped the Lord in all places, who jeoparded her life
contrary to the Kings command, went and spoke to the King, in the wisdom and
fear of the Lord, by which means she saved the lives of the People of God; and
righteous Mordecai did not forbid her speaking, but said, If she held her
peace, her and her Fathers house should be destroyed; and herein you blind
Priests are contrary to Righteous Mordecai.

Likewise you may read how Judith spoke, and what noble acts she did, and how
she spoke to the Elders of Israel, and said, Dear Brethren, seeing ye are the
honorable and elders of the People of God, call to remembrance how our Fathers
in time past were tempted, that they might be proved if they would worship God
aright; they ought also to remember how our Father Abraham, being tried through
manifold tribulations, was found a friend of God; so was Isaac, Jacob, and
Moses, and all they pleased God, and were steadfast in Faith through manifold
troubles. And read also her prayer in the Book of Judith, and how the Elders
commended her, and said, All that thou speak is true, and no man can reprove
thy words, pray therefore for us, for thou art an holy Woman, and fear God.
So these elders of Israel did not forbid her speaking, as you blind Priests do;
yet you will make a Trade of Women's words to get money by, and take Texts, and
Preach Sermons upon Women's words; and still cry out, Women must not speak,
Women must be silent; so you are far from the minds of the Elders of Israel,
who praised God for a Woman's speaking. But the Jezebel, and the Woman, the
false Church, the great Whore, and tatling women, and busybodies, which are
forbidden to Preach, which have a long time spoke and tatled, which are
forbidden to speak by the True Church, which Christ is the Head of; such Women
as were in transgression under the Law, which are called a Woman in the
Revelations. And see further how the wise Woman cried to Joab over the Wall,
and saved the City of Abel, as you may read, 2 Samuel 20. how in her, wisdom she
spoke to Joab, saying, I am one of them that are peaceable and faithful in
Israel, and thou go about to destroy a city and Mother in Israel; Why will thou destroy the Inheritance of the Lord? Then went the woman to the people in
her wisdom, and smote off the head of Sheba, that rose up against David, the
Lords Anointed: Then Joab bled the Trumpet, and all the People departed in
peace. And this deliverance was by the means of a Woman's speaking; but tatlers,
and busy bodies, are forbidden to preach by the True Woman, whom Christ is the
Husband, to the Woman as well as the Man, all being comprehended to be the
Church; and so in this True Church, Sons and Daughters do Prophecy, Women
labor in the Gospel; but the Apostle permits not tatlers, busybodies, and
such as usurp authority over the Man would not have Christ Reign, nor speak
neither in the Male nor Female; Such the Law permits not to speak, such must
learn of their Husbands: But what Husbands have Widows to learn of, but Christ?
And was not Christ the Husband of Philips four Daughters? And may not they that
learn of their Husbands speak then? But Jezebel, and Tatlers, and the Whore
that denies Revelation and Prophecy, are not permitted, which will not learn
of Christ; and they that be out of the Spirit and Power of Christ, that the
Prophets were in, who are in the Transgression, are ignorant of the Scriptures;
and such are against Women's speaking, and Men's too, who Preach that which they
have received of the Lord God; but that which they have preached, and do
preach, will come over all your heads, yea, over the head of the false Church,
the Pope; for the Pope is the Head of the False Church, and the False Church is
the Popes Wife: and so he and they that be of him, and come from him, are
against Women's speaking in the True Church, when both he and the false Church
are called Woman, in Revel. 17. and so are in the Transgression that would
usurp authority over the Man Christ Jesus, and his Wife too, and would not have
him to Reign; but the Judgment of the great Whore is come. But Christ, who is
the Head of the Church, the True Woman which is his Wife, in it do Daughters
Prophecy, who are above the Pope and his Wife and a top of them; And here
Christ is the Head of the Male and Female, who may speak; and the Church is
called a Royal Priesthood; so the Woman must offer as well as the Man, Rev.
22.17. The Spirit says, Come, and the Bride says, Come: and so is not the
Bride the Church? and does the Church only consist of Men? you that deny Women's
speaking, answer: Does it not consist of Women as well as men? Is not the Bride
compared to the whole Church? And does not the Bride say, Come? Does not the
Woman speak then? the Husband Christ Jesus, the Amen, and does not the false
Church go about to stop the Brides Mouth? But it is not possible for the
Bridegroom is with his Bride, and he opens her Mouth. Christ Jesus, who goes on
Conquering, and to Conquer, who kill and slayes with the Sword, which is the
words of his Mouth; the Lamb and the Saints shall have the Victory, the true
Speakers of Men and Women over the false Speaker.

The End.

