TO The Right Honorable THE Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons Assembled In PARLIAMENT.

THE Humble Petition of Edmond Felton, Gent.

LONDON, Printed in the year, 1642.

TO The Right Honorable the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses of the House of
Commons, now Assembled in Parliament.
The humble Petition of Edmond Felton, Gent.

Most humbly Shows.

THat your Petitioners late Father, Thomas Felton, Esquire was authorized under
the great Seal of England, and thereby employed by and for her late Majesty,
Queen Elizabeth, of famous memory, and his late Majesty, King James, of
blessed memory, in following the discovery, and convicting of Recusants, and
for Seizure of their Lands and goods and estates to their Majesty's use, by
which he caused great sums of money, to be brought into their Majesty's
Coffers, to the value of 88400l. or more, in the execution whereof, he spent a
great Estate of lands of inheritance of his own, then in Suffolk, and thereby
grown in debt through want of his own recompense, was enforced to leave Wife
and Children in great necessity, as by the (...) Letters of the late Lord
Brook will appear.

That your Petitioner since his Fathers decease, has suffered the oppression
in the following Articles for discovering Sir Henry Spillers deceipts to the
Crown, to the value of about one hundred Thousand pounds.

That in the Ninrh year of King James, or thereabouts, Mr. Henry Spiller, then
a Clarke in the Exchequer Office (since a Knight) falsely suggested a debt of
5671. to be due from your Petitioners said Father, to the Crown, upon which
suggestion, the said Sir Henry procured the Petitioners said Father to be
imprisoned till he died, not withought just cause of a strong presumption of
an untimely death, wherein your petitioner, and his Mother in her lifetime,
and her children, have sithence received more then two thousand pounds, part of
the Arrers proved to be due from your Petitioners said Father, for the foresaid
service, And upon view of sundry Records, since found upon search, there is Ten
thousand pounds or thereabouts still likewise due, and unpaid to your
petitioners said Father for the service.

That shortly after (this being made known to some of the late Lords of the
Privy Council) Sir Henry Spiller sought to take away the life of one of your
petitioners Witnesses, for a Rape supposed to be committed on one of his men's
Children, of which he was cleared in the open Court, at the Session: Shortly
after, the said party was thus uniustly and falsely accused, and charged with
the said capital crime, there were other most shameful and unchristian-like
plots used to take away his testimony; by which doings, the said party has
continued near thirty years prisoner, and so remains still.

That the said Sir Henry caused the Brother of the said Witness to be arrested
and imprisoned, for that he relieved his Brother in prison, and thereby was
undone, he being a Tradesman.

That Sir Henry Spiller (to prevent your petitioners questioning of him for his
frauds to his late Majesty, known to be discovered to the value of about one
Hundred thousand pound) presently after the discease of your Petitioners
Father, got all his Writings and Evidences whatsoever, concerning his Fathers
proper estate, mortgaged in that service, so that your petitioner, his wife and
Children, have hitherto lost their livelihood, and constrained thereby to grow
much in debt, upon hard terms, and great loss, And this kind of doings has
been Sir Henry's usual practice to many, as appears by several complaints,
against him this Parliament.

That three letttrs are now remaining amongst the Records (writ by some of the
Late Lords of the Privy Counsel) that do testify your Petitioners late
Father did great good service to his Prince and Country, and that his service
was both dangerous, painful and chargable, and by him most carefully and
effectually followed, and without him hardly to be accomplished; neither would
any undertake so dangerous a service, should he have given it over.

That your petitioner obtained several Referrences from the late King, and his
now Majesty, but could not obtain a hearing of him and his witnesses, And at
those times your petitioner, was imprisoned by Sir Henry, and the said Sir
Henry Spiller caused your petitioner to be arrested in his Majesty's Court in
White Hall, the same day he and his witnesses were to be examined in his
Majesty's right, as will appear by a special warrant from some of the late
Lords of the Privy Counsel, and from thence carried to the Marshalseys, and
constrained to put in bail for Fifteen thousand pound, or had perished by
that imprisonment.

That your Petitioner has six times been arrested and imprisoned at Sir H.
Spillers suit, and procurement; and this done at such times as your Petitioner
sued or complained in the right of his Majesty, and of the oppressions of his
Father, and for no other cause; Sir Henry hoping by those imprisonments, to
perish your Petitioner in prison (as he had done his late Father) and your
petitioner has by this means suffered near six years imprisonment.

Candlemas term, in the 14. Caro. Sir Henry Spiller obtained of the Lord
Chief Justice, to send his servant to require your petitioners attendance on
him at an hour, your Petitioner attended, and at his Lordships Chamber
encountered with Sir Will. Jones, since deceased, and Sir Henry Spiller, and the
said Sir John Bramston, charged your Petitioner to have scandalled Sir Henry by
scattered papers, your petitioner justified his papers to be true, containing
the aforesaid fraud, and by him subscribed, and thereupon Sir William Jones
proposed for the said Sir Henry Spiller, that he might have the good behavior
against your Petitioner, and Sir John Bramston asked Sir Henry, what he said
to it, who answered, I: and so the Petitioner left to the Tipstaves hand.

That your petitioner desired the Tip-stave to give him leave to send for
sureties, but he refused, and without other warrant, carried him to the Kings
Bench prison.

That not long after, your petitioner tendered suerties to the said Judges; But
in the mean time, Sir John Lenthall had contrary to Law, admitted of an
Action, to be charged upon your petitioner in 2000. pound, at the said Sir
Henry Spillers suite upon the case, for taxing him with the said fraud, whereas
your petitioner was not prisoned in law, by any Warrant from the said Judge
visiable, or if he had been, yet it is contrary to law, that a prisoner by
command should be charged with Actions, and the action being for words, bail
was not requirable by law, nevertheless, bail was tendered and refused, and
shortly after, the Clerk of the papers of the Kings Bench, gave your
Petitioner notice by writing, that at the next sitting of the Lord Chief
Justice Bramston at Guild Hall, the said Sir Henry would go to a trial with
your petitioner; and in the mean time, Sir Henry Spiller got a verdict of
1000l. against your petitioner at Westminster (for which he is yet prisoner to
the Fleet) and by a Iuory of his own choosing.

The cause your Petitioner did scatter papers against the said Sir Henry was,
for that after special Referrences from his Majesty, your petitioner and his
witnesses should be examined concerning Sir Henry's frauds to his Majesty,
and oppressions to your Petioners Father; and himself, but could not be
obtained, nor his just complaints move some of His Majesty's great Officers to
assist your Petitioner therein.

That your petitioner, as he was there writing in his Chamber, at the
King's Bench prison, was assaulted with six or seven of the Marshalls servants,
who did violently, and barbarously beat, and sore bruise him, and put him in
fear and danger of his life, and most cruelly took, and haled him out of the
Master-side, to the common Jail of the said Prison.

That your Petitioner (was shortly after) most uniustly and disgracefully
removed, and sent to the most infamous Goal of Newgate, and thither carried
bound, as a Fellon, on purpose thereby to be maimed or made away, and after his
remove from thence to the Master-side of the said Prison, was again twice
carried amongst the Fellons, without any offense by the Petitioner given; and
to the end that no friends should be helpful to your Petitioner, nor he or
they be believed in his complaint, it was given out by the Gaolor of Newgate,
he was a Madman, crazed in his brains, and not meet to be respected or
credited in anything, or to that effect. And this done on purpose to disgrace
and discourage your Petitioner, and to hinder his proceedings against Sir Henry
Spiller, in this cause, or on his Majesty's behalf.

That shortly after this cruel usage of your petitioner, his wife fell sick,
and lay at the point of death, to whom your Petitioner was not suffered to go,
but that day she lay ready to depart this life, to the judgment of all that
saw her, in which sickness her skin peeled all off her, as she had been
poisoned, and in this time of her extremity, your petitioner was removed from
the Master-side in Newgate, to the Common Jail there, and lodged many nights
in a dark Duugeon Ward on the ground, where is most noisome scents; Long of
which imprisonment, a child of your petitioners perished, for that neither he
nor his wife could give it its due, and the wife of your petitioner, then
miscarried, being with Child.

That there was a plot presently after your petitioners imprisonment in the
Kings Bench (as upon examination will appear) by one in favor with Sir Henry
Spiller, to have made your petitioner prisoner during Sir Henry's life, a
strong presumption it was, a combination betwixt Sir Henry, and the said
party, who lately in the presence of others said, None but Rogues and Whores
would speak against the said Sir Henry Spiller.

That a Committee this Parliament, being appointed by the Honorable House of
Commons, for the examination of Sir Henry's frauds to the Crown, and
oppression to His Majesty's Subjects, your petitioner there with his witnesses
(was ready) and did make good Sir Henry's frauds to his late Majesty, by
which, and the like courses of the said Sir Henry, has been loss to the
Crown above one Hundred thousand pound, and he thereby has purchased to
himself many thousand pounds a year, much thereof taken in other men's names.

In Answer to so much of this, as concerns your Petitioner, Sir Hen. Spiller,
at a Hearing before the Lords, produced three Letters. First, purporting an
Offer of Composition made by your Petitioner, to the said Sir Henry. The
second, An acknowledgement of Error in speaking words of the said Sir Henry.
The third, A desire of reasonable satisfaction, with promise to desist from
further prosecution.

To all which, your Petitioners Council was not instructed to answer, But
your Petitioner for answer says,

To the first, he was disabled by Sir Henry, in want of his writings and
Estate to prosecute Law, and therefore sought, but took no composition.

To the second, He was restrained of Liberty at Sir Henry's Suite, without
means to vindicate himself against his power and purse, and therefore for
gaining of his liberty, did acknowledge the Error of having spoken that
positively, which he had only from the relation of the party.

To the third, He answers, That it was done when he had sought Justice for
the King, and for himself to his pr^u^ Council frequently, and with more then
ordinary prosecution, yet without fruit or remedy.

Your Petitioner humbly prays your wonted Justice in all, and expedition
(suitable with the great Affairs) least it come unseasonably, he being
destitute of subsistence.

And he shall ever pray, etc. Edmond Felton.


