To the AUTHOR upon his FRONTIS-PIECE.
Eagle, who ever thou art; it is a prize
Not worth thy wing; shall eagles stoop at flies?
True; they have blown thy prey; but, in thy stead,
The vulgar fly-flap might have struck them dead.
But they have sported with the flame of Kings!
That very flame would soon have burnt their wings:
If not; Arachne, in her watchful seat,
As sure as Greg'ries hand, had done the feat.
But it is too late: some honor it will be,
Above their merits, to be crush't by thee.


SACRA NEMESIS, THE Levites Scourge, OR, Mercurius BRITAN. CIVICVS
Disciplined.

ALSO Diverse remarkable Disputes and Resolvs in the ASSEMBLY of Divines
related, Episcopacy asserted, Truth righted, Innocence vindicated against
detraction.

Nazianzen, Epist. 11. (...)
Anonymus de pace ecclesiae. Nunquam veritas rea fuit, ut non in eodem foro
causam ageret innocentia.

The truth of religion was never indicted, but innocence was arraigned at the
same bar.

DEUTERONOMY. 33.11. Strike through the loins of them that rise up against Levi, and
of them that hate him, that they rise not again.

OXFORD, Printed by Leonard Lichfield printer to the Universitie. 1644.

To the READER.
WHen the heart is smitten, and sore hurt, all the rascal deer run away, and
leave him alone to the cruelty of the bloodhounds: so it is with the vulgar
sort, when a person of quality in Church or commonwealth is wounded by the
Nimrods of this age in his estate, liberty or reputation (though not in
conscience) they all shun him and shift (as well as they can) for themselves:
none dare give a pluck at the arrow, much less chase away the hounds that
follow eagerly upon the hot sent, and never leave till they have plucked the
deer down. O the misery of these days, Esaias 51.19.
by so much the more woeful because not bemoaned (these things are come upon
thee, who will lament thee?) What! said I bemoaned! nay scorned and derided;
nay insulted insolently upon, nay uncharitably censured. If the viper light
upon Paul's hand, Acts 28.4.
surely he is a murderer not worthy to live: if a man be committed, certainly
he has committed some great fault in the judgment of the ignobile vulgus,
11.36. Herman leomel Spong. ex lit. urb. 8. catenae marty^um sunt monilia
religionis.
who forget of whom the Apostle spoke in the Hebrews, they were tried by
mockings and scourgings; yea, moreover by bonds and imprisonment, whom the
world was not worthy of. They who are in durance are judged not to be worthy to
live in the world; whereas by the judgment of the holy Ghost, if they suffer
in this kind for a good conscience, the world is not worthy of them* yet now
calamity is accounted a crime, and misery guilt, and durance malignancie, and
to visit those that are imprisoned a sufficient cause of bonds. Never was there
since the Reformation, no not in Q. Mary's days, Humphredus in vita Iuelli
nebula est, transib^t.
when the clearest sky of the Church was over-cast with a bloody cloud, such a
lamentable cry heard from the sons of Levi, their wives and children being
thrust out of the sanctuary, spoiled of all their goods, stripped stark naked,
and starved with hunger and cold as at this present. Neither is this all, P^^s.
sat. 1.
but every tressis agaso, every hackney pamphleter, every mercenary scribler
casts blots on their faces, and adds affliction to the afflicted, and powers
vinegar into their wounds in stead of oil. Among these Britanicus is the
busiest, who in the ensuing treatise is called to an account. But who he is in
particular or his antagonist; appears not, Eras. adag. Andabatarum ritu.
for they fight like Andabatae in tenebris in the dark, or rather like
whifflers with vizards on their faces. And marvail not at it, for truth seldom
appears (now adays) on either side but masked. And if Britanicus, who is a
favorite of the time, Gallinae filiu^ albae, whose daring pen weekly
provokes, not only the crozure, but the Scepter, yet conceals his proper name;
how much more needed his adversary so to do, who was before in nimbo, Live.
dec. Foedior in orb trucidatio, cum turba foeminarum puerorum* que in
succensum ignem se Conjicerent: rivique sanguinis flammam orientem
restinguerent.
and now is in limbo (where usually no light is seen but through a chink, nor
men but through a gra^e) who has lost all pro Christo Domino, and Domini
Christo, for the Lord Christ, and the Lord his Christ, that is, his anointed,
save the testimony of a good conscience, and a vehement desire to quench the
fire kindled of late in the bowels of the Church even with his blood, as the
Astapani sometimes did, and bury it in his ashes?

The special Contents of this treatise, with the arguments of every section.
SECTION I. The character of Britanicus. p. 1. SECT. II. The censure of the
diurnalls and scouts. p. 2. SECT. III. Six shameless untruths uttered by
Britanicus in three lines, and the true cause set down why D. F. was voted out
of the Assembly of Divines. p. 3. SECT. IV. How the parsonage of Lambeth and
Acton came to be sequestered, and why. p. 5. SECT. V. That D. F. was no
intelligencer or spy to Oxford, and the censure past upon him Sept. 29.
discussed. p. 8. SECT. VI. Aulicus truly relates the reasons alleged by D. F.
against the new covenant in the open Assembly. p. 11. SECT. VII. Diverse
remarkable passages in the Assembly of Divines related in a letter to the
Primate of Ireland: together with several speeches there made concerning the
three creeds, the imputation of Christ's active and passive obedience* and King
James his advice to the Synod held in France at Privase, and concerning the
second clause in the new covenant. p. 12. SECT. VIII. Sixteen reasons for
Episcopal government unanswered by the Smectymnians: together with the
judgment of all the reformed Churches for Episcopacie. p. 50. SECT. IX.
Britanicus his scurrilous jests at spiritual Courts retorted, and ex tempore
prayers and exercises censured. p. 60. SECT. X. The abuse of appropriations of
benefices, and the necessity of pluralities as the case stands. p. 62. SECT.
XI. That the abjuration of Episcopacie, especially in the Clergy of England,
involveth all them who take such an oath in perjury and Sacrilege. p. 65.
SECT. XII. Of profitable doctrines and beneficial positions held by Brownists
and Sectaries. p. 66. SECT. XIII. Of ministerial habits, the strict observance
of the christian Sabbath, and how the Brownists and other Sectaries profane
it. p. 68. SECT. XIV. Of the subscription of the letter written to the Primate
of Ireland, and the strange interpretation thereof by Sir W. E. p. 70. SECT.
XV. Wholesome and seasonable advice to Britanicus. p. 72. SECT. XVI. A sober
reckoning with Civicus. p. 74. SECT. XVII. A Corollarium, consisting of the
testimonies and Eulogies of many foraign Divines of eminent note, concerning D.
F. p. 79. SECT. XVIII. The sum of D. F. his apology reduced into two
unanswerable dilemma's. p. 88. SECT. ult. A true transcript of the most
material part of D. F. his letter to the Primate of Ireland, and an account of
the whole. See page 100.
ARTICLE 8. Of the three Creeds.
THe three, Creeds, Nice Creed, Athanasius Creed, and that whichis commonly
called the Apostles Creed, ought thoroughly to be received and believed: for they
may be proved by most certain warrants of holy Scripture.

Concerning this eighth Article, vide 2 speeches, page 13.

ARTICLE 11. Of the Justification of MAN.
WE are accounted righteous before God, only for the merit of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ by faith, and not for our own works, or deservings.
Wherefore, that we are justified by faith only, is a most wholesome doctrine,
and very full of comfort, as more largely is expressed in the Homily of
Justification.

Concerning this eleventh Article, vide 5 speeches, page 20.

The two first clauses of the Covenant, as they were offered to the Assembly,
licensed, and entered into the Hall book according to Order, September 4. 1643.
and Printed at London for Philip Lane.
1. THat we shall all and each one of us, sincerely, readily and constantly,
through the Grace of God, endeavor in on^ several places and callings, the
preservation of the true Reformed Protestant Religion, in the Church of
Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and Government according to the Word
of God, and the reformation of Religion in the Church of England (this
Explication to be at the end of the Covenant, as far as we do, or shall in our
consciences conceive to be according to the Word of God) according to the same
holy Word* the Example of the last Reformed Churches, and as may b^ing the
Church of God in both Nations to the nearest conjunction and Uniformity in
Religion, confession of Faith, Form of Church^ government* directory for
Worship and Catechizing; that we and our Posterity after us may, as Brethren,
live in Faith and Love.

2. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
Extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, Superstition, Heresy, Schism and
Profaneness* and whatsoever shall be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine,
and the power of Godliness in both Nation^, lest we partake in other men's
sins, and thereby be endangered to receive of their plagues, that the Lord may
be one, and his Name one in both Kingdoms.

To which first printed copy, the Doctors speech delivered in the Assembly,
relates page 48.

The two clauses of the Covenant, as they were altered and Printed by Order of
the House of COMMONS.
1. THat we shall sincerely, really and constantly, through the Grace of God,
endeavor in our several places and callings, the preservation of the reformed
Religion in the Church of Scotland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, against our common Enemies, the Reformation of Religion in the
Kingdoms of England and Ireland, in Doctrine, Worship, Discipline and
Government, according to the Word of God, and the Example of the best Reformed
Churches, and shall endeavor to bring the Churches of God in the three
Kingdoms, to the nearest Conjunction and Uniformity in Religion, Confession of
Faith, Form of Church Government, Directory for Worship and Catechizing* that
we and our Posterity after us may, as Brethren, live in Faith and Love, and
the Lord may delight to dwell in the midst of us.

II. That we shall in like manner, without respect of persons, endeavor the
extirpation of Popery, Prelacie, that is, Church Government by Archbishops,
Bishops, their Chancellours, Commissaries, Deans, Deans and Chapters,
Archdeacons, and all other Ecclesiastical Officers depending on the
Hierarchy, Superstition, Heresy, Schism* Profaneness, and whatsoever shall
be found to be contrary to sound Doctrine and the power of Godliness; lest we
partake in other men's sins* and thereby be in danger to receive of their
plagues and that the Lord may be one, and his Name one in the three Kingdoms.

Errata.
Epist. to the reader, l. 19. in. r. to. p. 12. l. 23. dazzled, r. so dazzled. p.
15. in marg. Vos. de 36. r. Vos. de tribus symbo. p. 40. l. 1. 2. Cor. 1.30. r.
1. Cor. 1.30. p. 43. l. 13. speciei. r. specie. p. 52. l. 24. Acts. 3.1. r.
1.3. p. 61. add in marg. Aug. de civit. Dei. l. 19. c. 19. l. ult. p. 66. l.
22. thought r. sought. p. 69. l. 25. there r. then. p. 87. l. 14. dele his own
Nation* for Primate of Armagh. r. Primate of Ireland.

SECTION I. The Character of Britanicus.
DIego writes, Diego Tornis edit. Venet. 1604.

Barcaeus, vester Diabolo venit obviam petiitque ut cathedram ejus occuparet,
quia erit dignior. Psalm. 1.


That Barcaeus meeting with the Devil sitting at his ease upon a Chair, bid
him rise up and give place to his better. The tale, Britanicus, is morallized
in thee, thou may very well challenge the precedencie of Satan, and thrust him
out of his Chair, The seat of the scornful, wherein thou have sat for these
many months, and out-railest all the Shimie's, and Rabsekehs, and out-Lyest
all the Simmeasses and Pseudolusses that ever sat in that Chair. And although
Tacitus whispers me in the ear, Maledicta, si irascaris, agnita videntur;
spreta exolescunt: Contumelious speeches if they put thee into a chafe, seem
to argue guilt. Yet because a wiser then he advises, in some case, to answer a
fool according to his folli^, lest he be wise in his own conceit: Prove. 26.5.
And because it is rather an argument of stupiditie then innocence, to be
altogether unsensible when our integrity, or the reputation of our friend is
touched, though it be but with the scratch of a goose quill* I though fit,
potius vexatum and castiga^um quam despectum dimitt^re Vatinium, rather to
dismiss Vatinius well cudgelled then slighted, I mean that scorn of all the
learned, and hate of all good men, Britanicus, or rather Brutanicus* not from
Brutus but Brutum. For he is no better then one of Cerberus whelps, at which
Hercules would not vouchsafe to give a Kick in his return from Hell: yet
because since he has lickt clean the Expraetors trencher, Alderm. P.
he never leaves barking at all who adore not the cap of maintenance, nor
canonize the synagogue of orbicular independents; I was desired to strike him
baculo pastorali, and teach him from henceforth, sua potius lambere ulcera,
quam aliorum famam arrodere, rather to use his tongue in licking his own
sores, then his teeth in biting them, upon whom heretofore he basely fawned.
The best is, he to whose appologie I have consecrated my Pen, is (...), out of
the danger of this hail shot, above these nebulas nebulonum, his reputation is
safe both from the tongue of detraction and teeth of envy, being treasured up
in the hearts of all that sincerely love the truth. Anthony proscribed Cicero,
Vell. Paters* l. 2.
for the space only that the Triumvirate in Rome lasted, but Cicero proscribed
Anthony to all ages. The more Camomile is trod upon, the sweeter smell it
gives, and the black aspersions of malice serve but as a dark foil to set off
the luster of eminent virtue. For thee, Britanicus, seeing thou know not thy
self, I will send thee to S. Jerome for thy Character, under the name of the
Else Helvidius, Loquacitatem facundiam existimat, and maledicere omnibus bonae
conscientiae signum arbitratur: he accounts railing to be Rhetoric, and deemes
it to be an argument of a good Conscience, to speak evil of all men.

SECT. II. The censure of all the Diurnals and Scouts.
WHat Lactantius threatened the ravening Wolves, will sooner or later befall the
mad Dogs also; Divin Instit. l. ult.
Veniet lispis rapacibus dies suus, not only those ravening Wolves that have
worried, not so much the flock of Christ, as the pastors themselves, devouring
them with their wives and children, and all their substance; but also those
snarling Curs and mad Dogs, that have fastened their venomous teeth upon the
true Servants of God, shall have their day. Among whom, take heed lest thou be
found, who have two known properties of a Cur, to bark at the clear light,
and to file in the best and cleanest swept room. Scalig. contra Lyid. In locis
nitidissimis olidum ponit.
Thou art not content to traduce and vilify the Reverend and Learned Clergy,
and spot and stain the prime Nobility and Gentry of the Kingdom, but like
the Serpent Ptyas, thou spittest venom at Majesty it self; and therefore
may expect for thy deserts, without any ambition, the highest preferment of
The one was hanged on a Gallows fifty cubits high, the other in a Cage on the
highest Tower in Munster*

Civicus, Scoticus, C^elicus.


Haman or Cnipperdoling. It is reported of a late Lidger Ambassador at Venice,
that he wrote with the point of a Diamond in Glass this definition of an
Ambassador, An Ambassador is an honorable Spy, sent by the State to lie for
the good of the Commonwealth. I hold this definition of an Ambassador in
general to have too much in it mordacis veritatis, of tart truth: but he
should do thee, and thy three Brethren in iniquity, (all of the Bastard brood
of Maia) right, who should define you base Spies, hired to invent and vent Lies
through the whole Kingdom, for the good of the Cause. For what is your weekly
employment but to smother the clear truth of all proceedings at Court, and set
a varnish upon all the Machiavillian cheats, unchristian practices, and
horrible outrages committed by the Plunderers and their accomplices in the
City? Howbeit, because Urbanus has taken thee to task for thy scandalum
magnatum, of which thou art like one day to hear without an ear: I shall
discipline thee at this present only for opening thy foul mouth upon a late
Member of the Assembly, whose hands thou know are so tied, that he cannot
wipe away the froth of thy impute discourse, which thus driveleth from thee.

SECT. III. Six Untruths uttered by Britanicus in three Lines; the true cause
why D. F. was voted out of the Assembly.
IT is briefly mentioned before, who was an Intelligencer to Oxford of passages
in the Assembly, now a word more of it: Merc. Brit. page 47.
That grave Doctor, I mean Doctor Featley, that held correspondencie with the
Bishop of Armagh, and informed his Irish grace how much His Majesty was
beholding to him for his intelligence, and upon the whole matter desires his
grace to move the King to confer upon him the Deanerie of Westminster. The
Letter it self was intercepted, all of his own hand writing, and he
acknowledged it.

Lingua in udo est and facile labitur, the tongue is seated in a moist place
and easily slips; this is seen by thee, Britanicus, whose tongue has slipped
six times within the short space of three Lines.

First, Thou say that the Doctor held correspondence with his Irish grace by
Letters, whereas the Doctor never received Letter from the Primate of Armagh,
during the time of his abode in the Assembly.

Secondly, Thou make a hideous noise and great racket about a Letter written
to his grace, but intercepted; Whereas it was no Letter in truth and propriety
of speech, but a note unsealed without any indorsment or date, and that note
also drawn from the Doctor by a wile, by one who at this present is Suttler to
the Trained Band at S. Albans.

Thirdly, thou say, the Doctor informed his grace what good service he had
done the King this Parliament; whereas there is never a word in that Letter or
Note of any service done to His Majesty, but a mere complaint of unsufferable
wrongs offered the Doctor by the Parliament Soldiers, who plundered him both
at Acton and Lambeth.

Fourthly, thou impudently affirmest, that he desired his grace to move the
King to confer upon him the Deanerie of Westminster; whereas the words in the
original Letter not falsified are, that his grace would put in for himself,
that he might hold it as a Commendam with the Administratorship of Carlisle, as
the Archbishop of York held it before.

Fifthly, thou say, that the Doctor wrote all this pretended Letter with his
own hand, whereas he wrote never a Line of it with his own hand, but dictated
to another.

Sixthly, thou blushest not to say, that the Doctor acknowledged the Letter
examined before the Committee to be his own, whereas that was but a false
transcript, and never so much as showed to the Doctor, much less acknowledged
by him to be true. Thou will say then, if neither the original now at Oxford,
nor the transcript was exhibited to the Doctor, nor any witness at all
produced to make faith, either that the original being unsealed was not
corrupted, or that this transcript perfectly accorded with the original,
neither could be any evidence against the Doctor; how then came it to pass
that he was blown out of the Assembly, and both his Livings, by one blast of
Euroclydon? I could answer as Erasmus did to the Emperor, who demanded of him
what he thought of Martin Luther, a man so much cried up and down in the
world; up among the reformed, but down in the Popish Church: Truly, quoth
Erasmus, he is a worthy and able Divine, and otherwise irreproveable, only he
was too blame in two things.

First, That he touched the Popes triple Crown.

Secondly, The Monks belly, which were two Noli me tangere's: so the Doctor,
though otherwise he went with a right foot, and kept pace with those of his
rank, yet in two things he tript.

First, In the great debate about the three Creeds, he sided with the
Presbyterians against the Independents.

Secondly, When the new Covenant was first offered to the Assembly, he openly
and professedly opposed it, and endeavored to prove, that all the Divines that
were wrapped in that new bond, were entangled in perjurie by breaking their
Oaths of canonical obedience. For this, the Independents accounted him a
Malignant, and the Presbyterians confided not in him. Besides, our Politicians
that have been brought up at the feet of the great Gamaliel in Phylosophie,
Aristotle, taking upon them the defense of Ostracisme (never more practiced
then now, even by those who understand not what the word signifies) teach us,
that though a man have a clear breast and strong voice, yet if it be not
tunable, or his Note be so loud, that he drowneth the rest in the Consort, it
is fit he should be put out of the Quire. And truly, Britanicus, that needed
not, for though he were Voted into it by 390 voices, yet he never voted
himself into it, but often wished himself out of it, not because he was
averse from Synods, as the learnedest of the Greek Fathers (Sir-named the
Divine) was, who observed in his time, that he never saw good end of any such
Assemblies; but because this Assembly was not called by the sound of Moses his
Silver trumpet, neither were the Members thereof elected or nominated by the
body of the Clergy, neither have they any decisive, but only consultive, and
deliberative suffrages. In which regard, he conceived that he might do more
hurt to himself by his presence there, then good to others by his assistance.
And therefore when he heard, that like a Candle he was blown in and out with
the same breath, he past not at all for it, deeming himself neither a gainer
by the one, nor looser by the other.

SECT. IIII. How D. F. his Livings came to be sequestered, and why.
BUt his Livings touched him more nearly, and to the quick: The Sequestration
from the Assembly made him but speechless there, where for the most part he
was but a Mute before, but the sequestration of his Benefices made him
livelesse, or rather according to the Apostles phrase, twice dead and plucked up
by the roots: For as good upon the matter to be dead, as deprived of all
means of livelihood. Thou will say, admit his voice in the Assembly were
Malignant; yet surely neither his Books nor his Livings were so. I grant it,
yet some cast a Malignant eye at them, they were like a Pin and a Web in the
eye of Envy, they were two good Benefices conveniently seated near London,
the one has a goo^ friend of the Air, the other of the Thames; and therefore
the Mouth of some of the Assembly watered after them, one of the Assessors, M.
W. must have a convenient seat, and M. Nigh must be denied nothing: and because
intus apparens prohibet extraneum, that they might be inducted, the Dr. must be
outed: Neither want there presidents for it; Fundus Albanus in Italy, and
Nabals Vineyard in Iezreel are ruling cases for it. Annal. Tacit. lib. 12.

Agrippina Statilium Taurum hortis ejus inhians pervertit.


Yea, but where are the men of Belial to testify that the Dr. blasphemed the
Parliament, and their Ordinances? they were ready at the Committee for plundered
Ministers, namely Andrews the Botcher, and Sharp the Cobbler, these prevailed
so far with 4 of the Committee, that April the 23, the Dr. was voted out of his
living at Lambeth, though six eminent and worthy Members of the Parliament
there present (but not of the Committee) showed great dislike of this Censure,
and one of them said That it had bin better for the Dr. to have fallen into the
hands of the high Commission, or Popish Inquisition, then that Committee. But
salva res est, the sentence of four men was reversed in open Parliament by 80
at least, who acquitted the Dr. and now he is settled in both his Benefices and
locked fast into the Assembly, and the separatists and schismatic Recusants
at Lambeth, (who the 23 of April, after the Dr. was sentenced, kept a great
Feast, like to that of the Persians, called Magophonia, at which, first they
prayed themselves out of their senses, and after drank themselves out of their
wits) now mourn in the chine, Justin. lib. 1. Persae festum celebrant ob necem
Magorum, dictum, (...).
their short wits are at an end, they know not what to do, and therefore for 3
months they sit down by the loss: but afterward felix casus se immiscuit
arti, an occasion is offered to effect that by an engine, which they could not
do with clean strength. It was reported at London and at Lambeth, by some
that came from Oxford, that the Dr. was lost at Court, by reason of his
repairing so usually to the Assembly of Divines, and concurring with them in
their resolves: upon this, they who before lay in wait for the Doctor, work,
and a Felt-maker in the Borough, a great stickler for the new Reformation, is
sent to the Doctor, with a pretended message from the Primate of Armagh,
Armiger Warner.
that his Majesty was very much offended with the Doctors complying with the
Assembly, and that he charged him upon high displeasure never more to meet with
the Divines in Henry the 7ths Chapel. At this the Dr. being much appaled and
troubled, not knowing how to steer his course between the Symplegades, nor
obey the contrary commands of two such masters, the Messenger put him in some
comfort, saying, that a word of the Primates to the King would set all right,
and that the next morning, being Saturday, he was to take his journey to
Oxford, and that if the Dr. would write two or three lines to his Grace, and
acquaint him with some late passages of the Assembly, with his desire to get
leave of his Majesty to continue his attendance there, till he might upon fair
terms withdraw himself* he engaged himself deeply that he would bring an
answer from the Primate the Tuesday following. Upon this overture, the Dr. very
desirous to take the first opportunity to make his peace with the KING,
dic^ated a letter, or rather a note which he read to the Messenger, demanding
of him whether he thought there was any matter of offense or danger in it, and
if there were, he wished him utterly to suppress it; the Messenger answered,
that there neither was, nor could be any danger in it, for it was a note only
unsealed and contained no secrets in it, but the open and known resolves of
the Assembly. Whereupon the Dr. trusted him with it, but heard no Answer till
some weeks after. In the mean while, the Messenger shows this note to
diverse, and closes with the Committee, who took a Copy of it, but dispatched
him away with the Original to Oxford, whereupon he brings back an answer
from the Primate: upon his return he is committed for a few days, but since
preferred to a gainful place in the Army: so his turn was served, but the
Doctor turned out of house and home, sequestered, plundered, and libelled in all
the triobulary pasquils printed the first and second week of October. 1643.


Being thus as you heard, made an Intelligencer to Oxford, he is censured by
them who made him so, in the highest degree. And now the Vulturs hover over the
carcass of his estate: one M W^ite of Dorchest.
seizes upon his Living at Lambeth; another M. Nigh
upon his Benefice at Acton; a third M. Ben,
upon his Books; a fourth M Cook.
upon his provisions; a fifth Andrew Ke^win.
upon his goods and household-stuffe: and thou, Britanicus, here gottest store
of Gall and Coppres to put in thine Ink; which, it ever God open thy eyes, to
see thy error, thou will mingle with thy tears: For he was a great One that
said it, Whosoever offends one of these little ones, even the least in the
Kingdom of God, that is, the Ministry of the Gospel, it were better that a
millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into the Sea. Is this the
purity of precise Zeal? Are these the distilled Spirits of Christianity? To
beautify the Temple of God, by damming up the lights thereof? To lay traps in
their ways, who guide our feet into the way of peace? To make men Delinquents,
and then to persecute them with all severity? Is this the piety of this age,
for the flocks of Christ to betray their Pastors to ravening Wolves; to
strengthen the Arms of Brownists and base miscreants against learned,
painful, and Orthodox Divines; to take Oath upon Oath, and enter into Covenant
after Covenant, to maintain and support the true reformed Religion, and yet to
supplant, and upon forged Cavillations overthrow the known Champions thereof?
O ubi estis fontes lachrymarum? Oh where are ye! fountains of tears.

SECT. V. That the Doctor was no Intelligencer or Spy.
MAulicus, we have traced your Intelligence from the Parliament to the
Assembly, Brit. p. 45.
and found your Mercury in the habit of a Doctor, but he confessed the hope of
a Deanerie seduced him.

Nay, rather we have traced a cunning Merchant from the Bear at Bridge-foot to
Kennington, Ans.
from Kennington to the close Committee, from the close Committee to Oxford,
from Oxford to the Court of Wards, and from thence to the Leaguer at Saint
Albans: Egregiam vero laudem, let it be recorded to the everlasting praise of
the agents that bear themselves upon the close Committee, that by fraud and
falsehood they have entrapped Simplicity, betrayed Loyalty; and rewarded
Treachery; before they put the Doctor into the habit of an Intelligencer, they
transformed themselves into Angels of light. As for the Doctors confessing,
that the hope of a Deanerie seduced him, thy word will be taken for no more
then thy weekly intelligence brings thee in; produce but one witness for it,
though as copped a Roundhead as thy self, and I will confess thee to be an
honest man. But thou have a Patent to Lie; and whatsoever thou printest in thy
weekly Curranto's, though never so grossly absurd and palpably false, after
thou have got M. Whites hand to it, no man can say, black is thine eye.

Yea, but the Doctor is charged to be a Spy and Intelligencer to Oxford, by
the report made to the House of Commons, which here follows.

A Letter of Doctor Featley's intercepted, going to Oxford to the Primate of
Armagh, wherein were contained great imputations upon the proceedings of the
Assembly, and diverse Members both of the Assembly and Parliament, whereby it
appears that he is a Spy and Intelligencer to Oxford: The Letter was read
before the Committee, and the Doctor called to his Answer, who confessed all
the material points in it, etc. September. 29. 1643.

This report of the Chaire-man, may be reduced to this Syllogism.

Whosoever sends a Letter to the Primate of Armagh, containing great
imputations upon the Members of the Assembly and Parliament, is a Spy and
Intelligencer to Oxford, and ought to be deprived of both his Livings, Books,
and Liberty.

But the Doctor sent a Letter to the Primate of Armagh, etc.

Ergo, he ought to be deprived of his Livings, Books, and Liberty; as it
follows there in the Sentence.

Here the Conclusion is in Ferio, or in Bocardo rather. But the premises are
both false, The name of a Mood in the third Figure, and also of a Prison.
and it will cost the Reporter hot water to make good either of them.

For first, the original Letter, was never showed to the Doctor, nor
acknowledged by him, nor any witness produced, to testify that it was written
by him; and therefore can be no evidence against him in any Court where Astrea
sits. Ovid. M^tam. l. 1. terras Astraea reliquit. See the gentle Lash, p. 5.


Secondly, The Transcript upon which the Committee proceeded, disagreeth with
the original in diverse material points, as is proved elsewhere: Neither was
there any Faith at all made before the Doctor, to convince him, that the Letter
read before the Committee was a true Transcript.

Thirdly, in that Letter there was no imputation, great or small, laid upon the
Members of the Assembly, or Parliament; unless it be an imputation to say,
That the Prolocutors daily prayer was the best and truest Diurnall, for that he
had a special gift to pray, not so much ex tempore as de tempore.

Fourthly, The great imputations spoken of, we desire that the Reporter, for
his reputation sake, would specify: For either they were true, or false: If
they were true, why are nor the Members of the Assembly and Parliament
questioned, and punished for them? if they were false, why was not the Doctor
put to his proof, and in case he failed, censured as a slanderer? There Is a
Pad in the Straw; Aliquid latet quod non patet.

Fifthly, To send a Letter from one Member of the Assembly to another, is not
to be a Spy or Intelligencer to the adverse party: But such a one was the
Primate of Armagh, not only a Member of the Assembly, chosen by the joint
Votes of the whole House of Commons, but a Member at that time in such grace
with the Assembly, that he was often alleged with great honor and respect
both by the Assessors and others, especially in debating the Article of Christ's
descent into Hell.

Sixthly, (...), one Swallow makes not a Summer, nor one act a habit, nor one
link a Chain, nor one flower a garland, nor one rotten grain a corrupt
Pomegranat; nor does one Letter sent to Wickham, lying in the Road to Oxon.
make a Spy or Intelligencer to Oxford, and more then one Letter the Docto^
never dictated, and that also intercepted; how then can he be a Spy? For the
Letter intercepted could give no intelligence to Oxon, being stayed at London.

Seventhly, Resolves of a Synod and conclusions de side, are no secrets of
State; neither is the imparting of them to a most religious, learned, and every
way accomplished Bishop, betraying secrets to an enemy, but consulting an
Oracle in Theological disputes of as great difficulty as moment.

Eighthly, Whereas it is said, that the Doctor confessed all the material
points in the transcript* it is most untrue: for the main and only material
point* concerning aspersions laid upon Members of the Assembly and Parliament,
was never so much as put to the Doctor, much less confessed by him; and for
the truth hereof, he appealeth to the whole Committee for Examinations.

Lastly, to return to thee, Sir Britanicus, Civicus, or Scoticus, for thou art
a man omnium nominum and horarum; tell me in good earnest, what is the Trade,
or Profession, or Mystery, whereby thou live? Is it not to be a City- Spy,
and Intelligencer? And why may it not be as lawful for the Doctor to send
Theological Truths to Oxford, as for thee every week Civil Lies to all parts
of the Kingdom? And because it is said, thou art either Cornutus, or
Cornificius, I very much entreat thee, in the last place, to dissolve this
Dilemma or Cornutum argumentum.

Either the Letter sent by the Doctor to the Primate of Armagh, contained in it
matter of offense and scandal, or not; Ad parts, which of the horns will thou
take? hold off; if thou say the Letter contained no matter of offense or
scandal, thou say just nothing in the defense of the justice of the
Committee or Parliament; if thou say that it contained any just matter of
offense or scandal, and in that regard ought not to have been published, to
the disgrace of the Assembly or Parliament: Why did not those of the close
Committee, when it was in their hands suppress it? Why did they send the
original Letter to Oxford, whereby it is now made public, and exposed to the
view of all men? Certainly, if the bare sending of that Letter to Oxford, make
a man a Spy and Intelligencer, and guilty of I know not what capital Crime,
as S. Austine argued against the Devils ambiguous oracles, Sors ipsa referenda
est ad sortem, so I may truly say, and make it good by the Recorders logic
and the Parliaments Cens^re* that those of the close Committee, who after they
had perused the Letter and taken a Copy, delivered it to the Messenger to
conveigh it with all speed to Oxford, deserve to be close committed, and sent
by the Sergeant at Arms Petri ad vincula. O utinam: nec enim lex justior ulla
est, quam necis artifices art perire sua.

SECT. VI. Aulicus truly relates the Doctors reasons alleged against the New
Covenant, in the open Assembly.
HE tells us of Doctor Featley's exception against our Oath, Brit. page 67.
he framed some wished reasons and arguments, and pinned them on the Doctors
sleeve and would make them his, but they are not satisfactorie enough.

I pray thee, Britanicus, Ans.
show us the long Pin wherewith he pinned those reasons to the Doctors
sleeve, reaching from Christ-Church or All Souls in Oxford, to Peter-house in
London; and because thy brow is made of the same Metal with that Pin, go
boldly to the house of Peers, and enquire of the Lord Say and Wharton, and
after into the house of Commons, and demand of M. Rouse and White, and lastly
into the Assembly, and ask of M. Case and Calamie, whether the Doctor did not
openly propound those reasons in the Assembly a fortnight before, that so
often produced and much traduced Letter was sent to the Primate of Armagh, out
of which Aulicus transcribed those reasons verbatim. Yea, but these reasons are
not sufficient enough, they were sufficient enough to convince them who took
the Oath, and to confound thee, Britanicus: if they were insufficient, why all
this while have not thou or some of them discovered the weakness and
insufficiency of them?

The Doctor could have alleged many other reasons, both against the Covenant
in general, and that clause in particular, which may be in due time produced
after the former reasons have been any way impeached or infringed by any
colorable answer: till then thy silence, and theirs whom it so deeply concerns
to dissolve them, as that they may dis-ingage themselves from perjurie, argues
plainly they are to you unanswerable.

SECT. VII. Diverse remarkable passages in the Assembly of Divines, related in
the Letter to the Primate of Armagh.
BEcause this Letter, or rather unsealed advertisement, sent to an eminent
Member of the Assembly, has been made as a Match anointed with the Brimstone
of the Adversaries malice, to kindle a fire of envy against the Doctor, which
has consumed his whole estate, and dazzled the eyes of many of his Friends in
the Assembly, that they could not look upon him any more as a faithful
Fellow-builder, but rather as a deceitful Work-man^ I will here truly acquaint
thee, Reader, with all those passages in that Letter, that any way reflect on
the Assembly.

After an Encomium of the Prolocutor for his special gift of praying, not so
much ex tempore, as de tempore, rather to fish out the learned Archbishops
judgment in those controverted points, then to satisfy his curiosity, the
Doctor related three great disputes which held the Assembly many days. The
first, concerning the eighth Article of Religion; the second, concerning the
eleventh; the third, concerning the second clause in the New Covenant. The
first, whether those words in the Article, ( The three Creeds ought thoroughly
to be received and believed) might stand. The second, whether in the definition
of justification, the imputation of Christ's active obedience as well as his
passive ought to be mentioned. The third, whether those words in the New
Covenant, I will endeavor the extirpation of Popery and Prelacie, that is,
government by Archbishops, Bishops, etc, shall pass without any qualification
or addition of the words papal or tyrannical or independent. The Assembly
voted affirmatively in all three, the Doctor in the two former concurred with
them, but dissented in the latter: upon what grounds he concurred in the former
and dissented in the latter, the ensuing Speeches made in the Assembly will
declare.

The first Speech concerning the eighth Article, before the Assembly of
DIVINES.
M. Prolocutor,
THat we may not Penelopes tela^ texere and retexere, do and undo; and that
it may not be said of our votes, as Charles the fifth spoke sometimes of the
decrees at their Diets, that they were like Vipers, the latter always
destroying the former; What I shall humbly offer to this Assembly, shall be
in confirmation of our last vote concerning the three Creeds, read in our
Church. The exception of some of our learned Brethren, are taken either at the
titles* or the Creeds themselves: Against the titles, that the Nic^ne Creed* is
in truth the Constantinopolitane; that the Creed which goes under the name of
Athanasius, was either made by Anastasius, as some affirm, or Eusebius
Vercellensis, as our incomparable Jewel relates. Apol. Eccl. Ang. p. 2. c. 1.
divis. 1.
Certainly Meletius the Patriarch of Constantinople, in his Epistle to John
Do^sa resolves negatively, Athanasio falso ascriptum symbolum cum appendice
illo Romanorum Pontificum adulteratum luce lucidius contestamur: we contest
that it is cle^rer than day light, that this Creed is falsely fathered upon
Athanasius, and is adulterated by the adding of a clause inserted by the Roman
Bishop; and for that which is called the Apostles Creed, the father who so
christened it is unknown. Hereunto I answer, that though the entire Creed,
which is read in our Churches, under the name of the Nicen, be found totidem
verbis in the Constantinopolitane; yet it may be truly called the Nicen,
because the greatest part of it is taken out of that of Nice. And howsoever,
some doubt whether Athanasius were the author of that Creed which bears his
name, yet the greater number of the learned of latter ages entitle him to it;
and though peradventure he framed it not himself, yet it is most agreeable to
his doctrine, and seems to be drawn out of his works, and in that regard may
be rightly termed his Creed. And for the third Creed, although I believe not,
that either the Apostles jointly or severally dictated it: yet I subscribe to
Calvin's judgment, who says, that it was a summarie of the Christian Faith,
extant in the Apostles days, and approved of by them. Howsoever, according to
the rule of Aristotle, Loquendum cum vulgo, licet sentiendum cum sapientibus,
we must use the language of the vulgar, though we vote with wise men, and think
as they do. And certain it is, these three Creeds, for many hundreds of
years, have generally passed under the titles of the Nicen, the Athanasian, and
the Apostles. So much for the titles. Against the Creeds themselves, the
exceptions which are taken, either concern the form of propounding the
Articles, or the matter and doctrine of them; concerning the manner of
propounding them, it is objected to be in too peremptory a way, under pain of
damnation, and that they ought to be thoroughly believed. To the former I
answer with Leo, where it is said, Whosoever holds not this Creed, shall perish
everlastingly; Vid. Vossium de 36 Symbolis.
It is understood of such as have capacity to understand it, and their
consciences are convinced of the truth of it. To the latter, that thoroughly to
believe it, signifies no more then throughout, and entirely, and that not for
the authority of the Creeds themselves, but for the Scripture by which they
are confirmed. The exceptions against the matter or doctrine of the Creeds,
either concern the first Article, God of God, or the Article about the descent
into hell. For the first, there can be no doubt at all of it, for the Son is
of the Father, and therefore the Father and Son being God, it must needs
follow, that Christ is God of God, neither will it hence follow, that the
Deity of the Son is of the Deity of the Father. For the argument holds not
a concreto ad abstractum, verbi gratia, it will not follow, Deus passus est,
ergo deitas passa est, God suffered, ergo the deity suffered: nor this, Maria
est matter Dei, ergo est matter deitatis; Mary is the mother of God, ergo she is
mother of the Deity. Yea but Calvin says, Christ is autotheos, God of
himself; the answer is easy, Christ is God of himself, ratione essentiae;
but God of God, ratione personae. And whereas it is objected, that if he be
Deus de Deo, it must be either per productionem essentiae, or communicationem;
by the production, or communication of the essence: though Beza, and other of
our Divines stick not at the latter phrase, yet it follows not; for it is
sufficient to prove him God of God, that his person is generated of the Father,
and it is safer to say that he has communem essentiam cum patre, then
communicatam. rather common then communicated. For the latter, concerning
descent into Hell, all the Christians in the world acknowledge, that CHRIST
some way descended into hell, either locally, as many of the ancient fathers,
Latimer the martyr, Bilson and Andrews, and Noel in his catechism (commanded to
be taught in all Schools, soon after the publishing the 39 Articles expound it)
or vertually as Durand, or metaphorically as Calvin, or metonymically as
Tilenus, Perkins, and this Assembly; and therefore no man need to make scruple
of subscribing to the Article, as it stands in the creed, seeing it is capable
of so many orthodoxall explications, and therein I desire that this Assembly in
their aspersions would (after the example of the harmony of confessions)
content themselves with branding only the popish exposition of this Article,
which takes hell for limbus patrum, or purgatory (Netherland regions, extra
anni solisquevias) for any of the other four interpretations, they are so far
from being Heretical, that it has not bin proved that any of them is
erroneous.

M. Prolocutor,
The second Speech, to the eighth Article.
THough there is nothing more tender then Conscience, every scrupulus there is
more painful then surculus in carne a thorn in the flesh; and though nothing
ought more now to be soght after, when not only Christ's seamlesse coat, but his
mystical body is rent and torn asunder, then (...), and (...) to seek the
truth in love, and love in truth; and therefore I shall be most willing to any
kind of reason able (...) condescending, to give satisfaction to our learned
brethren: yet on the other side, they may do well to think of that maxim in
the canon law, turpis pars quae discordat toti, it is an unsound part which
differs from the whole body, and not nodos inscirpo quaerere, to except against
undoubted verities, and most warrantable expressions, such as have bin debated
in this Article* namely, Deus de Deo, and symbola recipi debere: for these are
the lapides offensionis, rocks of offense.

That Christ is Deus de Deo, God of God, is thus clearly proved out of
Scripture; whosoever is God and the Son of God, must needs be God of God; but
Christ is God and the Son of God, ergo etc. But it has bin objected, if he be
God of God, then he must have his essence communicated to him from the Father,
and so be essentiatus a patre, essentiated, or natured from the Father: this
will not follow, no more then that Socrates is essentiatus a Sophronisco, but
only that he is genitus a patre, begotten of his Father, and so is recipiens
essentiam, or habens essentiam communicatam a patre; which manner of speech is
approved of by Beza, Act 14 Trin*
filius est a patre per ineffabilem totius essentiae communicationem ab
aeterno: In ep. ad Polon*
the Son is from the Father by an unspeakable communication of his whole
essence from eternity: and Symlerus, non negamus silium habere* essentiam a Deo
patre, sed essentiam genitam negamus: we do not deny that the Son has his
essence from God the Father, but we deny that the essence is begotten, and why
should we boggle at this phrase, John 5.26.
when our Lord himself acknowledges, Ioh. 5.26. omnia mihi data sunt a patre
meo, and pater dedit filio habere vitam in se, all things are given me of my
Father? Neither does this any way contradict Calvin his autotheos, God of
himself; which form of expression, though some protestants as well as papists
have excepted against, yet I am of Whitakers mind, in his answer to the 7th
reason of Campian, hat it is verissime and sanstissime dictum, most truly and
religiously spoken; Hom. de temp. 88.
nam si ex se Deus non est, omnino Deus non est: for if he be not God of
himself, he is not God at all: let St Augustine be the umpire, and reconcile
both, Christus ad se Deus, dicitur ad patrem filius; Christ may be considered
two ways, either absolutely, and so he is Deus ex se, God of himself, as the
Father is and the holy Spirit; or relatively, as filius, and so he is Deus de
Deo, as he is the Son, so he is God of God: yea but these phrases may be taken
in an ill sense, and so may all the Articles of the Creed, as you may see in
the Parisian censure set out by the Jesuits; nay so may the whole Scripture, as
St Peter teaches us, which (...) the ignorant and unstable pervert: what then,
must we weed up all the flowers of Paradise, because heretics, like spiders,
suck such juice out of them which they turn into poison?

2. For the other expression [ ought to be received] as I conceive, it may be
thus justified. Whatsoever articles may be firmly and evidently proved out of
scripture, ought to be received and believed, ar^. 6. But such are all the
articles of these three Creeds, ergo etc. 2. Those to whose office and function
it belongs, to declare and teach the people of God, what they may and ought to
receive and believe, may use this expression. But it appertains to the office
of the Pastors of the Church, especially met at a Synod for that end* to teach
the people of God what they ought to receive and believe, ergo etc. 3. That
form of words which has bin used in Synods, held in the purest times, and is
at this day used, not only in the harmony of all protestant confessions (as was
showed by a learned brother) but every day in most approved sermons, may be
retained. But such is this form, recipi and credi debere, ought to be received
and believed, ergo, council. Carth. 1* Caecilius a Bilta dixit, quam rem fugere
ac vitare debemus, and a tanto scelere nos separare, said, which thing we ought
to shun and avoid, and to keep our selves from so great a sin: Council. Elib.
can. 12. Lapsi in haeresin ad ecclesiam recurrentes incunctanter recipi debent;
poenitentia iis non est den^ganda. Council. Neo. can. 1. Those that are fallen
into heresy, returning to the Church, ought readily to be received, repentance
is not to be denied unto them. Presbyter moechus ab ecclesia pelli debet, an
incontinent presbyter ought to be driven from the church. Conc. La^d. quod non
oporteat angelos inv^cari, that we ought not to call upon Angels. and can. 59.
quod non oporteat libros non canonicos legi in ecclesia, that books that are
not canonical, ought not to be read in church. But our acute and learned
brother demands, qua fide recipiendi sint hi articuli, ecclesiastica an
divina? with what kind of faith, humane or divine? I answer, at the first
propounding of them, if we have nothing to say against them fide ecclesiastica,
or humana, by a humane faith, or the faith of the church, out of reverence to
our mother the church; but after we have examined them and compared them with
Scriptures, then fide divina, by a divine faith: as the Samaritans at the first
believed, fide humana by a humane faith, upon the relation of the woman; but
afterward, when they heard Christ himself, and saw his miracles, fide divina.

The first Speech concerning the eleventh ARTICLE.
M. Prolocutor*
THere are two sorts of things which are not defined without great difficulty,
things of the highest, and of the lowest nature; the former can hardly be
defined in regard of their exceeding perfection, the latter for their extreme
imperfection: of the former no definition is capable, the latter are capable of
no exact definition, but only some imperfect description: and therefore as
Aristotle defines materia prima, the first matter, by mere negations, quod nec
quid, nec quantum, nec quale, neither substance, nor quantity, nor quality,
etc. So Plato defines God, that he is (...), neither body nor color, etc. To
this later kind we may well refer justification, of which we read that high
eulogie in the Bohemian Confession, Hoc caput doctrinae ex omnibus apud nos pro
maximo and gravissimo capite habetur, ut in quo summa evangelii posita est, and
quo christianismus fundatur, and in quo preciosus nobilissimusqu^ thesaurus
salutis aeternae, unica and viva cons^latio divina comprehenditur: this is the
chief head of doctrine, in which consists the sum of the whole Gospel, etc*
This excellency of the subject notwithstanding ought not to dull the edge of
our most diligent search into it, but sharpen it rather, to endeavor so to
define justification, that we may justify our definition. Which we cannot
do, without distinguishing of a threefold righteousness: first, a perfect
righteousness, but not inherent; of which, 2 Cor. 5.21. secondly, inherent,
but not perfect; of which, Luke 1.75. and Apoc. 22. 11. thirdly, perfect and
inherent* of which, Heb. 12.23. The first, is the righteousness by which we
are justified; the second, by which we are sanctified; and the third, by which
we are glorified. The first consists as well of Christ's active as his
passive obedience, and in the imputation thereof by faith consists the
essence of our justification, which may be thus defined: an act of God, The
definition of justification.
whereby he acquitteth every penitent and believing sinner, by not imputing to
him his sins, and imputing to him the perfect satisfaction and righteousness
of Christ. Every part of this definition may be proved by clear testimonies of
Scripture; and besides, it has that (...), certain mark or touchstone of a
true definition, that it meets with all doubts, and confronteth all errors
broached against the nature of justification: first, the error of the
Libertines, by that clause, every penitent: secondly, of the Antinomians, in
the clause, not imputing their sin: thirdly, the Socinians, in the clause,
perfect satisfaction: and lastly, the Arminians and Papists, in the last
clause, imputing Christ's righteousness, no habit or act of ours* no, not the
act of faith. The testimonies of Scripture, because they are ready at hand to
every one, I shall forbear to quote at this present and conclude with culling
out of some passages of the ancient Fathers, the rather to confound our Romish
adversaries, who putting on a brazen face, challenge the champions of our Faith
to produce but one testimony of any Divine or Doctor of the Church, who
taught, that a man was justified by another man's righteousness, before Calvin
or Luther. We accept of the challenge, and allege first Justin Martyr, (...).
O the inestimable and unexpected mercies of God! The transgression of many is
hid in one righteous One, and the righteousness of One acquitteth many. Ierom,
ut nos efficeremu^ justitia Dei in ipso, non nostra, nec in nobis: that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him, not ours, nor in us. August.
sermon. 6. de verb. Apost. Videte duo* justitia Dei, non nostra; in ipso, non in
nobis: observe two things; it is Gods justice, not ours; and in him, not in us.
Et tract. 3. in Johan. Omnes qui ex Ad^mo in peccato, peccatores, omnes qui per
Christum justificati, justi; non in se, sed i^ illo: all that are justified by
Christ, are just, not in themselves, but in him. Et in Psalm. 21. Mors Christi
morte fugatur, and Christi nobis justitia imputatur: our death is put to flight
by Christ's death, and Christ his righteousness is imputed to us. Bernard. ad
Mil. Temp. c. 12. Adae peccatum imputabitur mihi, and Christi justitia ad me
non pertinebit? Adams sin is imputed to me, and shall not Christ his
righteousness belong to me? Et Sermon. 61. in Cant. Nempe factus es tu mihi,
Christ, justitia a Deo: nunquid mihi verendum; ne una amb^bus non sufficiat?
non est pallium breve, quod non possit operire duos; and te pariter and me
operiet larga and aeterna justitia: thou, O Christ, art made righteousenesse
unto me from God: need I fear lest thy righteousness, being but one, cannot
suffice us both? it is no short or scantie cloak or garment, that cannot cover
two; thy large and eternal justice or robe of righteousness, shall cover both
thee and me.

M. Prolocutor,
The second Speech, to the eleventh Article.
Judicious and devout Calvin, alluding to the words of the Prophet, let us draw
water out of the well^ of salvation, Calvin. praefat. Institut.
says, nusquam legimus reprehens^s ^ui nimium de puteo aquae vivae hauserint:
none ever were found fault with, for drawing too much out of the well of life.
Since then we have free liberty to draw, and the water is so precious and
sovereign, Cypri. de ce^t. Dom.
the well so full and exubera^t, that, as S. Cyprian speaks, quantumfidei
capacis aff^rimus, tantum gratiae inundantis haurimus; we take up so much grace
as our faith can hold or receive. I profess, for my own part, I had rather
draw more out of this well then less: they who are only for the imputation of
Christ's passive obedience, seem to me to draw bu^ one bu^kes full but they who
are for the imputation of both, two the former draw from thence only, pretium
redemptionis, the price of our ransom; the other, meritum aeternae vitae, the
merit of eternal life. But to leave all rhetorical expressions, and handle
th^s subtle question logically and scholastically.

First, we are to take notice of a double obedience of Christ; a general,
which he performed to the whole law through the whole course of his life: a
special, which he performed to that particular command of his Father, to lay
down his life for his sheep.

Secondly, when we speak of this general and special obedience of Christ
(which some term active and passive) though it be most true which Bernard
says, Christus in vita habuit actionem passivam; in morte passionem activam:
Christ in his life performed a passive action; in his death he sustained an
active passion. It is confessed on all hands, that both are necessary to
justification, and that Christ performed both for us; but then we must
distinguish of this term, for us; for it may either signify bono nostre, only
for our good and behoof, or also loco nostro, in our stead and place; that
Christ satisfied the punishment of the law, and fulfilled all the precepts
thereof for us, that is, for our benefit, is not denied by any: and therefore
those texts, puer natus est nobis, and oportet nos implere omnem justitiam, and
factus est sub lege ut eos redimeret; to us a Child is borne, and so we ought
to fulfill all righteousness, and he was made under the law, that he might
redeem those that were under the law, and the like might be spared; they are
like the Lacedemonian swords, too short to reach their adversaries. But that he
fulfilled the law, loco nostro, in our stead and place, that is denied by
Piscator and Vilenus; who conceive that the passive obedience only is imputed
to us, et implet utramque paginam, not the active. Their principal reasons are.

Piscator and Tilenus.
First, Christ as man, being a creature, was bound to fulfill the law of his
Creator for himself, otherwise he had not been sacerdos inculpatus, Obj.
a high Priest without blame* neither would his sufferings have steaded us:
but, being an innocent man, he was not bound to satisfy for the breach of the
law; that therefore is to be allowed to us which he did undergo in our stead.

Secondly, the Scripture attributes our redemption and reconciliation to the
blood of Christ; Christ's blood cleanses us from all sin, 1 Io. 1, 9, and 6.
Christ gave his flesh for the life of the world.

Thirdly, he that is freed from the guilt of all sins, of omission as well as
commission, is to be reputed, as if he had fulfilled the law: for idem est esse
iustum and insontem, it is all one to be a just and an innocent man. But by the
imputation of Christ's passive obedience we are freed from the guilt of all sin,
as well of omission as commission, ergo etc.

Fourthly, if Christ's active obedience be imputed to us, then there needs no
remission of sins; for he who is esteemed to have fulfilled the law, needs no
forgiveness for the breach it.

Fifthly, those who are freed from eternal death, of necessity attain
everlasting life: but by the imputation of Christ's passive obedience, we are
freed from eternal death: ergo, by it we obtain everlasting life.

To the first, a threefold answer may be given. First, Sol 1*
that Christ, in regard of his hypostaticall union, Obj.
was freed from all obligation of law, which otherwise had layen upon him, if
he had been mere man. Secondly, admitting that Christ, as man, after he had
taken upon him our nature, was bound to fulfill the law for himself; yet
because he freely took upon him our nature, and consequently this obligation
for us, his discharging it shall accrue to us: as if I freely enter into bond
for another man's debt; if I discharge the bond, I both release my self and my
friend. Thirdly, we must distinguish of a public person and private; what a
man does as a private person, belongs only to himself; but what he does as a
public person, to himself and others.

To the second I answer, Sol. 2.
that either the blood and death of Christ are taken by a Synechdoche, for his
entire obedience, it being the coronis and crown of all; or that salvation and
life is attributed to it, because it merited for us the imputation of Christ's
active obedience also.

To the third, he that is freed from sin of omission is in the state of an
innocent, but not of a just man: Sol. 3.
he is indeed freed from all punishment, yet because he has not actively
fulfilled the law in the course of his life, he has no good title to eternal
life: by the law, hoc fac and vives, do this and thou shall live; he that is
guilty of no sin of omission, is equivalent to a just man, quoad liberationem
a poena, but not quoad meritum aeternae vitae* in regard of freedom from
punishment, but not in regard of the meriting eternal life; secundum quid, non
simpliciter; in some respects, not simply.

Sol. 4.
To the fourth, Christ's righteousness cannot be imputed to us, before we are
assoyled of our sins. For it is not righteous with God, to account him
righteous, who has no way satisfied for his sins, neither by himself nor
other: the captive must be first freed, before he be advanced to honor.

To the fifth, though it follow by the connection of the causes of our
salvation, Sol. 5.
that whosoever is freed from eternal death, is stated in eternal life: yet
it does not follow that there is the same cause of both: as for example, if you
open the leaves of a window, the sunnebeams shine into the room; yet there is
not one and the self same cause of opening the window, and the immission of
the beams.

Thus I h^ve handled the point, (...), by way of confutation: now (...), by way
of confirmation, I set to the proof thereof.

First, if justification be a distinct thing from redemption and satisfaction:
then the imputation of Christ's mere passive obedience will not suffice for our
justification: but they are distinct things, Dan. 9, 24. He shall make an end
of sin, he shall make reconciliation for iniquity, and bring in everlasting
righteousness. 1 Cor. 1, 30. He is made to us, righteousness, and
sanctification, and redemption.

Secondly, that which is imputed to us, is called righteousness, and (...),
Romans 5. but mere passive obedience makes not a man righteous, but only patient,
ergo, etc.

Thirdly, the fulfilling of the ceremonial law is a different thing from
Christ's passive obedience; but that is imputed to us, by the reason which our
adversaries bring, because Christ did not that for himself, in regard he had no
sin; whereof all those legal acts were a kind of confession: and therefore it
must be allowed to us.

Fourthly, If part of Christ's active obedience be imputed to us, why not the
whole? But the adversaries confess, that Christ's voluntary submitting himself
to death, and offering up himself for a sacrifice to God (which are parts of
his active obedience) are imputed to us: for otherwise his bare sufferings had
not been meritorious, Ergo, his whole active obedience is imputed to us.

Fifthly, unless Christ's actual fulfilling of the law be imputed to us, we
are debarred of eternal life, which is promised to none but such who in
themselves or by Christ have fulfilled the law, according to those texts, fac
hoc and vives: and si vis ad vitam ingredi, serva mandata: do this and thou
shall live, and if thou will enter into life, keep the Commandments.

If Christ were not bound to fulfill the law for himself, upon our adversaries
own ground, his fulfilling the law must be imputed to us: but he was not bound
to fulfill the law for himself. First, because he was not persona humana, and
lex datur personae, non naturae; Christ was not a humane person, and the law is
given to the person, not to the nature. Secondly, because as Son of man, he is
Lord of the Sabbath, and so of the law. Thirdly, because he is the King of the
Church, to prescribe laws to his subjects, not to himself, and all power is
given to him both in heaven and earth. Lastly, because no man will say, that
Christ in heaven has any obligation upon him, yet there he has his humane
nature: that nature therefore, as in him it was hypostatically united to the
deity, was free from all tie in regard of himself; what he engaged himself
was for us, and to be allowed on our account.

M. Prolocutor,
The third Speech, to the eleventh Article.
AS S. Gregory said, plus debeo Thomae, quam Petro, I a^ more indebted to
Thomas then Peter* because his doubting of Christ's resurrection occasioned a
more sensible demonstration thereof then otherwise we should have had: so truly
I may say, we are much beholding to him, who first moved the scruple concerning
the imputation of Christ's sole satisfaction; for it has occasioned the
resolution, not only of that doubt, but of many other concerning the
communicatio idiomatum, the effects of the hypostaticall union, the nature of
the law, and the faithfuls title to heaven.

It is true, there has been some clashing among the worthy Members of this
Assembly: but it has been like the collision of steel and flint, whereby have
been struck out many sparks of divine and saving truth. Nothing seems to me
now to hinder the putting the question to the vote and determining it ex voto,
according to our desire, but the vindication of it from aspersions cast upon it
by four sorts of mis^reants, the Antinomians, the Papists, the Arminians, and
Socinians.

First, the Antinomians object, if Christ's active righteousness be imputed
unto us, then are not we bound to keep the law, because Christ has kept it for
us.

This objection may be assoyled with a double answer: first, that this active
obedience of Christ is imputed to none but true penitents. For though
repentance be no cause of our justification, yet it is conditio requisita in
subjecto, a condition required in the subject* and to believe the remission of
our sins, by imputation of Christ's satisfaction and righteousness without a
sincere and serious purpose to forsake all our transgressions, and walk in
newness of life, is an act, not of Faith, but of presumption. Secondly, I
grant, that Christ's righteousness being imputed to us, we are not bound to
fulfill the law hoc nomine to justify us before God, or procure us a title to
the Kingdom of Heaven: but for other ends, namely, to glorify God, obey his
will, to testify our thankfulness to our Redeemer, to show our faith by our
works, to make our election sure to our selves, to adorn our profession with a
holy conversation, to avoid scandal, and avert Gods judgments.

Secondly, the Papists object, if Christ's active obedience be imputed to us,
then either the whole, or a part of it: not a part, for that will make us
righteous but in part: not the whole, for then no other should have share in
it, but our selves; and every particular believer should be as righteous as
Christ himself, and every o^e as another.

But this objection may be assoyled by a threefold answer. First, there is a
double totum or whole, totum extra quod nihil est, and totum cui nihil deest: a
whole out of which there is nothing; as the whole water is in the basin; and a
whole to which nothing is wanting, as the whole soul is in every part of the
body; for the soul is tota in toto, and tota in qualibet part. Christ's whole
obedience in the first sense is imputed to us, not in the second. 2. All
believers, according to the speech of Luther, are aeque justi ratione justitiae
imputatae, equally just in respect of imputed justice, though not inhaerentis,
of inherent; in respect of passive, not active righteousness. Thirdly, aeque
pronunciamur justi, ut Christus; we are equally pronounced just, as Christ;
that is, we are as truly acquitted and absolved as he; sed non pronunciamur
aeque justi, but not pronounced equally just: for his justice was inherent,
ours imputed; his from himself, ours from him; his of infinite worth,
sufficient to justify all believers; ours of finite, and sufficient only for
our selves.

The Arminians object, if (...) credere, or the very act of believing justify
us, then not Christ's imputed righteousness. But the very act of believing
justifies, as the Apostle says, Abraham believed, and it was counted to him
for righteousness. To this I answer, that says may be considered either
ratione actus, or ratione objecti, in regard of the act, or of the object.
Faith justifies not ratione actus, for then some work should justify; but
ratione objecti, not in regard of the act, but in regard of the object; as the
spoon feeds the child, in regard of the milk in it; and the chirurgions hand
heals, in regard of the plaster he applies: those that were healed by looking
upon the brazen serpent, were not cured by the sharpness of their sight, for
the purblind were as well healed as the sharp-sighted, but by a supernatural
virtue at that time given to the object, the brazen serpent, a type of Christ.

4. The Socinians object, God does not justify man by an act of injustice: but
it is injustice to punish one man for another, or attribute one man's
righteousness to another: for, justitiae est suum cuique tribuere, it is the
office or property of justice to give to every man his own; therefore we are
not justified by the imputation of Christ's active or passive obedience. But
this objection may be assoyled with a double answer. First it is not against
justice, but agreeable to justice, to lay the debt or penalty of one man upon
another, in case that one man voluntarily undertake for the other* and becomes
his surety: as it was just to lay Cimon in the gaol for his father Miltiades
debt, after he engaged himself for it, and made it his own: neither was it
unjust to put out one of Zaleuchus his eyes for his sons adultery, after he
undertook to satisfy for his son, and to save him one eye, who otherwise
should have lost both. Secondly when God imputes Christ's righteousness unto
us, he gives us our own, namely, that which Christ has purchased for us by his
death: and secondly in regard of our union with Christ, whatsoever is Christ's
in this kind, is ours, and To* 5. he that has given Christ to us, has given
his righteousness also.

M. Prolocutor,
THe Roman orator in his oration pro Sex^o Roscio Amerino writes of Caius
Fimbria, The fourth speech to the eleventh Article.
that he indicted Q. Scaevola upon a strange point, that he would not suffer
himself to be slain outright by him, diem Scaevolae dixit, quod non totum
^elum corpore recepisse^; accused Scaevola, for not receiving his whole weapon
into his body: methinks some of our brethren put in a like bill against us,
that we suffer them not to have a full and fair blow at us; quod non tota t^la
argumentorum rec^piamus, that we receive not the weapons of their arguments
whole and entire, I will therefore propound their arguments, as near as I can
remember, in their own words to the best advantage, and then return a punctual
answer unto them. If any of their arro^s be headed, if any of their s^ords be
keen edged and sharp pointed, if any of their arguments have acumen and robur,
sharpness and strength, they are these five following.

Every humane creature is bound to fulfill the Law of God for himself jure
creationis, Obj. 1.
by the right of creation. But Christ is a humane creature, ergo he was bound
to fulfill the Law of God for himself, and consequently he fulfilled it not in
our stead.

To the consequence inferred upon the conclusion of this Syllogism, I have
spoken heretofore. I now answer to the Syllogism it self, by distinguishing of
humana creatura, a humane creature, which may be taken either ratione naturae
only, or ratione personae also; which may be so termed, either in regard of
the nature, or the person: every humane creature ratione naturae and personae,
that is, such a creature as has not only humane nature but a humane person
also, is bound to fulfill the moral Law for himself: but Christ was not so; he
had a humane nature, but no humane person. Now we know, Lex datur personae, the
Law is given to the person, Thou shall do this, or thou shall not do that.

Obj. 2.
In the account of the law, and all judiciarie proceedings, it is all one to be
insons and justus, to be guiltless and righteous: but by the imputation of
Christ's satisfaction we are accounted guiltless before God: ergo righteous and
fully justified.

I answer: There are two sorts of causes in courts of justice, criminal and
civil; in criminal it is true, idem est esse insontem and justum, it is all
one to be accounted innocent, and just: but not in civil, where justice has a
respect to reward: and in that regard, a guiltless man is not necessarily a
just man, that is, a deserving man. It was not sufficient for Demosthenes to
plead for Ctesiphon, that he was a harmless man, and therefore ought in
justice to have the crown; but he proves that he was a deserving man, and by
the law ought to have it as his due.

Thirdly, Justification is a judiciary act opposite to condemnation; Obj. 3.
but imputation of active obedidience is no judiciary act opposite to
condemnation, ergo, etc.

God is said to be a righteous judge, Sol.
not only in respect of inflicting punishment rightly, but also in conferring
rewards and crowns of glory* and justification has respect to both, for there
are two questions put to us at Gods tribunal; first, what have thou to say for
thy self, why thou should not be condemned to hels torments? the answer is, I
confess I have deserved them by my sins; but Christ has satisfied for me: the
second question is, what can thou plead why thou should in justice receive
a crown of glory, since thou have not fulfilled the law? the answer is, Christ
has fulfilled the law for me: both these are expressed by Anselm in his book
de modo visitandi infirmos; si dixerit, meruisti damnationem; dic, Domine,
mortem Domini nostri Jesus Christi obtendo inter me and mala merita mea;
ipsiusque meritum ^ffero pro merit^, quod ego debuissem habere, nec habeo; if
he, says thou have deserved damnation, answer thou, I set Christ's death
between me and my ill deserts, or wicked works* and I offer his merit for that
merit which I should have, but of my self I have not.

Fourthly, Obj. 4.
all they who are freed from the guilt of all sins of omission as well as
commission, are accounted as absolutely righteous before God* but by the
imputation of Christ's mere passive obedience we are freed from the guilt of all
sins, of omission as well as commission, ergo, etc.

I answer: This argument is a plain fallacy a dicto secundum quid ad
simpliciter, Sol.
from that which is said to be so in some respect, to that which is simply so:
he that is free from the guilt of the sin of omission, is as if he were
righteous secundum quid, in some respect; that is, in regard of punishment and
guilt, but not as a righteous man simply, who has a good title to a crown of
glory. For the taking away of guilt does not necessarily put merit. Adam at
the first moment of his creation was guiltless, yet had no merit which he
might pretend as a title to the Kingdom of Heaven.

Obj. 5.
Fifthly, every doctrine of Faith ought to be founded upon Gods Word; but our
pretending a title to the Kingdom of Heaven, by the imputation of Christ's
active obedience, has no foundation in Gods Word, ergo, etc.

Sol.
It has foundation in Gods Word; namely; in these texts, fac hoc and vives; si
vis ad vitam ingredi* ser^a mandata, do this and thou shall live; and if thou will enter into life, keep the commandments: and we establish the law by
faith; and these shall walk with me in white robes, for they are worthy: upon
these foundations we build this fort for truth; none may enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven, who have not some way fulfilled the law ( fac hoc and vives) and
that in the rigor thereof, exactly and perfectly; but all true believers enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven; and I subsume (they have not fulfilled the law
exactly and perfectly in their own persons.) Ergo, they have fulfilled it by
their surety. Christ his fulfilling the law therefore is imputed to them.

Concerning the resolve of the Assembly, that the whole obedience of Christ is
imputed to every believer.
M. Prol^cutor,
THe expression agreed upon by the Assembly, The fifth speech to the eleventh
Article.
seems liable to three exceptions, redundancie, deficiencie, and noveltie:
redundancie, in the word whole; deficiencie, in the word obedience; and
noveltie, in the word imputed: as Tertullian says of the serpent, quot colores
tot dolores; so we may say here, quot literae tot liturae.

The first exception is of redundancie: for within the account of the whole
obedience of Christ comes his obedience to the ceremonial law, which yet is
not imputed to us, because we ought no obedience to it; it was no part of our
debt, and therefore our surety his laying it down comes not upon our account.

The second exception is of deficiencie in the word obedience, for it falls
short of that which is imputed to us. For Christ's original righteousness is
not comprised under either his active or passive obedience; yet that also must
be imputed to us, as Beza elegantly demonstrateth, putting the case thus: we
were accomptable to the divine justice for three things, original corruption,
sins of omission, and sins of commission.

To this threefold malady a threefold remedy was to be applied: to our
original sins, Christ's original righteousness: to sins of omission, Christ's
active: to sins of commission, his passive obedience. If the accuser of the
brethren article against us at Christ's bar, thou were conceived and born in
sin: the answer is, but my mediators conception and birth was without sin; if
he article, thou have omitted many duties of the law: the answer is, Christ
has fulfilled the law for me; if he article in the third place, thou have
committed many actual sins against the law: the answer is, Christ has
satisfied for them by his death and passion.

The third exception is of noveltie: for the imputation of Christ's active and
passive obedience was never defined for dogma fidei, a doctrine of faith, till
the Synods held at Gap and Privase in our memory. But these aspersions may be
easily washed away thus.

First, though we were not bound to the ceremonial law, yet the Jews were: to
whom this obedience of Christ was necessarily to be imputed, and this seems
to be the decision of the Apostle, Gal. 4, 4. Made under the law, to redeem
them that were under the law.

Secondly, though Christ's original righteousness were most requisite in him
to qualify him to be both our high Priest and sacrifice, that he might be an
immaculate lamb and an high Priest separated from sinners; and though this
original righteousness has influence into our birth, to cleanse it: yet, as
Rivetus acutely observes, it was not properly the work of Christ, but of the
Holy Ghost sanctifying him in the womb, and in that regard not to be imputed to
us as any act of our mediator.

Thirdly, though in the Synods above named the controversies which arose about
this point, first between Piscator and Rivet, and after between Moulin and
Tilenus, were determined; yet the doctrine it self was much more ancient: For
besides the testimonies of Bernard, exhortat* ad templ. Chrysostom. 2. Cor. 5. Aug.
in Psalm. 21. and Justin Martyr in quaest. heretofore alleged by me, Tilenus
himself confesses that it was Luthers opinion: and Calvin is express for it,
in ep. ad Romans 3. v. 31. Cum ad Christum ventum est, in eo invenitur exacta
legis justitia quae per imputationem fit nostra; when we come to Christ, in him
we find the exact justice of the law, which by imputation is made ours. And so
is Peter Martyr, in ep. ad Romans c. 8. Iustitia Christi qua lex impleta fuit,
illorum jam est justitia, and illis a Deo imputatur: Christ his righteousness,
by which the law is fulfilled, is now their righteousness, and imputed to them
by God. And Vrsin. Catech. Perfecta satisfactio, justitia and sanctitas Christi
mihi imputatur: Christ his perfect satisfaction, justice and holiness, is
imputed to me. And Hemmingius de justif. art. 2. Iustificatio hominis est
credentis in Christum absolutio a peccato propter mortem Christi, and imputatio
justitiae Christi: justification is the acquitting of a believer from sin for
the death of Christ, and the imputation of Christ's righteousness. And the
Magdeburgenses, Cent. 1. l. 2. Iustitio, quam Deus impio imputat, est totum
opus quod Christus mediator noster pro toto genere humano praestitit: all which
Christ our mediator did for all mankind is the righteousness which God
imputes to a sinner.

But here me thinks I hear those who are most active in the Assembly for the
imputation of the mere passive obedience of Christ, like the Tribunes among the
Romans, ^b^unciare and intercedere, that they may hinder and stop the decree of
the Assembly, alleging, that though some of the ancient Fathers, and not a few
of the reformed Doctors cast in their white stone among ours: yet that we want
his suffrage, who alone has the turning voice in all debates of this kind, and
that according to our protestation made at our first meeting we ought to
resolve upon nothing in matter of faith, but what we are persuaded has firm
and sure ground in Scripture: and howsoever some texts have been alleged for
the imputation of both active and passive obedience, yet that at our last
sitting they were wrested from us, and all inferences from thence cut off, all
the re-doubts and forts built upon that holy ground slighted: it will import
therefore very much those who stand for the affirmative part to recruit the
forces of truth, and make up the breaches in our forts made by the adversaries
batteries.

First, our first fort is built upon Romans 5.18, 19. after this manner: Arg. 1.
if we are made righteous by the obedience of Christ, his entire obedience must
needs be imputed to us. But we are made righteous by the obedience of Christ,
as the Apostle affirms in the text quoted. Therefore Christ's obedience must
needs be imputed to us.

Resp.
In this fort they make a breach thus: by obedience the Apostle here
understands that special obedience which Christ performed to the
commandment of his Father, for laying down his life for his sheep; of which
the Apostle speaks, Phil. 2.8. He became obedient to death, even to the death
of the cross: therefore this text makes nothing for the imputation of Christ's
active obedience.

Replic.
But First, the breach is thus repaired: the word in the former verse is not
(...), but (...), which is never taken in Scripture for suffering, or mere
passive obedience.

Secondly, the Apostle says, loc. supra. cit. many are made righteous; and
righteousness came upon all to justification of life; and Christ is the end of
the law for righteousness; and the abundance of grace, and gift of
righteousness shall reign by one Jesus Christ: but no man is said to have
justification of life, or abundance of grace, and the gift of righteousness,
or to be made righteous, by suffering only: for the willing undergoing of
punishment satisfies the law but in part; it denominateth a man patient, but
not absolutely righteous. Christ himself was not righteous only in regard of
his sufferings; and therefore the imputation of them only unto us will not make
us formally righteous, though it fully acquitteth us from all punishment.

Thirdly, the obedience here mentioned is set in opposition to Adams
disobedience: but Adams disobedience was active: therefore Christ's obedience
must be active.

This argument may be illustrated by S. Bernards paraphrase, ad exhort, ad
Templar. c. 11. ablato peccato, redit justitia; porro mors Chrsti m^rte
fugatur, and Christi nobis justitia imputatur: plus potuit Adam in malo, quam
Christus in bono? Adae peccatum imputabitur mihi, and Christi justitia ad me
non pertinobit? Sin being taken away, righteousness returns; moreover, death
is put to flight by the death of Christ, and Christ's righteousness is imputed
unto us: could Adam more hurt us by sin, then Christ benefit us by
righteousness? Shall the sin of Adam be imputed to me and shall the
righteousness of Christ no way belong unto me, or I have no interest in it?

Our second fort is built upon 2 Cor. 1.30. after this manner. Arg. 2.
If Christ be made unto us righteousness, as righteousness is distinguished
from redemption, then Christ's active obedience is imputed to us as well as his
passive. But Christ is made to us righteousness and sanctification, as they
are distinct things from redemption, or satisfaction (as the letter of the text
imports, he is made to us of God righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption.) Ergo, Christ's active obedience is imputed to us as well as his
passive.

Advers. Resp.
In this fort they make a breach thus: Christ is made to us righteousness, as
he is made wisdom, for so runs the text; Christ is made to us of God wisdom,
and righteousness, etc. But he is not made to us wisdom, by imputing his
wisdom unto us* but by instructing us, and making us wise to salvation;
therefore neither is he said to be made righteousness to us, because his
righteousness is imputed to us; but because he sanctifies us, and makes us
by his grace righteous and holy. But the breach is thus repaired.

Replicatio.
First, whatsoever Christ is made unto us, he is made perfectly such unto us;
else we shall lay a defect upon him, who is perfection it self. But Christ is
not made perfectly wisdom, or sanctification, or righteousness to us, save
only by imputing his own righteousness, and wisdom, and holiness to us,
which are most perfect: for, as for our inherent righteousness, and holiness,
and wisdom they are imperfect and defective; as all confess, save Papists and
Pelagians.

Secondly, Christ is so made righteousness to us, as he is made redemption:
for so carries the letter; Christ is made to us righteousness, and
redemption. But he is made redemption unto us, by imputing his passive
obedience; therefore in like manner he is made righteousness unto us, by
imputing the active obedience. Yea but, say they, Christ's wisdom is not
imputed to us: I answer, it is, and it covers our follies and errors, as his
righteousness does our sins; and by virtue thereof we are acompted wise unto
salvation; and for proof of this exposition I allege an Author of greatest
authority next the Apostles, Clemens Romanus in his for^er Epistle ad Corinth.
so highly cried up by all the ancients, p. 41. Non per nos ipsos justificam^r,
neque per sapentiam nostram, intelligentiam* pietatem, aut opera, quae in
puritate cordis and sanctimonia operati sumus; sed per fidem, per quam
omnipotens Deus omnes ab initio justificavit: we are not justified by our
wisdom or godliness, etc. but by faith by which God justified all from the
beginning.

Thirdly, our third fort is built upon 2 Cor. 5, 21. after this manner: Arg. 3.
those who are made the righteousness of God in Christ must needs have Gods
righteousness imputed unto them. But Gods righteousness in Christ is the
perfect fulfilling of the law, ergo, the perfect fulfilling of the law is
imputed to us.

In this fort they make a breach thus. By sin is here meant a sacrifice for
sin: Resp. Advers.
and it is granted on all hands that Christ was made a sacrifice for sin, that
we might be accounted righteous before God; and this makes for the imputation
of the passive, but not the active obedience of Christ. Replic.
But the breach is thus repaired.

First, there is no necessity of expounding here sin by this gloss, a
sacrifice for sin: the words will carry as well another interpretation,
namely, that as Christ was reputed a sinner for us, or in our stead: so we are
accounted righteousness in him* But our sins are no way in him but by
imputation, therefore his righteousness also is in us by imputation; and this
is the current sense which we find in the expositions of the ancient Fathers,
Chrysostom. in hunc locum, p. 322. (...), etc. he said not righteous, but
righteousness; for that righteousness he speaks of is Gods, since it is not
of works; and it is such in which there must be no stain, or spot, which cannot
be inherent but imputed: he made the just to be unjust, that the unjust might
be made just, and S. Aug. in Psalm. 21. delicta nostra sua delicta feci^, In
Romans 5.
ut justitiam suam nostram justitiam faceret: he made our sins his sins, that
he might make his righteousness our righteousness.

Secondly, admit we take sin for sacrifice for sin in this place, this very
interpretation rather strengthens then weakneth the former argument: for that
righteousness which is said to be in Christ would never have been ours,
Assumpt. But the ^^ghteousnesse of Christ, as he was a sacrifice for sin, was
to be unspotted wholly and without sin.

Hebr. Ergo, as he was a sacrifice for sin, his holiness was imputed unto us.


if his death had not been a sacrifice for our sins: thus therefore I collect
the argument out of this place.

The righteousness which is in Christ can be no otherwise ours then by
imputation; but the righteousness here spoken of is the righteousness in
Christ; ergo, it cannot be ours any other way then by imputation.

Thirdly, Christ's sufferings are not properly his righteousness, though he who
suffered were righteous, nay righteousness it self: neither are these
sufferings now in Christ, but his active obedience and holiness is truly and
properly righteousness, and it remains in him; and is that eternal
righteousness spoken of by the prophet Daniel, (c. 9, v. 14.) he shall take
away sin, and bring everlasting righteousness.

Arg. 4.
Our fourth fort is built upon Col. 2, 10. after this manner: if all the
faithful are complete in Christ, as the Apostle here affirms, we are
complete in him in whom dwells the fulness of the Godhead; then Christ
supplyeth whatsoever is otherwise defective in them, and yet required of them.
But the perfect fulfilling of the law is required of them, which they cannot
do in their own persons; ergo, Christ's fulfilling it for them is imputed to
them.

In this fort they make a breach thus: Advers. Sol.
whatsoever we were bound to do, Christ has done for us, either in specie, or
per aequivalentiam; in kind, or in value: according to which distinction,
although the fulfilling of the law be not imputed to us in speci^i yet it is*
per aequivalentiam, because his satisfaction is imputed to us* and so there is
no defect in us, because no man is bound both to fulfill the law, and satisfy
the breach thereof: we therefore having satisfied for the breach of the law are
accounted as if we had fulfilled the law. But the breach is thus repaired.

No man who stands rectus in curia, Replicatio.
as Adam did in his innocence, or the Angels before they were confirmed in
grace, is bound both to fulfill the law, and to satisfy for the violation
thereof; but to the one or to the other, to fulfill only the law primarily, and
to satisfy for not fulfilling it in case he should transgress; but that is
not our present case. For we are all born and conceived in sin, and by nature
are the children of wrath, and are guilty as well of Adams actual
transgression as our own corruption of nature drawn from his loins. Therefore
first we must satisfy for our sin, and then by our obedience lay claim to
life, according as it is offered us by God in his law, fac hoc and viv^s, do
this and live. Now we grant freely that Christ's death is sufficient for the
satisfactorie part; but, unless his active obedience be imputed to us, we have
no plea or title at all to eternal life. To illustrate this by a lively
similitude, and such an one to which the Apostle himself elsewhere alludes. In
the Olympian games he that overcame received a crown of gold or silver, or a
garland of flowers, or some other prize or badge of honor; but he that was
overcome, besides the loss of the prize, forfeited something to the keeper of
the games. Suppose then some friend of his should pay his forfeiture, will that
entitle him to his garland? Certainly no, unless he prove masteries again, and
in another race outstrip his adversary, he must go away crownlesse. This is
our case by Adams transgression and our own: we have incurred a forfeiture, or
penalty; this is satisfied by the imputation of Christ's passive obedience: but
unless his active be also imputed to us, we have no plea or claim at all to
our crown of glory; for we have not in our own persons so ru^, that we might
obtain.

The VOTE.
After this speech the Divines cried generally to the Vote, and though some few
of eminent parts in the Assembly dissented, yet far the major part resolved
for the affirmative; but before the close D. F. produced an advice of King
James of blessed memory directed to an Assembly of Divines at Privase in
France, for the deciding the present Controversy which here follows.

Consilium serenissimi principis, Iacobi, Magnae Britanniae Regis, de
controversia sequente sopienda.
FEcit Deus (inquit Solomon) hominem rectum, sed ipse infinitis se immiscuit
quaestionibus. Cujus sententiae veritas hinc elucet, quod tam infinitae indies
oriantur controversiae, quae tantum ad turbandam ecclesiae pacem spargi ubique
videntur. Inter quas haec nupera non ante quadraginta annos nata, and qua car
uit ecclesia annis mill quadringentis sexaginta, nec quicquam inde tulit
d^trimenti; nunc vero inter duos doctissimos viros tan^ acriter ventilata
potest recenseri, utrum scilicet passiva Christi obedientia, qua vitam pro
ovibus speciali mandato posuit, tantum nobis imputetur ad justi^iam; vel simul
cum passiva, activa etiam qua se legi obedientem praestitit.

Hanc quaestionem and quae inde emanant necessario, quarum specimen in
propositionibus Molinaei, and oppositionibus Tileni cer^ere licet, nec
generatim discutere, nec particulatim examinare nobis est propositum: sed ex
iis tantum quae legimus ipsi, and coram audivimus, consilium dabimus, quale
fidei defensorem non dedecere arbitramur. Et hoc quidem illud erit; nempe, ut
ipsa penitus sepeliatur quaestio cum omnibus inde emergentibus, and cum fas^^i^
and linteis quibus revinctum erat and involutum Christi corpus, in sepulchro
relinquatur, ab iis presertim qui se cum Christo resurrexisse profitentur; ut,
relictis impedimentis omnibus, omnes simul in perfectum virum in Christo
coalescamus: ne forte nimium altercando infantem vivum, quod indulgens matter
non passa est, discindere; aut inco^ sutilem Christi tunicam, quod crudelis non
tulit miles, divider^ videamur.

Haec consilii nostri summa: cuius ratio haec est, quaestio quod plan^ nova
si^* (...) necessaria prioribus seculis inaudita, a conciliis non desinita a
patribus non tractata, nec denique a scholasticis ipsis agitata. Apage ergo.

Deinde si utraque pars litigantium vel ab ipsis doct^ssimorum theologorum
sententiis ab utrisque alla^is stare* vel in ecclesiarum judiciis quae ab ipsis
utrinque afferuntur acquiescere vellet, non alio opus esset arbitro; cum and
ipsi, ut ex eorum scriptis apparet, jam inter se consenserint ultro, and
faelicissimum quaestioni finem imposuerint^

Proinde hortamur ac amice monemus ne deinceps sina^t hasce controversias
latius serpere; prae om^ibus, praelo ut abstineant, and scriptis hinc i^de
pol^micis huic siti fomenta ne ministrent: denique ut fidele sit utrinque
silemium, cum edificationi non serviant* nec al^^ tenda^t qua^ ad dissociandos
hominum animos in reliquis fidei capitibus consent^entium: quibus omnibus, si
unquam alias, tum hisce praesertim temporibu^ summa pax and concordia est sum
necessaria.

Sint igitur m^mores plus semper tribuendum esse charitatis studio, quam
scienti^e victoriae, secundum illud Apostoli: solliciti servare unitatem
spiritus in vinculo pacis, and publico ecclesiae commodo privatam non anteferre
gloriam.

JACOBUS Rex.

The advice of the most Gracious Prince, James, King of great Britain, for the
quieting and composing the ensuing Controversy.
Eccl. 7.29.
GOd made man upright, says Solomon, but he found out many inventions: the
truth whereof hence appears, that there daily grow such infinite controversies
which seem to tend to no other end, then to disturb the peace of the Church.
Among which this late question sprung up within these forty years, which the
Church of God knew not of for 1460 years and sustained thereby no detriment,
but now has been eagerly argued between two most learned men, may be ranked;
whether the passive obedience of Christ, whereby he laid down his life for his
sheep by the special command of his Father, be only imputed to us for
righteousness, or together with the passive the active also whereby he
rendered himself obedient to the law. This question, and those that necessarily
arise from it, (a glimpse whereof we may see in the propositions of Molinaeus,
and the oppositions of Tilenus) we have no mind either in general to discuss,
or in particular to sca^. But out of those things which we have read our
selves, or heard from others in our presence, we will give such advice as we
think will not mis-beseem the Defender of the faith. And that is this: to wit,
that this question be altogether buried with those that depend upon it, and be
left in the grave with the napkin and the linen cloths wherein the body of
Christ was wrapped, especially by them who profess themselves to be risen with
Christ: that, all impediments being removed, we may all grow unto a perfect man
in Christ Jesus: lest peradventure by too much wrangling we seem to cut in two
the living child, which the tenderhearted mother would not endure; or divide
the seamlesse coat of Christ, which the cruel soldier would not suffer. This
is the substance of what we shall advise: the reason whereof is, because it is
a question altogether new, and not necessary, unheard of in former ages, not
determined in any Council, not handled by the fathers not disputed in the
schools. Away with it therefore. Moreover, if both parties now contesting would
either stand to the judgments of most learned Divines alleged by both sides,
or would test satisfied in the determinations of the churches urged by both,
there needed no other Arbitrator; seeing they themselves, as appears by their
writings, agree of their own accord, and have already brought it to an happy
issue.

Therefore we exhort and friendly advise you that you suffer not these
controversies to spread any further: above all, that you keep from the press,
and add not fuel to this fire by polemicall tractates.

Lastly, that there be faithful silence on both sides: seeing they tend not to
edification, nor serve to any other purpose then to distract m^ns minds
otherwise consenting in all chief points of faith. To whom, if ever, especially
in these days perfect concord is most necessary. Let them therefore remember
that they ought rather to strive to preserve charity then to gain victory
according to that of the Apostle; endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit
in the bond of peace; and not to prefer their private glory before the
public good of the Church.

D. F. his speech before the Assembly of Divines, concerning the new League
and COVENANT.
M. Prolocutor,
OUr brethren of Scot^and desire a resolution from this Assembly concerning
the necessity and lawfulness of entering into this new league; and how can we
resolve them if we be not resolved our selves, as some of us are not? I shall
therefore humbly offer to your serious consideration whether it be not fit to
qualify the word Prelacie when it is ranked with popery and superstition,
after this manner: I will endeavor the extirpation of popery, and all
antichristian, tyrannical, or independent prel^cie; for otherwise by abjuring
prelacie, absolutely some of us shall swear to forswear our selves. For
prelacie, as also hierarchy, in the former and better ages of the Church were
taken in the better part; hierarchy signifing nothing but a holy rule or
government, and prelacie the preeminencie of one in the Church above another.
Prelation is a relatio disquiparantiae, and praelati are relati to those over
whom they are set; who may be either the flock, or the pastors themselves; if
the flock, in that sense all that have charge of souls may be truly c^lled
praelati, viz. gregi; for they are set over them to be their overseers and
spiritual rulers, Act. 8, 28. 1 Pet. 5* 2. Heb. 13, 17, 24, 1 Timothy 5.17. In
this sense both S. Gregory and Bernard take the word; praelati non quae sua
sunt, sed quae domini, quaerant: and non pastores, sed impostores; non
doctores, sed seductores; non praelati, sed Pilati: let prelates not seek their
own, but those things which are the Lords; now adays we have not teachers, but
seducers; not shepherds, but deceivers; not prelates, but Pilat^; in which
sentence, teachers, pastors and prelates are ranked together, as signifying the
same persons: in which elegant antanaclasis you hear that doctors, pastors, and
prelates, are a kind of synonoma's. In this sense, if we condemn prelates, and
vote their extirpation, we shall with one breath blow all the Divines that have
cure of souls, not only out of this Assembly, but out of their Parsonages, and
Vicaridges also. But if praelati are here in this covenant taken in reference
to pastors themselves, and ministers of the Gospel, and thereby such are mean^
only who are praepositi clero, set over Clergymen themselves, as having not
only some precedencie to, but authority over the rest: neither in this sense
may we piously swear the eradication of them. For there are classes in the
Netherlands, Intendents and Super-indendents in Germany, Presidents in the
reformed Synods in France, and Masters, Provosts, and Heads of Colleges, and
Halls in our Universities, who have a kind of prelacie and authority over the
fellows and students, whereof the major part are Divines, and in holy orders.
Here I conceive it will be said, that none of these are aimed at, but only
Diocesan Bishops already banished out of Scotland, and prelates indeed they
are in a more eminent degree; and if prelacie be restrained to them, it is
Episcopacie that is principally shot at, to the extirpation whereof I dare not
yield my vote or suffrage, lest this new Oath entangle me in perjurie. For both
my self and all, who have received orders in this Kingdom, by the imposition of
Episcopal hands, have freely engaged our selves by oath to obey our Ordinary,
and to submit to his godly judgment, and in all things lawful and honest to
receive his commands; if then we now swear to endeavor the abolishing of
Epscopacy, we swear to renounce our canonical obedience, that is, as I
apprehend, we swear to forswear our selves.

It is true that the Dr was furnished with many other reasons for episcopacy,
besides these; and of some he gave a hint in the assembly it self upon other
occasions, as namely.

SECT. VIII. Sixteen reasons for episcopal government.
THat the name of episcopacy, even as it signifies a degree of eminency in the
Church, is a sacred and venerable title: first in holy scripture ascribed to
our blessed Redeemer* who as he is dominus dominantium, 1 Pet. 2.25. (...).
Act. 1.20.
lord of lords, so also episcopus episcoporum, bishop of bishops, the shepherd
and bishop of all our souls: next to the Apostles, whose office in the Church
is styled by the holy Ghost Episcope a bishopric, let another take his
bishopric, though it be translated, let another take his office; yet the
original signifies not an office at large, but an episcopal function, that
office which Iuda^ lost, and Matthias was elected into, which was the office
and dignity of an Apostle: Ambros com. in Ephesians. c. 4. v. 10. Apostoli sunt
Episcopi Ierom. ad Marcel. apud nos Apostolorum locum tenent Episcopi. Cyp. ep.
l. 3. Apostolos id est Episcopos, and praepositos Dominus elegit.

August. in Ps. 45. loco patrum erunt filii, ^d est, Apostolorum Episcopi. Et
ibid. dilatatum est Evangelium in omnibus finibus mundi; in quibus* principes
ecclesia id est, Episcopi sunt constituti.


lastly to those whom the Apostles set over the Churches, as namely to Timothy
and Titus, who in the subscription of the Apostles letters divinely inspired
are styled Bishops* in the restrained sense of the word, 2 Timothy 4. written from
Rome to Timoth^us, the first bishop elected of the church of Ephesus and to
Titus, the first elect Bishop of the church of the Cretians: how ancient these
subscriptions are, it is not certain among the learned, if they bear not the
same date with the Epistles themselves (the contrary whereof neither is nor can
be demonstrated) yet they are undoubtedly very ancient, and of great authority,
and in them the word bishop cannot be taken at large for any minister or
presbyter, but for a singular person in place and dignity above other pastors;
for there were many other presbyters in Ephesus both before and besides
Timothy, Acts 20.27.18, and in the Island of Creet or Candie there must of
necessity be more then one pastor or minister. Besides, S. Paul investeth
Timothy in episcopal power, making him a judge of presbyters, both to rebuke
them, 1 Timothy 5.1. and to prefer and reward them, ver. 17. and to censure them
ver. 19. Against an elder receive no accusation, but under two or three
witnesses; and he gives to Titus expressly both potestatem ordinis and
jurisdictionis, of order and jurisdiction; of order in those words c. 1.5. That
thou should ordain elders in every city; and of jurisdiction, I left thee in
Creet that thou should continue (...), to correct or redress the things that
remained* or those things which the Apostle before intended to amend, but had
not redressed.

2. The Angels of the seven churches, Apoc. 10.20. were no other in the
judgment of the best learned Aug. ep. 162 and comment in Apoc. hom. 2. Ambrose
1 1 Cor. 11.16. ^^cumeniu^, Areth^s, Marlorat. Pareus, in Apoc. c 1.2.
Policarp. Episcopus Smyrnae, Onesimus Ephesi Antipa^ Pergami, etc.
commentators both ancient and later then the bishops of those sees, for in
those provinces or territories there cannot be conceived to be less then many
hundred ordinary preachers and pastors; yet there were but seven precisely
answering to the seven golden candlesticks: seven candlesticks, seven lights
burning in them, these can be no other then seven prime pastors, who had the
oversight of the rest: for the errors and abuses in all those churches are
imputed to them, and they reproved for not redressing them, c. 2.14. Thou have
them that maintain the doctrine of Baalam, and v. 20. Thou suffer the Edi^
Teclae it is (...) thy wife which demonstrateth that the A^gell there
signifies one singular man of authority in the Church, and not the whole
clergy of that place, Ep ad Episc. Winton.
woman Iezebel to teach etc.

3. It is confessed by Molinaeus, and other learned patrons of presbyteriall
government themselves, that episcopacy is a plant, either set in the church by
the Apostles themselves, or their immediate successors in the first and best
ages of the Church; and is it agreeable to piety to swear the extirpation of
such a plant?

4. It cannot be denied, that when the Church most flourished, and was of far
larger extent then now it is, over the face of the christian world; there was
no Council. Nice. can. 5. conc. Antioch can 6. Conc. Sard. can. 14. conc Chal.
act. 15. c. 29. ^gnatius in ep. ad Philad. Irenaeus l. ^. c. 3. Tertul. l. de
baptismo Euse. l. ^. c. 40. Ierom ep ad Nep^t. Optatus l. 1. cont. Parmen. Amb.
in Ephesians. cap. 4. Basil. Ephesians. 70.
other government then episcopacy regulated by divine precepts* and
ecclesiastical canons: and shall we swear to extirpate that government under
the which the church most thrived and flourished? Shall we swear against our
prayers, viz. for the rooting out of that, upon which we are enjoined to pray
God to pour down the dew of his blessing? surely the dew of heaven burns not
the root of any plant upon earth, but waters it and makes it grow.

5. They were bishops who had the chiefest hand, first in the plantation of
christian religion in the days of Lucius, king of Britain; and after in the
^estitution in the days of Etheldred King of Kent; and in the reformation of it
in the reign of Edward the (...), and Queen Elizabeth and is it a religiou^ act
to e^adicate tha^ government and power which both planted and pr^ned religion
it (...)?

6. Christ died not intestate, he made his last Will and Testament, and by it
bequeathed many legacies ^o his Church, and among them not only catholic
doctrine, but di^cipline also: thi^ discipline, if it be not Episcopal
government moderated by Evangelicall and Apostolical rules, the whole Church
is guilty of the loss of a sacred and precious jewel: for certain it is out
of records of all ages of the Church, that no other wa^ ever retained, or can
be found save thi^ before the religious reformer and magistrates of Geneva
having banished their Popish Bishops, were after a sort necessitated to draw a
new plat-forme of Ecclesiastical discipline by Lay Elders. Christ, as the
Apostle teaches us* was faithful in the house of God as Moses: and if Moses,
after his forty days speech with God on the mount* received a pattern from
God* and delivered it to the Jews, not only of doctrine but of discipline
also, which continued till Christ's coming in the flesh; it cannot be
conceived, but that Christ lest a pattern of government to his Church, to
continue till the end of the world* and doubtless, his Apostles with whom he
conversed forty days after his resurrection, speaking of those things which
appertain to the kingdom of God, Acts 3.1. delivered that to the Church which
they received from their Master. What government or discipline was that? There
can be conceived but three forms of government; Episcopal, most conformable
to Monarchy; Presbyteriall, to A^istoc^acie, and Independent, as they term it
to Democracie. Presbyteriall or Independent it could not be, for Presbyteriall
is no elder then the reformation in Geneva, and the Independent no elder then
New England; whereas Episcopal government has been time out of mind no^ in
one bu^ in all Churches: and since it was not first constituted by any sanction
of a general Council, it follows necessarily, according to S. Augustins
observation, that it must needs be an Apostolical institution: for what not
one Church, but all Churches, not in one age, but all ages, has uniformly
observed and practiced, and no man can define who, after the Apostles, were the
beginners of it, must needs be supposed to be done by order or tradition from
them.

7. This form of government was not only generally received and embraced by
Catholics, but even by heretics and (...); who though they severed from the
communion of the Church in doctrine, yet not in discipline: for the Novatians
and Donatists had Bishops of their own from whom they took their names; only
Epiphanius haeres. 75. p. 295. Aug ad quod vult D^u^ A^riam ab AErio quodam
sunt nominati, qui cum esse^ presbyter, dolu^sse fertur quod Episcop^^ non
potuit ordinari, di^^bat presbyterum ab Ep^scopo nulla ^is^r^ntia debere
disce^n^. Hieron. in Tit.
AErius, who stood for a Bishopric and missed it out of discontent broached
that new doctrine wherewith the heads of our schismatiks are so much
intoxicated, viz. that there ought to be no distinction in the Church between a
Bishop and a Presbyter: and for this confounding those sacred orders was
himself ranked among heretics, and stands upon record in the Bed^olls of them
made by Epiphanius, Augustine, and Philastrius. It is true he had other brands
on him, but this was the proper mark put upon him by those ancient fathe^s, who
mention this tenet of his as erroneous and heretical. I grant some of the
ancient Doctors affirm, that in the beginning, till the prevention of schism
made this distinction between Bishops and Presbyters, they were all one in
name, as now they are in those essential parts of their function, viz.
preaching of the Word, and administration of the Sacraments. But AErius was the
first who professedly oppugned the ecclesiastical hierarchy, maintaining that
there ought to be no difference and distinction between Bishops and Elders.

8. This assertion of AErius, Con. 1. art. 15. c. 29 Episcopum in presbyteri
gradum reducere est sacrilegium. Anatolius constant. Episcop. dixit, i^qui
dicuntu^ ab Episcopal^ dignitat^ ad presbyteri ordinem descendi^^e, si (...)
causis condemnanturnec presbyteri honor digni sunt.
as in the doctrine thereof it was def^ned by the Doctors of the Church to be
heresy, so in the practice thereof it is condemned by the great council of
Chalcedon, to be sacrilege; to confound, say they, the ranks of Bishops and
Elders and to bring down a Bishop to the inferior degree of an Elder, is no
l^sse then sacrilege. Now I would fain know how that comes to be truth now,
which was condemned for heresy; and to be piety now, which was branded for
sacrilege above 1200 years ago.

9. Neither were the Fathers of the council of Chalcedon, only zealous in this
cause, which so much concerned the honor of the Church: but the other three
also* whose authority S. Gregory held to be the next to the four Evangelists,
and the doctrine thereof is after a sort incorporated into our Acts of
Parliament, Eliz. 1. In these counsels which all consisted of Bishops,
Episcopacie it self is almost in every canon* and sanction either asserted or
regulated.

10. Next to the primitive Church, we owe a reverend respect to the reformed
Churches beyond the seas; who either have bishops, as in Poland, Transylvania,
Denmark, and Swethland; or the same function is in nature, though not in name:
to wit, intendents and super-intendents; or they would have them if they could,
as I understood from many Ministers in France; or at least approve of them, as
appears by the testimony of Beza, Sadiel, Scultetus, and others.

11. What should I speak of the Articles of religion ratified by a sequence of
religious Princes succeeding one the other, and confirmed by act of Parliament;
to which all beneficed men are required under pain of loss of their livings,
within a month to profess their assent and consent; in which, both the power
and consecration of bishops and ministers is expressly asserted, See Art. 36.
and ^. de consecrat. It is evident to all men reading holy Scriptures and
ancient authors, that from the Apostles time there have bin these three orders
in the Church of Christ, and that a Bishop ought to correct and punish such as
are unquiet, ^riminous and disobedient within his diocese, according to such
authority as he has by the word of God.
and their distinction from presbyters? or of the Statute of Carlisle, the 15 of
Edw. 2. and the first of Qu. Eliz. with very many other unrepealed Acts, in
which episcopal government is either related unto, or regulated or confirmed
in such sort, that quite to abolish and extirpate it would bring a confusion
and make a stop as well in secular as ecclesiastical courts? And therefore our
zealous reformers, if they think themselves not too good to be advised by the
great councellor, ought to take heed how they rashly and unadvisedly pluck up
the tares, as they esteem them, of holy canons and ecclesiastical laws, ne
simul ^radicent and triticum, lest together with those tares (as they count
them) they pluck up by the roots the good wheat of many profitable and
wholesome laws of the common wealth and Acts of Parliament.

12. But if the authority of both houses could soon cure the^e sores in
precedent Acts of Parliament, yet how will they make up the breaches in the
consciences of all those, who in the late Protestation and this new Covenant
have taken a solemn oath to maintain the privileges of the members of
Parliament, and the liberties of the subject? The most authentical evidence
whereof, are Charta magna, and the Petition of right, in both which the rights
of the Church and privileges of episcopal sees, are set down in the
forefront in capital letters.

13. To strain this string a little higher, the power of granting congedeliers,
together with the investiture of Archbishops, Bishops, and collation of
Deanries, and Prebends, with a settled revenue from the first fruits and tenths
thereof, is one of the fairest flowers in the Kings crown; and to rob the
imperial diadem of it (considering the King is a Person most sacred) is
sacrilege in a high degree; and not sacrilege only, but perjurie also in all
those who attempt it. For all Graduates in the Universitie, and men of rank and
quality in the Commonwealth, who are admitted to any place of emminent
authority or trust take the oath of Supremacy, whereby they are bound to
defend and propugne all preemminences, authorities* and prerogatives annexed to
the imperial crown, whereof this is known to be one inherent in the King, as
he is supreme head of the Church within his realms, and defender of the faith.

14. Yet for all this, admit that reason of state should enforce the
extirpation of episcopacie thus rooted, as it has been said, both in the
royal prerogative and privilege of the subject and in the laws of of the
land; it is a golden maxim of law, possumus quod jure possumut, we can do no
more then lawfully we may. If episcopal government must be overthrown, it must
be done in a lawful way, not by popular tumults but by a Bill passed in
Parliament, and that to be tendered to his Majesty for his royal assent; and
how such a bill can be pressed upon his Majesty who has taken an oath Vide
record. in Exchequer. I will preserve and maintain to you and the Churches
committed to your charges all Canonical privileges, and I will be your
protector and defender to my power, by the assistance of God, as every good
King in his kingdom in right ought to defend the Bishops and Churches under
their government etc. Then laying his hand on the book on the communion table,
he says, the things which I have before promised, I shall perform and keep, so
help me God, and by the contents of this book*
at his Coronation to preserve Bishops in their legal rights, I must learn
from our great masters of the law. For by the Gospel all inducements to sin are
sin; and solicitations to perjurie are tainted with that guilt: neither is
there any power upon earth to dispense with the breach of oaths lawfully taken.

15. If we desire that this Church of England should flourish like the garden
of Eden, we must have an eye to the nurseries of good learning and religion,
the two Univers^ties, which will never be furnished with choice plants, if
there be no preferments and encouragements to the students there, who for the
far greater part bend their studies to the Queen of all professions,
Divinity; which will make but a slow progress, if Bishoprics, Deanries*
Archdeaconries, and Prebendaries, and all other Ecclesiastical dignities,
which like silver spurs prick on the industry of those, who consecrate their
labors and endeavors to the glorifying of God, in employing their tal^nt in
the ministry of the Gospel, be taken away. What ^ayls are to a ship, that are
affections to the soul; which if they be not filled with the hope of some
rewards, and deserved preferments, as a prosperous gale of wind, our sacred
studies and endeavors will soon be calmed: for, Cic. Tusc. quaest.
honos abit artos; omnesqu^ incenduntur studio gloriae; jacentquo ea semper,
quae apud quosquo improbantur; honor nourishes arts; and all men are inflamed
with the desire of glory; and those professions fall and decay, which are in no
esteem with most men. And if there are places both of great profit, honor, and
power propounded to Statesmen* and those that are learned in the law, like
rich prizes to those that prove masteries; shall the professors of the divine
law be had in less esteem then the students and practisers in the municipall?
And shall that profession only be barred from ^ntring into the temple of
honor, which directs all men to the temple of virtue; and has best right to
honor by the promise of God, honorantes nic honorab^, those that honor me, I
will honor; because they most honor God in every action of their function,
which immediately tends to his glory?

They will say, that Episcopal government has proved inconvenient and
prejudicial to the State, and therefore the Hierarchy is to be cut down, root
and branch. Of this argument we may say as Cicero does of Cato, his exceptions
against Pro Mur. toll no^en Catonis.
Murenae, set aside the authority of the objectors, the objection has very
little weight in it. For it is liable to many and just exceptions, and
admits of diverse replies.

First, it is said, that Episcopal government is inconvenient and mischievous,
and prejudicial to the State; but it was never proved to be so.

Secondly, admit some good proof could be brought of it; yet if Episcopacie be
of divine institution, as has been proved, it must not be therefore rooted
out, but the luxurious stems of it pruned, and those additions to the first
institution from whence these inconveniences have grown ought to be retranched.

Thirdly, if Episcopacie has proved inconvenient, and mischievous in this age,
which was most Statut. Ed. 3. ann. 25. The Church of England was founded in the
state of prelacie, etc. for we owe to it our best laws made in the Saxon times,
and Charta magna it self: The union of the two Roses, Yo^k, and Lancaster, the
marriage with Scotland; and above all, the plantation and reformation of true
religion. See Vindication of Episcopacie* page 23, 24. See also the statute
book of 16. Rich. 2. where the Commons show, that the Prelates were much
profitable and necessary to their Sovereign Lord the K. and the realm etc.
beneficial and profitable in all former ages, the fault may be in the
maladies of the patient, not in the method of cure. This age is to be reformed,
not Episcopacie abrogated; that the liberty and looseness of these times will
not brook the sacred bands of Episcopal discipline, is rather a proof of the
integrity thereof, then a true argument of any maligr^tie in it to the state:
without which, no effectual Jerome advers. Luc. c. 4. Ecclesiae salu^ a summi
sacerdot^ dignitate pendet, cui si non ^xors quaedam, and ab omnibus em^nens
detur protestas, tot in ecclesia efficientur schismata, quot sacerdotes.

Cypr. ep. 3. non aliunde haereses abortae sunt, aut nata schismata, quam inde
quod sacerdoti Dei non obtemperatur; nec unus in ecclesia ad tempus sacerdos,
and ad tempus judex^ vice Christi cogitatur.


means or course can be taken, either for the suppressing schismatics, or the
continuation of a lawful and undeniable succession in the Ministry.

16. Lastly, though some of late think they have brought gold and silver, and
precious stones to build the house of God, by producing some stuff out of
antiquity, to prove the ordination of presbyters by mere presbyters; yet being
put to the test, it proves mere trash: for there can be no instance brought out
of Scripture of any ordination, without imposition of Apostolical or
Episcopal hands; neither has prime antiquity ever approved of mere
presbyters laying hands one upon another, but in orthodoxall Councels revoked,
cassated, and disannulled all such ordinations, as we may read in the Apologies
of Athanas. apol. 2. Colithus quidam presbyter in ecclesia Alexandrina alios
presbyteros ordinare praesumpserat; sed rescissa fuit ejus ordinatio, and omnes
ab eo constituti presbyteri in laic^rum ordinem redacti. See Epiph. haer. 75.
The order of Bishops begets Fathers in the Church: but the order of Presbyters
sons in baptism, but no Fathers or Doctors.
Athanasius, and elsewhere.

What shall I need to add more, save the testimony of all Chistians of what
denomination soever under the cope of heaven* save only the mushrom sect of
Brownists sprung up the other night, all who have given their name to Christ,
and acknowledge and have some dependence on either the Patriarch of
Constantinople in the East, or of Rome in the West, or of Muscovia in the
North, or of Alexandria in the South, together with the Cophti^, Maro^ites,
Abissenes, and Chinese, not only admit of Episcopal government, and most
willingly submit to it, but never had, or at this day have any other? Neither
is this, or can it be denied by our Aerians: but they tell us, that these are
Christians at large, who hold many errors and superstitions with the
fundamentals of Christian doctrine: their Churches are like oar not cleansed
from earth; like gold not purged from dross; like threshed wheat, not fanned
from the chaff; like meal not sifted from the bran; like wine not drawn off
the lees: we are, say they, upon a reformation, and the new Covenant engages
us to endeavor the reformation of the Church of England in doctrine, worship,
discipline, and government, according to the Word of God, and according to the
example of the best reformed Churches. The best reformed, which are they?
whether the remainders of the Waldenses and Albigenses in Piemont, and the
parts adjoining; or of the Taborites in Bohemia; or of the Lutherans in
Germany; or those that are called after the name of Calvin, in France, and
elsewhere.

First, for the Waldenses, the forerunners of Luther, as he himself
confesses, See also ^. Abbot* in his (...) of the visibilitie of the Church,
and in his answer to Hill.
they had Bishops who ordained their Pastors; a catalogue whereof we may see
in the history of the Waldenses, first written in French, and after translated
into English by a learned Herald.

Secondly, for the Lutheran Churches, they have Prelates governing them, under
the titles of Archbishops and Bishops in Poland, Denmark* and Swethland; but
under the name of Superintendents and Intendents in Germany: and as for their
judgment in the point, it is expressly set down in the Apol. confess.
Augustan. c. de numero and usu sacrament. ^os saepe pro^estati sumus summa cum
voluntate conservare p^litiam eccl^siasticam, and g^adus in ecclesia factos
etiam summa authoritate: scimus enim utili consilio ecclesiacticam disciplina
hanc modo quo vet^res eam d^scribunt constitutam.
apology of the Augusta^e confession in these words: we have often protested
our earnest desires to conserve the discipline of degrees in the Church by
Bishops. Nay, Luther. tom. 2. p. 320. Nemo contra statu^ episcoporum and veros
episcopos, vel bonos pastores dictum putet, quicquid contra hos tyrannos
dicitur.
Luther himself, who of all men most bitterly inveighed against the
Antichristian Hierarchy, yet puts water into his wine, adding; let no man
hereby conceive, that I speak any thing against the state of Bishops, but only
against Rom^sh wolves and tyrant^. Neither are the Lutherans of another mind at
this day, witness their every-way accomplished Gerard. de ministerio eccles.
Nemo nostrum dicit nihil interesse inter episcopum, and presbyterum; sed
agnoscimus distinctionem graduum propter (...) ecclesiae, ut concordia
conservetur.
Gerard: none of us, says he, affirms, that there is no difference between a
Bishop, or Presbyter, or Priest; but we acknowledge a difference of degrees for
good order s^ke, and to preserve concord in the Church.

Here, me thinks I see the Smec^y^nians bend their brows, and answer with some
indignation: what have we to do with Luthera^s who have Images in their
Churches, and auricular confession, and maintain consubs^antiation, and
ubiquitie, and intercision of grace, and many other errors? We are of Calvin,
and hold with the doctrine and discipline of Geneva, which has no allay at all
of error and superstition, but is like the pure angell-gold.

Here though I might (as many have done) crave leave to put in a legal
exception against the authority of Calvin and Beza in matter of discipline,
because they had a hand in thrusting out the Bishop of Geneva, and the Lay
Presbyterian government was the issue of their brain; and we know it is
natural for parents to dote upon their own children, and account them far
fairer and more beautiful then indeed they are: yet such was the ingenuitie of
those worthy reformers, and such is the evidence and strength of truth, that
in this point, concerning the abolition of Episcopacie in the Church of
England, I dare choose them as Umpires. First, let Calv. de necess. reform.
ecclesiae. Talem nobis hierarchiam s^ exbibeant, in qua sic emin^a^t episcopi,
ut Ch^isto subeste non recusent, ut ab illo tanquam unico capite pendeant and
ad ipsum referantur, in qua sic inter se fraternam societa^em colant, ut non
alio modo quam ejus veritate si^t colligati; tum vero nullo non anathemate
dignos fateo^, si qui erunt, qui non ^am ^everenter, summaque obedientia
observent.
Calvin speak in his exquisite Treatise concerning the necessity of reforming
the Church, the most proper place (if any where) clearly to deliver his
judgment in this controversy; where, having ripped up the abuses of the Romish
Hierarchy, in the end thus he resolves: let them show us such an Hierarchy,
in which the Bishops may have such prehemine^cie, that yet they refuse not
themselves to be subject to Christ, that they depend upon him as the only
Head, and ref^rre all to him, and so embrace brotherly society, that they are
knit together by no other means then his truth, and I will confess they
deserve any cu^se, if there be any who will not observe such an Hierarchy with
reverence and greatest obedience. After him, let us hear Beza, de grad. minist.
evang. c. 18. Sess. 3. Quod si nunc ecclesiae instau^atae Anglicanae suorum
Episcoporum and Archiepisc^porum authoritate suffultae perstant, quemadmodum
hoc illis nostra memoria contigit, ut eju^ ordinis homines non ^antum insignes
Dei Martyrs, sed etiam praestantissimos Doctores and Pastores habuerit, etc.
Beza in that very book which he wrote against Saravia, a Prebend of
Canterbury, concerning different degrees in the Clergy: but, says he, if the
reformed Churches of England remain still supported with the authority of
their Archbishops and Bishops, as it has come to pass in our memory, that
they have had men of that rank, not only famous Martyrs, but most excellent
Doctors and Pastors (which happiness I, for my part, wish that they may
continually enjoy) etc. Surely, he that so highly extolled our Bishops, and
wished that that order might, like the tree in the Poet, continually bring
forth such golden boughs and fruit, would not readily swear to endeavor the
utter extirpation thereof.

With these and other shafts the Doctors quiver was full, though he drew out
but one only (considering the time and the auditorie) which he took from the
oath at the ordination of the Divines in that Assembly, which, as he conceived*
tied up their hands fast enough from subscribing to the second Clause in the
Covenant: for all persons so ordained, who swear for the extirpation of
Episcopacie* forswear their Canonical obedience* and question the validity of
their Orders given them, upon condition of performing such obedience and
submission as that oath enjoyneth.

SECT. IX. Britanicus his scurrilous jests at spiritual Courts retorted, and
extemporarie prayers and sermons deservedly censured.
Brit. p. 67.
HE says, the Doctor excepted against the Scotch covenant as not agreeable to
Gods Word: this is not all. For the Doctor would not like it a jot worse for
that, but there are not so many reverend conveniences; you cannot have liberty
of conscience, and pluralities at once, you cannot keep an orthodoxall coach
and four horses, you cannot mind your business of State and ease* for the
ceremony of constant preaching; you shall want the good company of
Chancellours and Commissaries, and the gainful equity of the canon law, and
the goodly tyranny of the high Commission Courts, and the comfortable use of
the keys over a pottle of Sack in the Chancellours chamber.

Ans.
If thou had any vermilion tincture of modesty Britanicus* thou would blush
to charge the Doctor with negligence in preaching* or coaching it with four
horses, or gleeking it on the Lords day: for it is well known to all that know
him, that he never kept coach with four horses, nor played at gleek in his life,
much less on the Lords day. And for his constant diligence in preaching, for
35 years and more, if I should hold my peace, the prime and chief pulpits in
the Universitie and London would say enough* to stop thy mouth, and open all
ingenuous men's, to yield a testimony to a known truth. But thou art possessed
with Martin Marprelates devil, which Urbanus will shortly conjure out of thee.
The power of the keys is a great eyesore to thee, for those of thy sect like
not to stand in white sheets, though if the world belie you not, none better
deserve it: for Papists and Brownists, like Sampsons foxes, though they are
severed in the heads, they are joined in the tails. And doubtless, when thou
were summoned by an Apparitor for committing folly with an elect Sister, and
waitedst in the Chancellors chamber, it was then that thou heldst thy nose so
long over a pottle of Sack, till thy brains crowed. For what Chimera's,
Tragelaphusses, and Hippocentaurs do thou talk of? reverend conveniences,
orthodoxall coaches, and business of State, and ease, the ceremony of
constant preaching and goodly tyranny of the high commission Court, as if that
court now stood? What thy intoxicated brain conceives, or thy loose tongue
would have understood by reverend conveniences* and orthodoxall coaches, I
understand not; unless thou alludest to that noble man's conveniencie, who had
a reverend coachman for his preacher; whose doctrine, very agreeable to his
profession, was, that a stable was every way as holy a^ a Church, (and for my
part, I wish those of his strain may have no other Church,) or thou had a
s^ing at the Doctors successor in Acton, who rides every Lords day in triumph
in a coach drawn with four horses to exercise there. M. Nigh.
What thou talkest of business of state and ease, thou understandest not thy
self; if there be business in state, surely there is little ^ase; bus^nesse of
state and ease are a kind of asystata; non been convenient nec in una s^de
morantur; if there were ever such a calm^ in the state, that the steer^men
might take their ease, yet certainly never since your Boreas blew in the
Church. If that character might truly be given of any, it may of your sect;
turba gravis paci* placidaequ^ immica quieti: you are the natural sons of
Ismael, your hands are against all men and all men's hands against you. But here
thou secretly girdest at our Bishops sitting in Parliament, and our Doctors on
the Bench of Justice; that is a great eyesore to you, as if it were agreeable
to reason or religion for Laymen to meddle with all Ecclesiastical matters as
now they do, and Ecclesiastical persons to meddle with no secular; or the
Apostles argument were of no fo^ce* those who a^e fit Judges of the highest
cases of conscience, and shall one day judge the Angels, are much more able to
judge men, and compose differences of a lower nature. Certainly, the superior
science is better able to judge of the conclusions of an inferior, the ^ the
inferior of a superior. Yea, but this is a distraction from their sacred
function: none at all, if, as thou here say, the handling of such business
is a matter of ease: yet admit it be some distraction and trouble to
Clergymen to keep the peace, and compose secular differences amongst those of
their flock; yet that religious Bishop S. Aug^stine yields a good reason for
it; why for the good of souls godly pastors must not refuse this troublesome
work: otium s^nctum quaerit charitas veritatis, sed nego^ium justum suscipit
necessitas charitatis, the love of truth desires the rest of contemplation, but
the necessity of charity puts manifold businesses upon us.

But, I pray thee, tell me what thou meanest by the ceremony of preaching.
This is thy peculiar dialect, never any to my knowledge termed it so before
thee; if some too much addicted to prayer have too much ^ig^tned preaching; as
on the contrary, some too much addicted to preaching have to much vilified
common prayer: what is this to the Doctor, who was ever both for diligent
preaching, and constant prayer? For neither can a man pray as he ought without
direction from preaching, nor preach powerfully without prayer: and as it is an
absurd kind of preaching* to preach against preaching; so it is a most unholy
prayer to pray ex tempore against the set-forms of prayer allowed by the
Church. The public preaching of the word is a substantial part of Gods
worship, and very imp^^usly called by thee a ceremony, unless the word be
applied to your ex tempore Enthusiasts, whose preaching is nothing else but a
mere ceremony of lifting up the hands and eyes and moving the lips, and
b^ating the cushio^, and varying phrases, and plundering an English
concordance. Cicero in his book entitled Orator, speaks of negligentia quaedam
diligens, a careful avoiding of accurate penning and neglect of ornaments of
speech; there is, says he, a diligent kind of negligence consisting in the
weeding out the flow^rs of rhetor^ck: but I may truly say of these men's
preaching, that we may observe in it a negligent kind of diligence, an idle
kind of labor; and though they exercise twice every Lords day, and lecture it
most days of the week* and kill their hearers at every funeral sermon with
the tedious prolixitie thereof; yet unless they take more pains in composing
their sermon, then they do, they shall never escape the curse of the Prophet:
woe be to them that do the work of the Lord negligently.

SECT. X. Of the abuse of appropriations of benefices, and the necessity of
Pluralities as, the case stands.
ENough of your preaching, whereof all men surfeit: now to the grand crime you
charge our prelaticall clergy with, the defense of Pluralities, and
Non-residence; in some case Pluralities is no single crime with the Brownists
of a deep dye, who by their good will would have all that serve at the Lords
Table their trencher-chaplains, wherein they exceed the sin of Jeroboam: for
his was, that he took of the lowest of the people, and made them priests of the
high places: but these take from the highest of the Clergy their deserved
rewards and preferments, and endeavor to reduce them to the lowest rank of
their hirelings^, that so they that wear the sacred Ephod, may be every way
suitable to their apron-men. So cunning is Satan* when he transformeth himself
into an Angel of light, that he makes religion her self an advocate to plead
for sacrilege. Forsooth* if the ministers of the Gospel be well provided for
in their bodies and temporal estate they will take less care of other men's
souls: Jupiters golden cloak is too heavy for him to bear, the weight of two
bene^^ces is enough to break the back a Clergie-man: yet their Lecture-men can
hold two Lectures; the Assemblie-men two sequestrations; and your Lay-patrons
(or rather latrons) as many impropriations as they can purchase with their
use-money. C. B. can keep Watford, a benefice said to be worth 200 li. per
annum, with a Lecture in Paul's, for which he is to be allowed out of the
revenues of the Cathedral Church 400 li. per annum. S. M. for a long space
held his benefice in Essex, and the Curates gainful employment at Westminster,
and a preachers place in the Army, and yet he no way guilty of the bloody
sin of Non-residence. In the Legend of Saint Francis written by Vincentius
Bellovacensis there is one chapter entitled, de sancta ejus hypocrisi, of his
holy hypocrisy: this chapter you Brownists have conned by heart* for there is
not such holy hypocrisy and hypocritical holiness in any sect of the world,
as in yours; save the Jesuits, whom before you followed close at heels, but now
have out-stripped them. You cannot be igno^ant* that as things now ^^and in the
Church* there is a necessity of Pluralities. Of the 9000 livings with cure in
this Kingdom, there are above 4000 so castrated by sacrilegious appropriations,
that in very many places in this Kingdom, that which remains for the
incumbent is no way sufficient to support him and his family; either then his
means must be pieced out with another living, or he perish for want of
corporal* and his parishioners for want of spiritual food. In every
Parliament since the reformation there has been a bill against Pluralities
pursued with all vehemency and eagerness, but ever stopped with a cross bill
against appropriations: ubi ille nominaverit Phaedriam, tu Pamphilam: let
impropriations and Pluralities either stand together, or fall together. So long
as impropriations stand, and the bounds of parishes are not altered, nor some
other course taken to make single livings competent and correspondent both to
the pains and parts of the incumbent, there will be a necessity of
Pluralities. Yea, but Pluralities are s^ns and there can be no necessity of
sinning; if Plurality be a sin, they themselves have taken an oath to maintain
s^n in the Church, for they have taken an oath and made Protestation to
maintain the privileges of Parliament, and liberty of subjects: among which,
the capacity of holding more benefices with cure is one confirmed by Act of
Parliament. If it be unlawful to hold more benefices with cure within
convenient distance, it is either malum quia prohibitum, or prohibitum quia
malum; it is either evil because prohibited, or prohibited because evil in it
self. It is not evil because prohibited, because the law of God no where sets
out the limits of parishes* nor confineth the pains of a pastor within such
narrow limits: all that the divine law requires, is, that every pastor
carefully by himself, and by his fellow laborers, which the holy Scripture
expressly mentions, feed that flock whereof the holy Ghost has made him
over-seer: and from whence he is to receive comfortable maintenance, whether
this flock be comprised within the limits of one parish or no. For parishes
were first distinguished, not by Gods law, but by the Popes; and with such
disproportion, that some parishes are too much for any one to supply them; and
others make not a convenient flock for a man of meanest parts to feed and
attend on. Neither is Plurality prohibited by any law, quia malum in se,
because it is evil in it self; for none of the precisest make scruple of
conscience to hold any one benefice of never so great value: which
notwithstanding has diverse chappells of ease annexed unto it, in which it is
impossible for a man to be resident and officiate the cure in person at once.
If they will say, he may discharge both by himself and his curate; so may he
also do who has two benefices: and let the parishioners both of Lambeth and
Acton testify, whether those benefices were not better supplied by the Doctor
himself, and his two learned and able curates, then now they are by those two
who enjoy the sequestration of his benefices, who have been perpetually
non-resident from both, and neither by themselves nor substitutes so much as
once administered the Sacrament of the Lords Supper unto them, though the best
of the parishioners have most earnestly desired it.

SECT. XI. That the abjuration of Episcopacie, especially in the Clergy of
England, involveth them in perjurie and sacrilege.
THe Doctor excepted against the extirpation of prelacie, Brit. p. 68.
Deanes, and Prebends, because he thought it not of Apostolical institution:
no, there is another reason of more force with the Doctor and the prelaticall
party, they must have another kind of divinity, and more beneficial
positions; they love not these naked truths, which are not able to maintain
their satin cassocks, nor those rigid opinions which will not allow a game at
gleek after evening prayer.

Canis festinans caecos parit catulos: thou (or the Printer, Ans.
Britanicus,) making more haste then good speed, have stumbled at pons
asinorum; and thou stammerest out perfect nonsense; thou say the Doctor
excepted against the extirpation of prelacie, because he thought it not of
Apostolical institution, thou should have said, because he thought it to be
of Apostolical institution: for so indeed he thinks, and will maintain his
tenet against all the disciples of AErius the heretic, the first patron of
paritie in the clergy; whether they be plant-animals, I mean lay-presbyters, or
atoms; that is, Independents, whose arguments are like themselves, all
together independent and inconsequent. But why do thou deliver the Doctors
mind by halfs? He did not only except against that clause in the new covenant,
wherein Episcopacie is abjured, and the extirpation vowed of that plant, which
the Apostles themselves planted, and we in our public liturgy established by
law pray to God to pour upon them the continual dew of his blessing, because
he held such an oath to be repugnant to an Apostolical institution; but also
because he conceived that horrible sacrilege was couched under it. For upon
the taking away of Episcopacie, root and branch, will undoubtedly follow the
confiscation of the lands of Bishops, and cathedral Churches, or at least
alienation from those holy uses, to the maintenance whereof, they were
dedicated: and is it a small matter, think thou Britanicus, to violate the
sacred testaments, and last wills of many hundred religious christians, and to
draw the guilt of sacrilege in the highest degree upon the land, which
already groaneth under the heavy burden of too many heinous sins, and
bewayleth them in all parts of this Realm with tears of blood?

SECT. XII. Of profitable doctrines and beneficial positions, held by
Brownists and Sectaries.
AS for that thou would imply, that the Doctor advanced Episcopacie to an
Apostolical institution, as Cicero extolled eloquence to the sky, that he
might be li^ted up with her; thou foully mistakest the matter, the Doctor is
known to affect that Dutch Worthy his temper, upon whose grave James Dowza
strewed that flower among others: honor^s quia merebatur, contempsit; and quia
contempsit, magis merebatur; because he deserved honors, he contemned them;
and because he contemned them, he much more deserved them. The whole course of
his life refutes that base calumny thou castest upon him: For,

1. After he first showed himself in public preaching, in his course at S.
Mary's in Oxford; he was commended by the Vice Chancellor and Universitie to
the Kings Majesty's Ambassador Lidget in France, where Cardinal Perone, homo
famae potius magnae, quam bonae, by his agents thought to inveagle him to
Popery, by promise o^ far greater preferments then ever he could expect in
England: but the Doctor esteemed no better of that motion* then of the devils
offer to our Savior; all th^se things will I give thee, if thou will fall down
and worship me: for he was so far from turning out of his course, to take up
these golden apples, that contrariewise he followed the harder after the price
of his high calling, See the testimonies of Dr. Moulin, and other foreign
divines in the Coroll^^ie.
and encountered all the Romish Priests, Jesuits* and So^bon Doctors wheresoever
he met them, even to the hazard of his life; and God gave such a blessing to
his many combats for the faith there, that he reclaimed diverse from popery,
and confirmed many that were wavering in the true reformed religion.

2. After his return into England, when the great favorite bore all the sway,
and the Doctor might have climbed to preferment by that ladder, by reason of
his ancient acquaintance with the Duke; and the dedication of a book to his
dearest consort, which she very much desired: The handmaid to devotio^.
yet understanding that the Duke for some politic ends sided with the Arminian
faction, he brake off all dependence upon that favouri^e, and wrote a smart
book against the Arminians, called Pelagius redivivus; and thereby dashed all
hopes of his preferment then at court.

3. After the Dukes death, when those that sat at the helm of the Church, and
had great power also at court, to procure the greater liberty to the
Protestants in popish Countries, and to draw her Majesty to a better liking of
the reformed religion, sought to reduce the Church of England to a nearer
conformity to the Roman* at least in some scholasticall tenets and outward
ceremonies and gestures with them; and to smooth the more rugged pos^tions of
popery* was thought a ready means to facilitate the way to prefermet: the
Doctor declined this rode also and though he desired nothing more then the
uniting of all christians in the faith first given to the Saints, and the
doctrine of the primitive Church; yet he could never en^ure those who went
about to sodder the Roman and reformed religion, and to bring Christ and
Antichrist to an enterview: neither would he ever be brought to vary in his
practice a nails breadth from the canons of the Church of England, and rubric
of the Common Prayer.

4. After the scene was turned, and many who before had layen in obscurity,
were brought upon the stage; who like the statues of Brutus and Cassius, eo
praefulgebant, quod non visebantur, did shine the brighter, the more they were
hid. The Doctor among others, was chosen by 390 votes to be a member of the
Assembly; and, among many other of eminent parts and worth, was designed by
the whole house of commons* to answer a popish Priest, The Author of the book,
entitled; A safeguard from Ship wrak
which he did accordingly; and was in so fair a way, that if his conscience had
been a Lesbian rule, and would have bowed that way, where preferments are now
offered* he might not only have held both his benefices, but expected such
farther privileges, as the chief of the Assembly now enjoy. But when a
covenant was tendered, wherein he must of necessity proclaim his ingratitude
to the world, by swearing to endeavor the ruin of those, upon whom under God
he built his chief hopes, and entangle his conscience in evident perjurie, by
swearing to break all his canonical oaths; necessity constrained him to break
off from the Assembly, and for this cause he is now in bonds and stripped of all
his ecclesiastical preferments, and temporal revenues; and nudus nudum
Christum sequitur, and follows his naked Savior himself also stark naked.

But to leave off this sad and melancholy discourse, and come to the
beneficial positions, and satin cassock thou talked of, and game at gleek:
thou should have said noddie; a game at which thou playest at as well
Sundays as working-days. For beneficial positions, I know none held by the
prelaticall clergy, as your schismatic laics term them, save this which
the Apostle has delivered, that godliness is great gain, and has the
promises of this life, and the life to come: but I can tell you of fruitful
doctrines and beneficial uses, raised by your Enthusiasts; A^^s forbids not
all usurie, but biting usurie in his Cases of Consciences.
as namely, that usurie, after it has been with a barber chyrurgion, and has
its teeth plucked out, is very lawful, and that those of your sect alone have a
right to the creature, and that the wicked have no right or title to any thing
they possess: and that therefore, when you plunder any Malignant you steal
not, but take your own from them; and agreeable to your positions is your
practice, you make no bones to devour widows houses, under color of long
prayers; like vultures you hover over dead corpses, and thereout suck no small
advantage; if any rich man be going the way of all flesh, some of your
fraternity must be sent for with all speed to pray his soul ex tempore into
heaven; and after you have persuaded him to set his house in order, for he must
dye and not live, and he is going to draw his last will and testament, you will
be sure to have a ^inger in it, or rather a claw, or nail to scrape and
scratch something for your selves, under the title of pious legacies.

SECT. XIII. Of ministerial habits, recreations on the Lords day, and how the
Brownists and sectaries profane the Christian Sabbath.
Have thou yet any better stuff in thy shop, Britanicus, besides the large
mourning weed begged artificially at the last funeral of a saint? Yes, a satin
cassock surely, a decent garment for a grave divine, especially on high days:
what would thou have the reverend clergy to wear? would thou have them go
in cuerpo, like your new England and Holland theologues? or in a rocket lived
through with plush or taffata, as some of the Assembly men flaunt it? or in a
short jacket, much like the riding coat of David's Ambassadors, which was cut
off at o^ sacrum, the huckle bone? Here Brit. thou playst the base cynick,
^alcas fastum Platonis, Plutarch Apopl^.
thou tramplest upon Plato's pride, but remember what Plato replied; calcas
fastum, sed alio fastu, thou tramplest upon the pride of some of the clergy in
their apparel, but thou do it in a worse kind of pride.

As for card-playing, I need not gle^k it with thee, for we are at play
already; thy earnest is nothing but jests, and those very scurrilous and
ridiculous; and therefore either to be scorned or retorted upon thee in sober
sadness. The Doctor is no player at cards or dice, nor approves at all any
recreations on the Lords day, but such as, like Aarons golden plate in his
miter, have holiness stamped on them: As for those of thy precise sect, they
indeed will not for a world play a game at cards or tables on the Lords day,
after evening prayer; but they do far worse, they take away morning and evening
prayer both, and jear out the sacred liturgy of the church: if thou art come to
thy self Brit. and have thy wits about thee, prithee tell me, is it not better
playing a game at tables on the christian sabbath, wherein a wooden man is taken
up without any loss or hurt? or at chesse, in which there is an image of men
set in battle array, there to cast the bloody die of war on that day, to kill,
to pillage, to plunder? of the two I had rather see latrunculos, on that day
then latrones, chesse-men then pressed-men: notwithstanding to choose, you rifle
houses, and sequester malignants on that day; your city magistrates and
Officers will not suffer a poor waterman to row on the Thames yet they permit
the soldiers in all the courts of guard, and forts, and ships to drink and
swell all the day: a physician may not pass over the river to save the life of
the body, not a divine to save the life of the soul, yet they account it a
sanctifying of the sabbath to beat up drums and press soldiers* to kill men
on that day: O precise hypocrisy, or rather hypocritical preciseness! A
devout father sharply reprooving the evil conversation of some christians in
his time told them to their faces, gentes agitis sub nomine Christi, you act
the parts of Gentiles in the habit of Christians: but I may truly say of you,
Iudaeos agitis sub nomine Christi, you act the parts of Jews in the habit of
Christians: Jews, I say, in the rigid observation of the Sabbath; of Jews, in
venting your spleen and malice against Christ, by excluding his prayer out of
your liturgy; by defacing his name Jesus wheresoever you see it written in
golden characters, or wrought in cloth of gold or tissue, or stamped in holy
vessels, calling it the Jesuits trim or ga^b by inveighing against keeping the
feast of the nativity, resurrection and ascension, and terrifying those that in
a religious compassion fast and mourn on good friday; your b^ating down with
axes and hammers the carved works of the temple, wherein there is any monument
of him; and which is far worse, persecuting his meniall servants, the most
faithful and orthodoxall ministers of the gospel unto bonds and death.

SECT. XIIII. Of the subscription of the letter written to the Primate of
Armagh, and the signification thereof.
HE tells us of Sir Walter Earls interpretation of PH and D the two Greek
letters: Brit. p. 68.
Aulicus, you see we have some honest Greeks, that can find out your villainies,
though you hide them in another language; I think you will translate your
mischiefs in time into all languages: oh these doctors treacheries are very
learned pieces; this is to show their schollarship, and traitorous abilities,
that they are able to betray us in Greek, as well as in English.

Because thy animadversions upon the doctors letter scorpion-like thrust out a
sting in the tail; Answ.
I will first pluck out the sting, and then crush the serpent to pieces, and
rub it upon the part. First then whereas thou chargest the doctor with villainy
and treachery: I answer, that this is villainous language; but because most
false and slanderous, the villain will return upon thy self, and the traitor
upon thy forma informans A. Wardner. I grant it is villainy and treachery to
betray the secrets of state, wherewith a man is trusted, to the enemy; but
resolves of Synods are no secrets of state, nor is the King an enemy of the
state; if thou say so, Brit. thou art a traitor, and reus laesae majestatis:
had the doctor acquainted his Majesty by the primate of A^magh what past in the
Assembly, it had bin no villainy or treachery* but piety and loyalty so to do;
for the King is the defender of the faith and the P. of Armagh is a noble
champion thereof: all treachery is either of things or persons: what or whom did
the Doctor betray? first what? did he betray forts, or cittadels or treasure or
magazins of armourie, or cabin-councels? no word or syllable in all the
intercepted advertisement of any such thing. There is mention of nothing but of
some doctrinall conclusions and theological propositions* de fide, quae tradi
debent prodi non possunt, which cannot be betrayed, yet ought to be delivered.
If the Assembly of divines resolve upon such articles of religion, as cannot
en^ure the light, it is not only lawful but a necessary duty of a faithful
minister of Christ Jesus* to detect them, and to discover the abettors of them
to the supreme head of the church under Christ, that he may prevent the danger
the body is like to be in. Tertullian a^signeth it as a proper note of
heretics, that they conceal their tenants from the governors of the church,
and the common sort of Christians also, and instill them secretly into the
ears of confiding proselites; occultant quod praedicant, si tamen praed^cant
quod occulta^t, Turtul. praescript.
and will thou brand the divines of the Assembly with this mark of heretics?

But the truth is, the Doctor held no correspondencie by Letters, nor was an
Assembly-Spie, nor sent, nor intended to send any Letter toward Oxford, save
only that one unsealed that was intercepted* which also by a false suggestion
was cunningly drawn from him and presently showed the close Committee, and a
copy taken of i^, and the original sent by them to Oxford, and the Carrier
preferred to a gain^ull place in the Army. By these st^ps, Br^tan^cus, if thou
can^t not sent and trace the tra^^or from the Bridge-foot to Lambeth, from
Lambeth to the close Committee, from the close Committee to Oxford, from Oxford
to the Committee for Examinations, and from thence to the Leaguer at S. Albans,
thou have no nose.

Yea but the Letter was subscribed not with the Doctors name in English but
with two Greek characters, D and PH, and is that treason? Then surely to
subscribe and much more to write a whole letter in Greek* as the Doctor has
done many, to Cyril Patriarch of Constantinople, Metrophanes Patriarch of
Alexandria, and diverse others, must needs be high treason, and such a treason
as none of your Brownisticall Lecturers or Teachers are guilty of. I had
thought, that the Latin had been only the language of the beast; but now I
perceive, that any learned language is with you not only Popery and heresy,
but also treason; because it is like the Mass, an unknown tongue to you, and
betrayeth your ignorance, who have skill of no other language then your mothers
tongue, and canting.

Yea, but the D and the PH were not written severally, and distinctly, but one
in another, after the manner of numerals in Greek characters, and the PH was
somewhat above the D, and therein certainly some mystery of iniquity lies
hid, which none of all the Committee but Sir Walter Earl could reveal; I pray
thee what was that? namely, that by these characters was signified not D. F.
but Fidelity: O divinam ariolum, o Chrysippeum acumen; O quint-essence of wit,
O rare Criticisme! Yet, by Sir Walters leave, this conceit will shrink in the
wetting: for there is a difference between Phi. and Fi. and Delta and Delitie:
neither was the PH written above the D,
but in the middle of it, after this manner, which marres the quiblet. Yet if
the wits will have it so, let it pass for a curious and quaint conjecture.
Admit that PH and D Phi and Delta is to be construed Fidelity, and that as the
Doctor carries loyalty in his heart, so also fidelity in the two first
letters of his name transposed, what will thou hence infer, Britanicus; ergo,
the Doctor is a villain and a traitor? now Phi upon the Delta, d^nce, or rather
Beta, Britanicus.

Ut sapiant fatuae fabrorum prandia Betae,
O quam saepe petet vin^ ^iperque Cook at the Bridge foot.
Coq^us?
SECT. XV. Wholesome and seasonable advice to Britanicus.
TO knit up all in a true lovers knot: I know thee not by face, Britanicus, but
only ex ungue, by thy nail, which I find fretting in every sore, in Church
and Commonwealth, whereby thou exasperatest all sorts of men against thee, and
have stirred a nest of hornets; which, if thou look not to it, will sting thee
to death; Cic. pro Sylla.
noli aculeos, qui reconditi sunt, excussos arbitrari; think not those stings
thrust or plucked out which lie hid, and for a time drawn in. Great Britain,
Britanicus, has been of late made a stage, wherein bloody tragedies have been
acted, and after every scene thou thrustest thy self in among the Chorus, and
freely censurest all the actors at thy pleasure; give over thy part in time,
and get off the stage: the Protasis is past, we are now in the Epitasis, God
knows what the Catastrophe will prove. In the mean while, take heed thou
insult not upon calamity, (...), Isocr ad Daem^nicum.
the fall of the Die is uncertain, and thou know not what may be thy chance.
He that out of curiosity looked into the table hanged up in the market place,
wherein the names of the Proscripti by Sylla were set in their order, at
unawares spyed his own name written in bloody characters: cuivis contingere
potest, quod cuiquam potest; that which is any ones case may be every ones
case. Strengthen not the hands of those whose fingers itch at the treasure of
the Church, it will prove like Sejanus horse, which none ever bestrid; or the
gold of Toulouse, which none ever touched but he came to an ill end. Neither
revile thou the servants of the living God, neither put scorns upon his
Prophets: be not so graceless, as to take a pride in disgracing those whom God
has appointed to be the instruments and silver conduit-pipes to conveigh grace
into thy soul. A jeer only at the Prophet Elisha, and that by innocents, proved
nocent, and their bodies were all to rent and torn with Bears* who touched
only the thin hayr of the Prophets head, crying, go thou bald-pate. If thou will needs prove masteries with thy pen, choose thy match, beware of impar
congressus.

(...)
(...). Hesiod. l. 1. ^p. and dies.

He is a stark idiot who will contend with his betters; for besides loss of
victory he gains blows into the bargain.

If Patroclus will encounter Hector; and Amycus Pollux; and Dares Entellus; and
the Syr^ns the Muses; and the blind worm the Basilisk, they must take that
which followed; above all things shoot not thy Porcupey's quills at sovereign
Majesty; though thou think thou go invisible, as if thou had Gyges
ring, or were compassed with Homers dark pavilion: yet the daughter of time
will descry thee, Adag. Homerica nube tectus. Ve^itas tempo^is filia.
and thou shall find by woeful experience, how dangerous a thing it is, in eum
scribere qui potest proscribere, it is not safe meddling with edge tools, nor
scribbling against him who has power to proscribe.

LEX TALIONIS: OR, A sober reckoning with CIVICUS.
AFter Britanicus, or rather Barbaricus, had mingled his ink with the
overflowing of his own gall: his brother Civicus, rather to vend his sorry
pamphlet, then to vent his spleen against D. F. has a sling at the gentle
lash, A Book so entitled.
and would fain squeez some poisonous juice out of the Doctors sponge.

SECT. XVI. Mercurius Civicus taken to task.
Occurrents Numb. 2. Ian. 12. THere is a cross to be erected at Oxford, Ian.
22. to crucify the Parliament now at Westminster, and D. F. has prepared a
lash* and a vinegar sponge, hoping to get an executioners place: he wrote his
own motto, the gentle lash, yet he would fain see the white flag died in blood.
But the Parliament have done well to clip the wings of the Clergy, that they
may fly into no temporal places* whose tongues, and p^ns have uttered such
poison against the Parliament and in their pride would willingly adhere to
Rome, as by many superstitions by them doted on, does plainly appear; who, by
their Babylonian ceremonies, have long endeavored to make a bridge into the
Church by Arminianisme to pass over into Popery.

Sic perusse frontem de rebus? Ans.
What a brow of brass and conscience seated with a hot iron, have thou
Civicus? that thou dare stain paper with such notorious untruths and
shameless ^landers? The^e can hardly be named any divine in this Kingdom now
living, who has disputed preached, written, and printed, more against Popery
and Arminianisme, then D. F. witness Vertumnus Romanus, printed by the command
of the house of Commons; the Supplement to the book of Martyrs; the Fisher
caught, and held in his own net; the Grand Sacrilege, the case for the
Spectacles, Cygnea Cant. Transubstantiation exploded; and Pelagius redivivus;
Ancilla pietati; and Clavis Mystica: citius crimen honestum quam turpem Ca^onem
feceris: thou shall sooner be able to prove the Protestant Religion to be
Popery, and Arminianisme true christianity, then the Doctor guilty of
either. What crime then can thou charge him withal? a ^aynous sin, and that
of commission: for he was many years in the commission of the peace: thou
shou^dst have added, that all that while he neither preached sermon, nor
printed book les^^ than before. Let the Borough of Southwark, with the adjacent
parts, inform thee, whether the Commonwealth gained not more by that his
impolyment then the Church lost. If the Docto^, to ^onfer with schismatics,
and refractorie persons to the Kings ecclesiastical laws, and canons of the
Church referred to him by the Judge; if to compose differences between
neighbors, and stifle a world of litigious suits in the bi^th: if to take
order for the relief of hundreds of poor and diseased persons in a dangerous
time of infection, when other commissioners rather provided for their own
safety by flight, then the safety of others, by the executing of their
office, he defalked some time from his sacred studies: peradventure, this
present age, rather jealous of, then zealous for the Church, will blame him for
it; but the former would have thanked him for it, as they did Nissene, and
Ambrose, and Augustine* and Jewel, whose temporal dignity and power no way
eclipsed their spiritual eminency, no more then it did the Priests, 2 Chronicles.
19, 8. set by Iehosaphat for the judgment and cause of the Lord.

Yet thou will say, that to discharge the function of a Pastor, and execute the
office of a Justice of peace, are incompatible. No more then to teach and to
make peace, to preach down and to beat down vice, to wound the hairie scalp of
every one that goes on in his profaneness, and drunkenness, and
uncleanesse, and routs, and riots, both with the spiritual and temporal
sword, which in former ages were aiding and assisting one to the other,
according to Bracton his observation; gladius gladium juvat: but now hack and
h^w one the other. If all peacemakers are blessed, surely as well the
religious Justice of peace as the preacher of peace; Mat. 5.^.
and if both concur in one person, he must needs have a double share in that
blessing: but thou art of another mind, thine eye is evil, because the Prince
or state are good to the Church, arming her with some temporal power, the more
effectually to compass her spiritual ends, and defend her children from
violence and wrong. Thou say the Parliament has done well to clip the wings
of the Clergy, that they may fly into ^o temporal place. I will not answer
thee, that many former Parliaments have imped them: See the statu^. 16. Rich.
2. and the 25 of Edw. 3.
but for Acts of Parliament, they are not for us to censure, but to obey; what
the Parliament has done, their Act speaks: and therefore I will be silent.

Yet since that Act, diverse of the Clergy great in your books, (but none
other) have flown into temporal places: one has flown into an examiners place
in Haberdashers-hall; another into a commissioners place for Scotland, a third
into a Gaolers place at Lambeth; arrige aures Pamphile. So, it seems, it
matters not much, quid, but quis; not what the employment is* but who it is
that is employed: for if he be a malignant, all is trash that he takes; but if
a confiding man, all is fish that comes to his net: See Sphyni^ Philosophica.
yea, that golden table which the Miletian fishers caught, and Apollo adjudged
to the wisest man then living. Howsoever, to be in the commission of the peace,
without seeking it* and to discharge that trust faithfully, without any
abatement or diminution of diligence in his pastoral function was no blemish,
but an ornament; no disgrace, but a dignity to the Doctor: It gave him more
power, it took nothing from his reputation; it blurred not but blazoned his
arms. Yet thou pickest a quarrel with him for executing justice upon
unlicensed scriblers, as before upon unlicensed tiplers: thou feel the smart
of his gentle lash, and put'st finger in the eye, crying and complaining there
is a cross to be erected at Oxford, Ian. 22. to crucify the Parliament now at
Westminster.

Say it over again, a cross erected at Oxford, to crucify etc. then there are
forty seven miles at least between the cross and the persons to be fastened to
it; a strange thing to erect a cross at Oxford, to crucify supposed
delinquents at Westminster; and more strange that an act of pardon and grace,
and the holding out of a golden scepter of mercy to all that will take hold of
it, should be taken to be the erecting a cross to crucify, or a gibbet to
execute any: but our late intelligencers, nae intelligendo faciant, ut nihil
intelligant, forfeit their wits as well as they have made shipwreck of their
consciences; else thou would never tell us of a gentle lash at the cross;
for neither were any according to the Roman laws lashed at the cross, nor was
that a gentle lash with which our Redeemer was scourged, for it set him all in
a gore blood, and made him such a ruefull spectacle, that Pilate himself, whose
conscience was as red as his scarlet robe, yet cried out in compassion, ecce
hom^, behold the man: and as absurd is thy application of the sponge, for the
Doctors was a sponge full of fair water, to wash away some foul aspersions cast
upon him by the Brownists; the other a sponge full of vinegar to suck out and
drink, that the Prophecy might be fulfilled literally, Psalm. 69.2^.
when I was a thirst they gave me vinegar to drink: and if all who make use of
a sponge in the former kind, are to be termed executioners, your noted noters
of sermons, and elect Ladies, who cleanse their table-books, especially before
your fast sermons; of which all men now begin to surfeit* must own that odious
title. Yea, but though he wrote his own motto, the gentle lash, yet he would
fain see the white flag dyed in blood. A lie dyed in grain, for which thy
conscience will check thee one day, if thou have any: for in the very narration
of the Doctor, entitled the sponge, which thou here quotest and alludest unto,
one of the a^ticles preferred by the s^paratists, to the committee for
plundered Ministers against him, was, that he taxed the lecturers in London and
the suburbs for being bou^efeus and incendiaries, by in^^igating the people to
these civil, or rather uncivil and unnatural wars, crying out for the cause
of God, and quarrel of the Gospel, fight, fight; kill, kill; battle, battle;
blood, blood; nay, so far is the Doctor from wishing that the white fl^g should
be dyed in blood, that he desires from his heart, that there were never a flag
or streamer to be seen in the field, nor drum or phife to be heard, nor sword
to be drawn, nor pike to be advanced in these kingdoms; but that it would
please the Prince of peace, our only peacemaker, upon the lifting up of
millions of hands in public and private, upon the prayers and tea^s o^
Scotland, sighs and groans of England, and last ga^ping breath of Ireland, to
turn all our drums into tab^e^s, and phifes into Recorders, and swords into
syths, and pole-a^es into mattocks* and streamers into winding sheets, to wrap
up all the differences between Prince and people, church and common wealth,
together with all the direful effects thereof, and to bury them all in
perpetual oblivion: dulce est nomen pacis, and res ipsa p^rqu^m salutaris,
sweet is the name of peace, and the thing it self most healthful; qua non
solum homines, sed and agri, and tecta laetar^ videntur.

The King-fishers, as Plutarch writes, never breed but in a calm sea; and S.
James teaches us, that the fruits of righteousness are sown in peace of them
that love peace. On the contrary, we read in Plinie's Not. Hist. l. 9. c. 35.
that in the generation of Margarites, or pearl, if it thunder, the work of
nature is quite marred, and that which would have been an orient gem, becomes a
crude moisture: and how many pearls have of late miscarried, since the thunder
of war, both the Universities will tell you with pearls in their eyes. For it
is not only true* silent leges inter arma, but musae also, that the laws are
suspended in the times of bloody wars, but the Prophets too, and the Muses
also. As Marius was wont to ^ay, where there is cla^hing and clattering of
Arms, neither laws of God nor man can be heard; and where the laws cannot be
heard, all outcries are heard* and all outrages are committed: no man has
proprieti^ of or in any thing, save losses and wounds; nor can purchase ought
but spoils, nor build any where but upon ruins. O the thundering in the air,
and plundering on the land; the suspending and interdicting, not so much of
Preachers as Churches! O the carcasses as well of Cities as men, and Coffins
rather of houses then corpses, and rooting up rather of families and countries
then of gardens! These and other dismal effects of war extort from all
those, who have any thing yet to lose, and have not forfeited the liberty of
their speech with the liberty of their persons, this unanimous and harmonious
Vote, Come blessed peace. Nulla salus bello, pacem te p^scimus omnes.


Of all the messengers of Gods vengeance, the sword is the swif^^st; of all
swords the civil is the keenest, especially when it is wh^t with a pretext of
Religion. This is (...), gladius anceps, a two-edged sword, cutting on both
sides, English men, Protestants, brethren, branches of the same root, subjects
to the same Prince, ^ay, members of the same mystical body. In all other
wars the victory is joyful on the one side; but in this, like as in the
Cadmean, neither good for the conqueror nor for the conquered: for, (...).


He that conquers, weepeth for the loss of his contrymen, friends, kinsmen,
and allies; and he that is conquered, is lost.

Which side soever gains, the King and the Country loses ^ O dismal
Ensigns! O banned Banners! O stained Colors! O bloody Streamers! O
inglorious Arms! O ignoble Victories! the monuments whereof are not pillars,
or statues set up, or trophies erected, but downfalls and ruins.

^ella geri placuit nullos habitura triumphos?
Heu quantum terrae poterat pelagique parari.
Hoc quem civiles hauserunt sanguine dextrae?
A Corollarie.
BEcause the good parts of men, like pictures, are best seen at a distance,
(picturae eminus videndae, non comminus) and our great Prophet tells us, that
a Prophet is not esteemed in his own country; I will here, by way of
Corollarie set down the Eulogies of some eminent foreign Divines* concerning
him who is sideratus among his own, but desideratus among them: Basil. ^p. 62.
(...).
the reason of which difference of judgments is evident to be this; they look
upon him in his printed wor^s and in himself as he is: but these look on him
through the foul spectacle of a false relation, and through the deception of
their sight deem the dust and filth to be in him the object, whereas it is
indeed in their furred glass: let them rub and cleanse then spectacles, and he
will appear such to them, as he does to those forraigners, whose testimonies
here follow in their own language.

SECT. XVII. Testimonies of foreign Divines.
Amplissimo praesuli Johanni Kingo, Petrus Molinaeus S. P. D.
QUantum recreatus sum (praesul ampl^ss.) consuetudine and amiciti^ D. Featlei,
tantum ojus abitum graviter molesteque tuli; est enim vir perpaucorum hominum,
and quem cum penitus inspex^ri^ non possis non amare vehementor. Non vulgaris
est in homine doctrina, ingenium comptum and in numerato, tum morum integritas,
and pietas condita est mir^ suavitate. Quem quia Monachi and Sacrificul^
vestrates qui hic sunt senserunt gravem adversarium, non dubito quin ejus
discessu laetentur summopere. Solent enim Anglos generosos Lutetiae agentes
excipere insidiis, and quasi septos indagine in fraude^ inducere. Cum quibus
Featleius non semel congressus opima spolia retulit, and infirmos confirmavit
in fide, deditque experimentum, quantum intersit vestratis ecclesiae habere hic
ministrum Anglum, qui se tam perniciosis ingeniis tam fortiter opponat. A talis
viri complexibus avelli, quam mihi grave fuerit facile aestimabit, qui sciat
quanta hic sit paucita^ ejusmodi virorium. Sed quia vocatur ad majora, and apud
vos inventurus est majorem segetem qua^ metat, aequum est privatam meam
voluptatem posthabere amici commodis, and ecclesiae utilitati: nolui tamen, ut
discederet absque literis, quae testentur quanti faciam (vir magne) pietatem
tuam, and doctrinam singularem: quae te gubernaculis tantae ecclesiae admovit;
quam quia pascit feliciter, summaque fide, and diligentia, ut Christi servum
deceat; optamus ut Deus te servet incolumem, and tuos labores suo faevore
prosequatur. Vale. Lutetia pride. call. Junii, 1613.

A haut and puissant Seigneur, Guillaume Herbert in the Epistle dedicatorie,
prefixed to his translation of Doct. Featley's Handmaid of devotion into French.
Messire PHILIPPE HERBERT, Conte de Pembroke and Montgomery, Baron HERBERT de
Cardiffe, Baron de Parre and Rosse, en Kendall, Fitzhugh Marmion and S.
Quintin; Baron HERBERT de Shurland; Grande Chamberlain du Roy de la Grande
Bretagne, etc.
I En'ose passer outre de peur de perdre mes paroles, car scachant que l'
Autheur s' est rendu fameux en France, par ses doctes disputes avec plusieurs
Docteurs de l'Eglise Roman; and en ce pais par ses predications, and par
plusieurs beaux livres qu'il a mis sous la press, i'estime que mes louanges
n'adjousteroint, non plus a sa reputation qu'un verre d'eau a l'ocean. Ie diray
seulement qu'en son Ancilla pietatis, dedie a cette noble, illustre and
vertueuse princess la Duchess de Buckingham belle mere du Baron de Shurland
vostre fills aine, qui en espousant Madame Marie de Villiers, heritiere des
beautez de sa mere, and des vertus de son pere, a allie deux maisons qui ne
cedent a aucune autre en noblesse, antiquite, grandeurs, richesses and virtue,
il s'est rendu tout admirable, pourtant au dedans de ses discourse le suc and la
moele, and au dehors la douceur and la grace; qu'il est tout verdoyant en
fueilles, plaisant en fleurs, and abundant en fruits: Utque viret semper
laurus, nec fronde caduca
Carpitur, aeternum sic habet ille decus.


Ad Lectorem.
COmme l'autheur de ces prieres est un homme docte and devot, il a si bien
conjoinct la devotion and la doctrine, qu'un coeur glace peut estre rechauffe,
and un entendement offusque peut estre illumine, s'il jette les yeux sur ce
livre, and le lit avec attention; car toutes ces prieres sont autant de
Sermons, qui luy preschent journellement la pratique de quelque virtue, and luy
exposent quant and quant les mysteres de Religion. Qu'est il besoin d'en dire
tant? Li' les mon cher Lecteur, and tu diras, que comme le Soleil ne demand
point tant nos louanges que nos yeux, (car qui le peut voir sans le lover)
ainsi ce livre ne peut estre leu plustost que love.

Salutem a salutis authore.
Wolsgangus Meyer in his Epistle dedicatorie before his Dutch translation.
REverendiss. and clarissime domine Doctor Featleie; miraberis, sat s^^o,
literarum mearum conspectu; ac sane tenuitatis meae mo^estiaeque fuisset, iis
potius supersedere, quam sanctas viri tanti occupationes interturbando in
publica commoda peccare. Verum ea est nobilissimi Equitis, D. Flemingi,
serenissimi regis vestri apud nos Helvetios Oratoris apud me* authoritas, ut
potius fama, quam in obedientiae periculum subire maluerim. Ejus jussu suasuque
non modo dignitatis tuae amicitiam praesentibus ambire, sed Pietatis quoque
Ancillam Germanica civitate donare ausus fui. Si absque offensione tua id abs
me factum intellexero, digito coelum attingam. Mirantur nostri homines
devotionis aculeos, quos precationes tuae, in cordibus fidelium exerunt, and
post se relinquunt. Mentiar, si iis quicquam legerim simile, Perge (vir
clarissime) hujusmodi scriptis seculum hoc bear; haec itur ad astra. Quid vero
in Polemicis quoque valeas, The Grand Sacrilege, printed Land. 1630.
Magnum Ecclesiae Romanae Sacrilegium, tuaeque cum Pontificii^ habitae
disputationes indicant. Si per humanitatem tuam alios quoque genii and ingenii
tui foetus exosculari licuerit, beatum me praedicabo. Fatentur nostri
transmarini* se mihi ob translationem Perkinsii, Willets, Downami, Squirii,
aliorumque scriptorum Anglicanorum, plurimum debere: sed long plus propter
translationem precum tuatum* Versor ego jam in Apocalypseos explicatione.
Antequam vero lucubrationes meas judicio doctorum ventilandas exponam, eas
prius, cum uno vel altero Anglorum, qui postremi hoc profundum marc
transiverunt confer lubet. Been mereberis, vir praestantissime, si me eorum
participem reddideris, gratitudinem aliam non polliceor quam quae a mea
tenuitate, and amore gentis Anglicanae fluere potest: vale pancratice vir
excellentissime, and salve;

Datam die Paschatis, Anno 1641. Ab eo, qui te fert in oculis, Wolfgango
Meyero, S. Th. D. and ecclesiae Cathedralis, quae est Basileae concionatore.

Viro reverendo ac clarissimo Domino Francisco Taylero Ecclesiae Claphamensis
Rectori vigilantissimo.
NE omittas clarissimi Doctoris Featleii opera, quae a doctissimo viro Domino
Spanhemio, Professore Genevensi, prae aliis laudantur.

Datum Basileae, Martii 13. 1640. Joannes Schaevarenus.
Idem in literis dat. Basileae 4. September. 1641. Doctor Featleius quoad acumen,
and singularem in meditationibus suis profunditatem, videtur certe vel
celebratissimis omnium aevorum hoc in genere scriptoribus palmam disputare.
Quod si quae alia ejus extent praeter Clavem Mysticam, and Ancillam Pietatis,
me quaeso fac rescire.



Viro venerando, Domino Francisco Tayler^, verbi divini praeconi fidelissimo.
UT unicum addam, quaeso, proximis significa an Doctor Featleius adhuc sit in
vivis, anque volumen suum meditationum publicarum nondum praelo submiserit: de
cujus praestantia nullus dubito, est enim mihi ad manum ipsius Ancilla
Pietatis, quaem dominus Oliverius propriae manu dono dedit, and dominus
Wolfgangus Meyerus in lingua^ nostram vertit v^rnaculam: Sic ipse coram
testatus est.

Datum Brugis, December. 10. 1641. Tuus ex ass, and besse, Johannes Henricus
Homalin, indignus Christi servus.

To the right reverend father in God, JOHN KING, Lord Bishop of London, Peter
Moulin wishes, etc.
THe greater content and delight I received in the friendship and society of
Dr. Featley, the greater cut it was to me to part with him; for he is such a
man, as you shall meet with but few; and whom, when you know thoroughly* you
cannot but love entirely. He is a man of choice learning, of a nimble and ready
wit, of an honest and religious disposition, seasoned with marvelous
sweetness: at whose departure, your English Priests and Jesuits, because they
found him a sore adversary, no doubt did greatly rejoice: for their manner is
to hancker about Paris, and to lie in wait for English Gentlemen that travail
thither, that they may catch them in their nets, and engage them in the Romish
quarrel* with these Doctor Featley often encountered, and striving with them,
carried away the prize* and confirmed those that were weak in the faith; and
gave proof how much it concerned your Church to have here an able English
Minister to make strong opposition against such pestilent wits. To be deprived
of the company of such a man, and to be plucked out of his bosom, how grievous
a thing it was to me, any man may judge, who knows the scarcity of such men
h^re: but because he is called to an higher place, and shall reap a more
plentiful harvest with you, it is fit for me for the public good and profit
of the Church, to forgo my private interest.

Salvation in the Author of Salvation.
REverend and most worthy Doctor Featley, I know well you will wonder at the
sight of my letters; and indeed it had stood better with my meandness and
modesty to have spared them rather, then by interrupting the sacred employments
of so great a man* to offend against the public good: but such is the
authority of that noble Knight, Sir Oliver Flemming, his excellent Majesty's
Ambassador Lieger with us Helvetians, that, I had rather hazard my reputation,
then incur the danger of disobedience. At his command and entreaty I have taken
the boldness not only to renew our acquaintance in these my letters* but to
translate your Handmaid to Devotion into the Dutch language: if I may
understand that you take no offense at it, I shall think my self very happy:
our countrymen very much wonder at the sparkles of devotion, which your
prayers do first kindle in the hearts of the faithful; and then leave the
flame behind them: let no man believe me if ever I read any thing like them: go
on most worthy Sir, to make this age happy with such kind of writing; this is
the high way to Heaven: besides what your abilities are in controversies, the
Grand Sacrilege of the Romish Church* and your disputations with the Papists
do sufficiently demonstrate; if out of your courtesy I may embrace other
fruits of your learning and judgment, I shall acknowledge it as a special
favor: our countrymen beyond the seas confess they are much indebted to me
for translating the works of Perkins, Willet, Downham, Squire, and other
english writers, but far more for the translation of your Devotions. I am now
employed in expounding the Apocalypse: but before I do expose my labors to be
examined here of the learned, I mean to communicate them to one or other of the
English, who last crossed the seas: worthy Sir, you shall do me a great benefit,
if you shall make me partaker of them; I promise no other thanks then* what can
proceed from my slender abililities, and the love of the English nation.
Farewell most excellent Sir,

From him who has his eyes ever upon you, Wolfgangus Meyer, S. Th. Doct. and
Preacher at the Cathedral Church which is in Basile.

To the Reverend and Worthy Mr. FRAN. TAILOR, the watchful Pastor of the
Church of Clapham.
FOrget not to send the works of worthy Doctor Featley, which above other are
commended by that most learned man Spa^hemius, Professor of Geneva.

Dated at Basile, March 13. 1641. John Schevaren.
The same man in his letters dated at Basile, 4. Sept. 1641. Doctor Featley,
for his a^utenesse and singular depth in his meditations, does seem to put hard
for the victory with the most famous writers of all ages in this kind: but if
there be any other works of his extant, beside his Mystical Key, and his
Handmaid to devotion, pray certify me thereof.



To the Worshipful M. FRANCIS TAILOR, a most faithful Preacher of the Word of
God.
THat I may add but one thing: in the next letters certify me whether D.
Featley be yet alive, and whether he has not yet printed his volume of public
meditations; of the excellency whereof I make no doubt: for I have here present
at hand his Handmaid to devotion, which Sir Oliver Flemming gave me with his
own hand, and M. Wolfgangus Meyer has translated into our mother tongue, so he
himself professed before me.

Bruges, Dec. 10. 1641. Yours to the utmost of my estate and power Johan. Hen.
Homalin, the unworthy servant of Christ.

Harlenae, April 11 1644. Charissimo suo Bullo. S. P. D.
VAlde me perculit qui hic rumor percrebuit de arcta domini Featlei custodia.
Siccine tractari insignem veritatis pugilem de religione reformata optime
meritum? Idque ab iis, qui reform andae ecclesiae palmam aliis praeripere
omnibus satagunt? Neutiquam tamen hoc mirum aut insolens discipulo videri
debet, cum sciat ipsius magistrum a gente sua and magnis in Israele Rabbinis
duriora passum.

Tuus ex animo, Johan. Stablesius generos. Ger.

From Harlew, to his very loving friend Master Bull, health and happiness.
I Am sorry to hear of the close Imprisonment of that worthy Dr. Featley; what?
He who is* and ever has been so stout a Champion for religion, to be so used
by the reformers thereof? But let his own Nation, and not the disciple think it
strange, when his Master suffered so much cruelty from the great Rabbis of
Israel.

Yours from my heart, Ioh. Stables Gent.
April 11. 1644.

These testimonies of foreign Divines I had thought to suppress, because the
rehearsing them cannot but wound the modesty of the party, and may
peradventure whet the venomous tooth of envy against him: yet these coming to
my hands, and considering in what condition the party now is, I held it a
duty of Christian charity and equity, to impart them to the indifferent
reader for the vindicating his person and adding some light to his reputation
now laboring in the eclipse.

SECT. XVIII. The sum of D. F. his apology, reduced into two unanswerable
Dilemma's.
BEfore I put forth the horns of the Dilemma's, I will lay down certain
Lemma's, or assertions of undeniable verity.

First, after D. F. had delivered his mind concerning the Scottish Covenant,
(which he thought he might do safely in a free Assembly) and many days before
he wrote any Letter to the Primate of Armagh, it was spoken openly at
Westminster, that the Doctor should be voted out of the Assembly, as L.M. and
M. H. disclosed to D. F.

Secondly, that D. F. sent not to A. Warner to conveigh a Letter of his to the
Primate of Armagh, but A. Warner was sent to the Doctor, who, by probable and
plausible suggestions, drew this Letter unsealed from the Doctor, which he no
sooner received, but he showed the close Committee.

Thirdly, that when the Doctor wrote this Letter to Armagh, the Bishop was an
elect Member of the Assembly by the house of Commons, and both he and Doctor
Pr^d^aux* and Doctor Ward, and Doctor Brounerigg, and Doctor Oldisworth and
Doctor Harris, and others well affected to the Discipline and Liturgy of the
Church of England, were daily expected at the Synod, and some of them excused
their necessary absence* for a time from the Assembly, by Letters to the
Prolocu^or, whereof one was presented by Doctor Featley himself, and Doctor
Gouge.

Fourthly, that when the Doctor wrote his Letter to the Primate of Armagh,
there was no declaration or ordinance of either of the houses of Parliament,
forbidding correspondencie by Letters to Oxford, without leave of the houses,
or warrant from the Lord General; for the Doctors Letter was written about the
middle of September, 1643. and the ordinance prohibiting any under pain of
Sequestration, to hold intelligence with Oxford, bears date October. 22. 1643. a
full month after; so that the writing of the forenamed Letter, at that time,
was not so much as malum quia prohibitum; neither could the Doctor be censured
for it as a crime, because, as the Apostle teaches us, where there is no law,
there is no transgression.

5. Fifthly, that there was never any thing objected against the Doctor since
the ^^tting of the Parliament, or the Assembly, save the seven Articles
preferred against him by the Brownists, of which he was cleared, acquitted, and
discharged in a full house after a long debate, July 13. and his Letter to the
Primate of Ireland, which was written before the ordinance of Parliament made
it criminal to write any letters to Oxford without special leave.

Now Civicus, call to thee Britanicus, and Scoticus, and Coelicus; together
with Patriark W. and Independent N. and set all your wits upon the renters, to
render some colorable answer to these two insoluble dilemma's.

First, either the vote of the house of Commons is an undoubted oracle of truth
and justice, and a concludent and definitive sentence in point of law, or not.
If it be so, then is D. F. clear from all aspersions cast upon him. For in a
full house, July 12. he was acquitted of all the articles objected against him,
as appears in the record under the hand of H. Elsing, exemplified in the
vindication of D. F. p. 21. If it be not so, but as some heretofore have
conceived, only as the inquest of the Grand Jurie, and a preparatorie to the
full information of the cause upon oath, and finally sentencing it in the house
of Peers; then the vote passed against the Doctor in the house of Commons
alone, without any farther proceeding in the house of Lords, is of no force or
validity in law, and consequently D. F. is still Rector both of Lambeth and
Acton, and M. W. and M. N. are no better then intruders and usurpers of another
man's ^ight and possession. If the Allegations brought by the Brownists against
the Doctor were true, how came he to be acquitted July 12? if they were false,
how came he to condemned by the vote of the same house Sept. 29? And why were
those articles from which he was cleared, commanded to be read in Lambeth
Church, and made the ground of the sentence of sequestration against him, as if
he had been guilty of them?

Secondly, either-the unsealed letter, written to the Primate of Ireland,
contained in it some disclosing of secrets of state* or imputations upon the
Parliament, or some other criminal matter liable to just censure, or not.

If the former, 1. Why was the original Letter sent by order of the close
Committee to Oxford* If it gave any intelligence, they who sent it were the
intelligencers, not the Doctor: his letter intercepted at London could tell no
^ales at Oxford.

2. Why was not the original under the Doctors own hand showed him to
convince him? Or at least an authentical copi^, attested by the hand of a
notarie or some sworn witness, proving the accord thereof with the original?

3. Why were not the pretended offensive particulars put to the Doctor, when he
was convented before the Committee, and his punctual answer required thereunto?

4. Why was not the messenger or some other witness produced, to prove that
the pretended offensive particulars were in the letter signed with the Doctors
own hand?

5. Why all this while is the letter suppressed, and not published to this day
to clear the justice of the proceedings against the Doctor? If it were a
legal evidence against him, as it is urged in the sentence; why could the
Doctor by no means gain a copy of it* that he might interpret his own meaning,
and that his answer as well as the objections against him might be upon record?

Lastly, why was no cause expressed in the Warrant, for committing him to
Prison?

If the latter, i. e. if the letter be so far from containing in it any matter
subject to exception that it rather deserved approbation, as expressing much
loyalty to his Majesty, zeal of the true orthodox religion, and a reverend
regard and respect to the Assembly of Divines, with a desire to continue still
among them with his Majesty's leave.

In the Vote Sept. 29. against the Dr. (all the other articles are waved) see
the record supr.
1. Why then is this letter made the only ground of all the proceedings against
the Doctor?

2. Why for writing this letter unsealed, not to a stranger, but to a member of
the Assembly, was he voted out of both his Benefices, all his estate both
personal and real sequestered, his ^ooks (in which lay his chiefest treasure)
taken from him, his family turned out of house and home, his servants and
friends examined upon oath, concerning any plate, money, rents, or arrerages,
bills or bonds belonging to him, and all that could be found seized upon?

3. Why is he suspended from the exercise of his Ecclesiastical function?

4. Why has he been so long detained in prison, and there put to a great
charge without any allowance at all out of his sequestered estate worth above
400 pound per annum?

5. Why is such a severe hand kept over him, that in the space of eight months
and more, he can by no means obtain a most humble and conscionable petition to
be rendered in his behalf to the house?

Thou, whosoever read these things, and have with Philip of Macedon,
reserved one ear for the defendant, consider of all things impartially: and si
quam opinionem animo conceperis* si eam ratio conv^llit, si ratio labefactabit,
si verita^ extorquebit, ne repugnes; Cic. pro Cl^^as.
^amque animo aut libenti aut aequo remittas. Est eni^^ haec norma and forma
judiciorum aequorum, ut culpa sine invidia plectatur, and invidia sine culpa
ponatur: whatsoever prejudicate opinion thou may have taken of the Doctor, if
reason convince it, if reason overthrow it, if truth it self pluck it from
thee, give over thy hold: for this is the rule and pattern of all righteous
judgments, that guilt be censured without envy or spleen, and envy and
spleen without guilt be abandoned.

Postscript to the Reader.
COurteous Reader, I know thou expectest that here the Doctors whole letter
should be added. But for the avoiding of ta^toligies, because all the
substantial contents, so far as in the Diurnall^ and Mecurie they have been
heretofore objected to the Doctor, they are in in the Gentle Lash, and in this
Treatise related in several sections and fully answered; I shall entreat thee
to be contented with the remainder thereof, faithfully transcribed out of the
original sent to the Primate of Ireland.

Doctor Featley having written a letter to the Lord Archbishop of Armagh,
Mercurius Aulicus 41. week, 1643.
to give his Grace an account of his demeanor in the business of the Scottish
Covenant, was committed Prisoner to the Lord Peter's house, both his Livings
given away to others, and his Books bestowed upon that old instrument of
sedition, White of Dorchester. But it was the Doctors reasons against their
Covenant, which raised all this stir, which (the original Letter being now
in my hands) I shall here impart, and the pretended Houses who got a copy of
it, can testify it to be true. First the Doctor excepted against those words
[Wee will endeavor the true Reformed Protestants Religion in the Church of
Scotland, in Doctrine, Discipline, Worship, and Government, according to the
Word of God.] These words (said the Doctor) imply that the Worship, Discipline,
and Government of the Church of Scotland, is according to the Word of God,
which (said he) is more then I dare subscribe, much less confirm by an Oath.
For first, I am not persuaded that any platform of Government in each
particular circumstance is jure divino. 2. Admit some were, yet I doubt whether
the Scots Presbytery be that. 3. Although somewhat may seem to be urged out of
Scripture for the Scots Government* with some show of probability, yet far
from such evidence as may convince a man's conscience, to swear it is agreeable
to Gods Word. Next the Doctor excepted against that passage [I shall endeavor
the extirpation of Prelacy in the Church of England, etc.] I (says he) dare
not (...) that: First, in regard that I believe Episcopacie is an Apostolical
Institution. 2. That the Church never so flourished, as within 500 years after
Christ, when it was governed by Bishops. 3. That our English Episcopacy is
justified by the prime Divines of the Reformed Churches beyond the Seas. 4.
that our English Bishops now and ever since the Reformation* have disclaimed
all Papal dependency. 5. That the four General Councels (confirmed in
England by Act of Parliament, 1 Eliza.) assert Episcopacy. And 6. (which all
men had need consider) the Ministers of the Church of England, ordained
according to a form (confirmed by Act of Parliament) at their Ordination take
an Oath that they will reverently obey their Ordinary, and other chief
Minister of the Church and them to whom the Government and charge is committed
over them. This Oath I and all Clergymen have taken; and if we shall swear
the extirpation of Prelacy, we shall swear to for swear our selves. Lastly,
he excepted against that passage [I will defend the Rights and Privileges of
Parliament, and defend His Majesty's Person and Authority, in defense of the
true Religion and Liberties of the Kingdom.] Here (said he) the Members are
put before the Head; the Parliaments Privileges before the Kings Prerogative,
and the restraint of defending the King, only in such and such cases (...) to
imply something, which I fear may be drawn to ^ll consequence.

FINIS.

