Dr. DANIEL FEATLEY revived.

OR THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD.

A Sermon Preached at the Consecration of three Bishops, the Lords Elect of
Oxford, Bristoll, and Chester, in his Graces Chapel at Lambeth, May, 9. 1619.

By that most Learned Pillar of our Church Daniell Featley Dr. in Divinity,
Rector of Lambeth and Acton, Provost of Chelsey-Colledge, and Chaplain in
ordinary to his late Majesty. Unto whom is Dedicated his large Volume Clavis
Mystica.

And now Reprinted at the sole charge of George Vineing, sometimes Servant to
the right Honorable Henry Earl of Manchester, Lord Privy Seal, Deceased.

LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1661.

To the Courteous Reader.
Courteous Reader,
HErein is shown the Original and dignity of Bishops and the singular union
between Regal, and Episcopal right and Authority: drawn from Constantine,
after the Church begun to have a little vigor against the persecuting Arians.
And because the works of this famous Author should be had in Endless
remembrance by all Protestants, as he is and ever will be, to the terror of all
Papists. And if any shall demand why I the Reprinter should take upon me to
publish this famous Sermon: my answer is as ready as true, (because; for the
sincere love that I bear unto the truth; and the Endless true love that I owe
unto my Deceased spiritual Father, who begat me in 1624. out of blind Popery
from dumb'd and dead Idols; and brought me into the clear light, to serve the
true and living God) that he may have glory by it, and every Reader the benefit
of it: I have thought no time so seasonable, nor none of all the Authors works
so suitable as this small volume is, that all those who never knew his person,
much less were conversant with him, or never read him in his large field of
his manifold unparalled works, may herein have a most sweet taste of his
worth, which may make them desirous to know him more in his larger works: so
this small piece is to inform the ignorant, to reform the obstinate, to
conform the moderate: and to confirm all to communicate in the Church of God.
That all Christians may so do, is the hearty desires and daily prayers, of the
meanest of the Sons of the Church.

G. V.

THE FAITHFUL SHEPHERD.
A Sermon Preached at the Consecration of three Bishops, the Lords Elect of
Oxford, Bristoll, and Chester, in his Graces Chapel at Lambeth, May 9. 1619.
1 PET: 5. 2, 3, 4. Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof, not by constraint, but willingly: not for filthy lucre, but
of a ready mind: not as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to
the flock. And when the chief shepherd shall appear, you shall receive a Crown
of glory that fades not away.
Most Reverend, Right Honorable, Right reverend, Right worshipful, etc.
ARchilocus Arist. R^^. c. 2.
sharpning his quill, and dipping it in gall against Licambes; that his
satirical invectives might be more poignant, puts the pen in Archilocrus his
fathers hand, and by an elegant prosopopeia makes him upbraid his son with
those errors and vices, which it was not fit that any but his father should in
such sort rip up. And Orat. pro M. Coeli^.
Tully being to read a lecture of gravity and modesty to Clodia, which became
not his years or condition, raises up, as it were, from the grave, her old
grandfather Appius Caecus, and out of his mouth delivers a sage and fatherly
admonition to her. In like manner (Right Reverend) receiving the charge from
you to give the charge unto you at this present, and being overruled by
authority to speak something of the eminent authority and sacred dignity into
which ye are now to be invested; I have brought upon this holy stage the first
of your rank, and auncientest of your Apostolical order, to admonish you with
authority both of your general calling, as Pastors set over Christ's flock;
and your special, as Bishops set over the Pastors themselves: That in the
former words, (...) feed; this in the latter, (...), bishoping, or taking the
oversight of them. Both they are to perform, 1 Not by constraint. 2 Not for
lucre. 3 Not with pride.


1 Not by constraint: constraint stands not with the dignity of the Apostles
successors.

2. Not for filthy lucre: filthy lucre sorts not with Gods Priests.

3 Not in, or with Lord-like pride: Lord-like pride complyeth not with the
humility of Christ's Ministers.

As Tully the aged wrote to Cato the ancient, of old age; so in the words of my
text Peter the Elder writes to Elders, of the calling, life and reward of
Elders in the Church of God.

1 Their function is feeding, and overlooking Christ's flock, enjoined, ver. 2.
2 Their life is to be a pattern of all virtue, drawn ver. 3. 3 Their reward is
a Crown of glory, set before them ver. 4.
1 Their function sacred, answerable to their calling, which is divine. 2 Their
life exemplary, answerable to their function, which is sacred. 3 Their reward,
exceeding great, answerable to the eminency of the one, and excellency of the
other.
May it please you therefore to observe out of the words, 1 For your
instruction, what your function is. 2 For correction, what your life should be.
3 For comfort, what your reward shall be.


As the costly Exodus 28. 14.
ornaments of Aaron were fastened to the Ephod with golden chains of writhen
works, so all the parts and points of the Apostles exhortation are artificially
joined and tied together with excellent coherence, as it were with chains of
gold. This chain thus I draw through them all. Feed.


1 There are some of the Ministry fitter to be fed and led like sheep, than to
feed or lead like shepherds; they are hunger-starved themselves, having no
better provision than the Apostles had in the wildernenesse after Christ's
miraculous feast, Mat. 14. 20.
a few baskets full of broken meat. Saint Tantae charitatis sunt per quos nobis
fluenta coelestia emanant, ut antea effundere quam effundi velint, loqui quam
audire paratiores, prompti docere quod nunquam didicerunt. Bernard.
Bernard admireth at their Charity, saying, they by whom the streams of
heavenly doctrine flow to us, are of such superabundant charity, that they
desire to empty themselves before they are half full, nay many before they have
any drop of saving knowledge, and divine learning, most ready to deliver that
which they never received, and teach what they never learned. Such a one was
that Lactant. divin. instit. l. 5. Cum coecus ipse esset, alios illuminate
suscepit in se.
Bithynian whom Lactantius takes up for taking upon him to cure dim and dark
eyes, when himself was stark blind. I find nothing whereunto I may fitter
resemble them, than to squibs or small fireworks, which as soon as they take
fire, never leave popping and shooting, and making a hidious noise, till all
the powder be spent: so these having rammed a little stuff together, and being
kindled with blind zeal, never leave shooting and spitting fire in the pulpit,
as long as their poor provision lasts. These men howsoever they are liable to
many other exceptions, yet all men will free them from the imputation which
Felix laid upon Saint Paul Act. 26. 24.
much learning has made thee mad. And as secure are they from the danger of
the killing letter, as the Poet in his witty Epigram plays upon an ignorant
Priest in time of Popery. Tho. Morus in epig.
Tu been cavisti ne te ulla occidere possit
Litera, nam nota est litera nulla tibi.
Thou have taken good care that the killing letter shall not hurt thee, for
thou know never a letter in the book. The measures of the Sanctuary
contained twice as much as the common measures, the shekel of the Sanctuary
weighed down two other shekels; to show us that the gifts of a Pastor ought to
carry a double proportion to those of his flock, else he had need to be fed
himself; and is not qualified for this duty required in my text, in the first
place, Feed

2 Of those that are able to feed, The flock.
some feed themselves, not their flock; like Varus, taxed by Velleius
Paterculus, who came poor into a rich Province, but went rich out of the poor
Province; making a very gainful exchange, by leaving them the poverty he
brought with him, and taking with him the wealth he found there. Feed ye not
your selves but the Flock.

3 Of those that feed the Flock, Of God.
some feed not Gods Flock but Satan's heard; teaching in Conventicles of
Heretics, or Schismatics. Waspes have their hives as well as Bees, and Pirates
have their Pilots as well as honest Merchants: be not ye like them; feed not
the droves of Satan or Antichrist, but the Flock of God.

4 Of those that feed the Flock of God, Among you.
some feed not the Flock which is among them, they are (...), Bishops in other
men's Diocesses; they thrust their sickle into another harvest, and discharge
without a charge: they may rightly say with the Spouse in the Canticles, Cant.
1. 6
They have made me (or rather I have made my self) a keeper of vineyards, but
mine own vineyard I have not kept. If the frogs Plin not. hist* l. 8. Ranae
mutae sunt etiam nune in Seryplio insula, eaedem alio tranflatae canunt, etc.
Seryphus could speak they would claim kindred of these men; for as those frogs
in the Island where they are bred are dumb, and make no noise at all, but
carried to any other Country, fall on singing or croaking, and never give over:
so these are silent and quiet in their own cures, but when they are out of them
none can be quiet for them: they who can scarce afford a Sermon in a month at
their own home, making nothing of lecturing every day in the week abroad.

5 Of those that feed the flock of God which is among them, Taking the
oversight thereof.
that is, preach painefully and powerfully, some are not (...) Overlookers;
they that take the oversight of their flock, they have not an eye to their
life and manners, they never use the reine, or rather curb of ecclesiastical
discipline; forgetting that in the Ark of God, together with the Table of the
Testimony, and the Pot of Manna, the Rod of Aaron that budded was laid up: and
that where Psalm. 23. 4.
David compares God to a shepherd, he makes mention both of his rod and
staff.

6 Of those that feed the flock of God that is amongst them, Not by constraint.
and take the oversight thereof, that is, both rule well, and labor in the
word, some deserve not the double honor, because they do it by constraint, not
wilingly, like those Calves, and Bullocks, and Rams, that were pulled and haled
to the Altars of the heathen gods, wherewith Plin. l. 8. not. hist. c. 45. Hoc
quoque notatum est vitulos ad aras humeris hominum allatos, non fere litare nec
aliena hostia placari deos, nec trahente se ab aris.
Pliny observes that the Paynim deities were never pleased, nor gave good
success to them which offered such sacrifice unto them. Nature it self gives a
prerogative to that Plin. not. hist. l. 1. c. 15. In omni melle quod per se
fluit, ut mustum, oleumque quod appellatur acaeton, maxim laudabile est. Not
for filthy lucre.
honey which drops out of the comb, before that which is forced or squized
out; and to that Plin. not. hist. l. 12. c. 15. Inciduntur bis, sudant autem
sponte priusquam incidantur stact^n dictam.
oil which sweats out of the Myrrh trees, issuing from thence of its own
accord, before that which runs after pricking or incision. The noblest
palate wine is made of that liquor of the grape which spinneth out upon the
smallest touch, without any violent pressure. Theog. gnom.
(...).

7 Of those that take the oversight of the flock, not by canstraint but
willingly, some do it not freely, or of a ready mind, but for filthy lucre. The
Echo taught by Erasmus, rings this in the ears of the Laity, and they hear it
brief, Quid venatur sacerdos? (...). And Plat. in Bon. 3. Re^vera pace bonorum
dicam, multi episcopatum desiderant, explendae avaritiae suae causa, non quo
communi utilitati ut eorum exposcit officium and nomen consulant: quaeritur
enim quantum reddat episcopatus, non quot oves pascuae in eo ^int.
Platina gives a touch thereof in the life of Pope Goodface the third; the
first question is, after a man is chosen Pope, what is the Bishopric of Rome
worth? Filthy lucre carries such an ill savor with it, the precious ointment
of Aaron cannot take away the smell thereof: Covetousness is a spot in any
coat, but a stain in the linen Ephod: what so unfit? what so incongruous? nay
what so opprobrious and scandalous, as for those who in scripture are styled
Angels, and should like Angels, by continual meditations, and divine
contemplations behold the face of God in heaven, to turn earth-wormes, and lie
and feed upon very muck? How dare they deliver the holy Sacrament with those
hands that have received bribes? or are defiled with the price of Blood? or are
foul with telling their use-money? Holiness (which of all other most befitteth
our sacred calling) in the Greek implies a contradiction to earthlinesse:
(...) which we render holy, is all one in that language as unearthly. If a
glass be soyled with dust, or besmeared with dirt, it reflecteth no image at
all: in like manner if the mind be soyled with the dust of earthlinesse, the
image of God cannot appear in it; the fancy of such a man will represent no
spiritual form, conceive no divine or heavenly imaginations. If we seek our
own and not the things that are Jesus Christ's, the Goods not the good of our
flock, we lose the first letter of our name in the Prophet Ezekiel. 3. 17. Son
of man, I have made thee a watchman.
Ezekiel, and of speculatores become peculatores, and are not to be termed
praedicatores but praedatores. But I will not make this blot bigger by
unskilfully going about to take it out.

8 Of those that feed, and take the oversight of Gods flock that is among
them, not by constraint, but willingly, Not as Lords.
not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind, some carry themselves, like Lords
over the flock, not as ensamples to their flock, they go in and out before them
in a lordly gate, (...), Council. Carthag. 4. (...). fumosus seculityphus.
in swelling pride, not in exemplary humillty, seeking rather to overruled them
with terror and violence, then rule over them with the spirit of meekness.
These though they are put up in the highest form, yet have not learned the
first lesson in the school of Christianity, Mat. 11. 29.
to be meek and lowly in heart: neither understand they that divine graces,
which are the plants of Paradise, are like to the tree in the Poet that bear
golden boughs. -- Virg. Aen. 6.
Quae quantum vertice ad auras
Aetheras tantum, radice in Tartara tendit.
whose root was just so much beneath the earth as the top was in height above
it. The higher Gods Saint grow upwards to perfection, the deeper they take root
downward in humility, considering that they have nothing of their own, but sin;
and what a foolish and impious sin of pride is it, to be proud of sin? He that
presumes on his own strength, says holy Austine, is conquered before he fight.
To repose trust in our selves, says Bern. sermon. 20. in vigil. not. dom.
Sibimet ipse fidere non, fidei sed perfidiae est, nec confidentiae sed
diffidentiae magis, in semetipso habere fiduciam.
Bernard, is not of faith, but perfidiousnesse, neither breeds it true
confidence, but diffidence. To be proud of knowledge, is to be blind with
light: to be proud of virtue is to poison himself with the Antidote: and to be
proud of authority, is to make his rise his downfall, and his ladder his ruin.
It is the dark soil that gives the Diamond its brightest luster: it is the
humble and low, and obscure conceit of our own worth that gives luster and
grace to all our virtues and perfections, if we have any; Moses glory was the
greater because his face shined, and he knew not of it.

Thus have I numbered unto you the several linkes of the Apostles golden chain
of instructions for Pastors, now let us gather them together in a narrow room.

1 Be not such as need to be fed but are able and willing to feed.

2 Feed not your selves but the flock.

3 Feed not the flock or droves of Antichrist, but the flock of God.

4 Feed the flock of God, not out of your charge, or without you, but the flock
of God which is among you.

5 Content not your selves with feeding them only with the word and Sacrament,
but over-looke them also, have an eye to their manners.

6 Do this not constrainedly, but willingly.

7 Not out of private respects, but freely.

8 Not proudly but humbly, not to show your authority over the flock, but to
set before them an ensample in your selves of humility, meekness, temperance,
patience, and all other virtues.

Thus feed the flock of God that is among you, thus rule those whom you feed,
thus carry your selves toward those whom you rule, thus give good ensample in
your carriage; and when the chief Shepherd and Bishop of your souls Christ
Jesus shall appear, you shall receive instead of a Crosier a Scepter, of a
Miter a Crown, of a Diocese upon earth a Kingdom in heaven.

You see I have a large and plentiful field before me, yet I purpose at this
time to follow the example of the Apostles, Matthew: 12. 1.
who as they passed through the corn field, plucked only an ear or two, and
rubbed them in their hands.

To rub the first ear, that you may see what grain it yields. To feed, says
l. 1. de Romans pont. c. 15. In scripturis pascere passim accipitur pro regere,
ut Psalm. 2. reges cos in virga ferrea in Heb. est pasce (...) and Apoc. 2: 27.
(...).
Bellarmine, signifies to rule with princely authority, to sway the scepter as
a spiritual Prince over Christ's flock; and to this purpose he alleges that
text in the Apocalypse, 2. 27. (...) he shall feed (or rule) them with a rod of
iron, hard feeding for Christ's sheep; he had need to have an Estridge's stomach
that can digest this interpretation here. Feed, not overruling ver. 3. that
is, overruled them, not feeding: this is as natural an interpretation of this
Scripture, as the gloss upon the word statuimus in the Canon law, id est,
abrogamus, or statuimus quod non; we enact, that is, we abrogate; we command,
that is, we forbid; we appoint this, that is, we appoint that this shall not
be. If this be a right interpretation of this place, and the other parallel to
it in Saint Ioh. 20. 17.
John, then St. Bernard. de considerat. ad Eugen. l. 2. I ergo tu and tibi
usurpare aude aut dominans apostolatum, autapostolicus dominatum, etc.
Bernard was in the wrong, for he infers the clean contrary from it; and which
is most considerable, in a book of consideration dedicated to the Pope himself:
Peter could not give thee that which he had not, what he had, that he gave
thee, care over the Churches: but did he not also give thee dominion? hear
what himself says, not as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being made
examples to the flock: least any man should think that this was spoken only in
humility, and not in truth, it is the voice of the Lord in the Gospel, Kings of
the Nations bear rule over them, but it shall not be so with you; it is plain
that Lord-like dominion is forbidden to the Apostles: go too therefore now,
and assume to thy self if thou dare, either the office of an Apostle, if thou
be a Lord, or Lord-like dominion if thou be an Apostle. Howbeit I deny not that
the word (...) here used, sometimes signifies to rule with Princely authority,
and Lord-like command, both in Scriptures and profane Writers: as Hom l^. 1.
Homer styles King Agamemnon (...) the Shepherd of the people: so God himself
calls Cyrus his Esaias 44. 28. That says of Cyrus, he is my shepherd
Shepherd; and which is very observable, Cyrus as if he had taken notice of
this name imposed by God upon him before his birth, was wont usually to say,
Xen. Cyr. paed. l. 8. (...)
That a good Prince was like a good Shepherd, who can by no other means grow
rich, than by making his flock to thrive under him; the prosperity of the
subject is not only the honor but the wealth also of the Prince. All this
makes nothing for the Popes triple Crown, to which he lays claim by virtue
of Christ's threefold pasce, or feed (Ioh. 21. 15, 16, 17.) for neither does
(...) originally, or properly, nor usually signify to reign as a King,
especially when oves meae, or grex domini, my sheep, or the flock of God is
construed with it; nor can it be so taken here, or Ioh. 21. as the light of
texts set together reflecting one upon the other will clear the point. For that
which Christ enjoyneth Peter, Ioh. 21. that Peter here enjoyneth all Elders:
the words of the charge are the same, Feed my sheep, there; Feed the flock of
God, here. But Saint Peter enjoyneth not all Elders in these words to rule with
sovereign authority as Kings over the whole flock, or as Lords over their own
peculiar: for this he expressly forbids, ver. 3. therefore to usurp
authority over the whole Church, or to domineere over any part thereof, is not
to feed according to Christ's charge to Saint Peter, or Saint Peter's to all
Elders. What is it then? if you have reference to the Etomology (...) is (...),
to feed, as the word imports in the original, is to reside upon our cure, or
abide with our flock, where the spouse is commanded to seek Christ, Cant. 1. 8.
go thy way forth to the footsteps of the flock. And indeed where should the
Sentinel be but upon his watch tower? Where the Pilot but at the stern? where
the intelligence but at his orb? where the Sun but within his ecliptic line?
where the candle but in the canble-stick? where the diamond but in the ring?
where the shepherd but among his flock? whom he is to feed, for whom he is to
provide, of whom he is to take the oversight, to whom he ought to be an
example; which he cannot be if he never be in their sight. But because this
observation is grounded only upon the Etymology, I will lay no more stresse
upon it. The proper and full signification of the word is, pastorum agere, to
play the good shepherd, or exercise the function of a Pastor, which consists
in three things especially.

1 Docendo quid facere debeant. 2 Orando ut facere possint. 3 Increpando si non
faciant.
1 In teaching those of his flock what they ought to do. 2 In praying that they
may do it. 3 In reproving if they do it not.
All which may be reduced to a threefold feeding. 1 With the Word, Ier. 3. 2
With the Sacraments, Ier. 3. 15. I will give you pastors according to mine own
heart, that shall feed you with knowledge and understanding.
Apoc. 2. and Ioh. 6. 3 With the Rod, Micah 7. 14.


To feed with the Word and Sacrament is the common duty of all Pastors, but to
feed with the rod is reserved to Bishops: they are Seraphims, holding the
spiritul sword of excommunication in their hands, to guard the tree of life:
whose special office, and eminent degree in the Church is implied in the word
(...), which the vulgar latin renders providentes, but Saint Aug. de civ. l
19. c. 19. Supervidentes appellantur, ut intelligant se non esse episcopos qui
praeesse dilexerint, non prodesse.
Augustine more agreeable to the Etymology, supervidentes, super-visors, or
super-intendents. Yet this is but a general notation of the name; every Bishop
is a super-visour or over-seer, but every super-visour is not a Bishop. The
Lacedaemonian Magistrates were called Epori, which is an equivalent style to
Episcopi: and Eusebius. vit. Constant. (...).
Constantine the great spoke as truly as piously to his Bishops; Ye reverend
Fathers are Bishops of them that are within the Church, but I of them that are
out of the Church: where your pastoral staff is too short, I will piece it out
and lengthen it with my scepter. (...) in the most proper and restrained
signification is to exercise Episcopal Authority (or perform the office of a
Bishop) which consists, in two things:

1 In ordaining. 2 Ordering.
1 Giving orders. 2 Keeping order.
Saint Paul gives Tit. 1. 5.
Titus both in charge: for this cause I left thee in Crete, to ordain Elders in
every Church, there is the first, to wit, ordination; and to set in order
things that are wanting, or (...), to correct things out of order, there is the
second viz. ordering or reformation. Timothy likewise the first Consecrated
Bishop of Ephesus is put in mind of these branches of his Episcopal function:
of the first, 1 Timothy 5. 22. ^9.
Lay hands suddenly on no man: of the second, Against an Elder receive not an
accusation but under two or three witnesses; Ve^. 20.
Them that sin rebuke before all, that others also may fear. Be not ver. 22.
partaker of any man's sins, to wit, by not censuring or punishing them. These
two offices to be most necessary in the Church, every man's reason and common
experience will inform us. For how shall we have Ministers at all without
Ordination? and how shall we have good Ministers or people without visitation?
Now for Presbyters or Ministers, who are equal in degree to exercise authority
one over the other, and lay hands upon themselves, and so to become their own
ghostly Fathers, is to make order it self a confusion. Therefore God in the law
put a difference between the Priests and Levits: and Christ in the Gospel
between the Apostles and Disciples; and the Apostles after Christ's death
between Bishops and Elders. Which the primitive Church kept so religiously,
that to oppose it in practice was accounted no less them Act. Council. 1.
Chalced. (...).
sacrilege; in doctrine, flat heresy. The first that I find ever to have gone
about to break down the partition wall between Bishops and Presbyters, was
Aerius, a man like this name, was light and aerie, easily carried away with the
wind of ambition. For as Epiph haeres. 71. Cum episcopatus spe excidisset
Eustathiopost habitus ut se consolaretur hanc haeresem excogitavit. (...).
Apiphanius writes, standing for a Bishopric, and missing it, he invented
this heresy to comfort himself; and because he could not raise up himself to
the high rank of Bishops, he sought to pull them down to his lower rank of
Elders. What difference, says he, is there between a Bishop and Priest? none
at all, their order, and honor, and dignity, is one and the self-same. But for
this his saucy malepartnesse he felt the smart of the Crosier staff, and for
ranking Bishops among Presbyters or Elders, he was himself ranked among
heretics. God who made greater and lesser lights in the firmament, and set
Angels in ranks one above another, has erected an See King James his Cygnea
Cantio. Bilson his perpetual government.
Hierarchy upon earth: which as he has ever yet, so I hope he still will to
the end of the world establish and support and propagate it, as it has
wonderfully supported and propagated the Church. Bancroft his survey of the
holy pretended discipline, c. de episc.
The bounds thereof extended by the preaching, and kept by the Government of
Bishops; the Heretics and Schismatics in all ages suppressed by Councels and
Synods of Bishops; Downam his sermon at the consecration of the Bishop of Bath
and Wells. Andrew opus posthum.
the Rubricks of Ecclesiastical Kalendars colored with the blood of so many
martyred Bishops, are sufficient evidence thereof. And as the Church soon after
her first plantation exceedingly prospered under the shade of James Bishop of
Jerusalem, Titus of Crete, Timothy of Ephesus, Mark of Alexandria, Ignatius of
Antioch, Antipas of Pargamus, Polycarpe of Smyrna, Hallier defenc. ecclesiast.
hier. l. 1.
and diverse others ordained by the Apostles, or their immediate successors; and
in succeeding ages received her best sap and nourishment from the Greek and
Latin Fathers, Aurelius vindiciae censurae tit. 3. de epis. and curatis.
who for the most part were Bishops: so Beza de grad. Min. evang. cap. 18: Non
tantum insignes Dei martyrs, sed etiam praestantissimos doctores and pastore.
Beza himself acknowledges it to have been the singular happiness of the
Church of England, which he prays may be perpetual, that this reverend and
sacred order has yielded not only famous Martyrs, but also most excellent
Doctors and Pastors, As the Poet blazing the virtues of the Emperor then
reigning, said, Mart. epig. l. 1.
Te volet invictus pro liberate Camillus.
Si Cato redd^tur, Caesarianus erit.
Brutus and Camillus and Cato, the greatest sticklers for the liberty of the
Commonwealth, if they were now alive would turn Royalists: so we may truly
affirm that the greatest enemies of Episcopal Jurisdiction, could not but
approve of such Bishops as now sit at the stern in our Church. And what if all
are not such? must the whole order suffer for their sake? Ovid. l. 1. de ^^rt.
Desine paucorum diffundere crimen in omnes. lay not upon all the fault of
some. If one or other bud of Aarons rod, the Bishopric of Rome and the
dependants thereon, are turned into serpents, shall the whole rod be cast out
of the Arc, and Ionah's gourd put in the place thereof? I mean the new sprung
up mushrome, the Government of lay Elders; Elders whereof no Elder age of the
Church ever took notice, and younger cannot tell yet how to Christen them:
because they are a kind of epicoens, of both genders, plant-animals, partly
Animals, partly plants* like a sort of Nuns at Bruxels, partly regular, partly
secular; in the morning wearing the cowles and habit of Recluses, in the
afternoon the feathers and other attire of Gallants. For they are
Clergy-laickes, and Lay-clerkes: of their clergy they are, for they together
with their Ministers ordain Ministers, and inflict Ecclesiastical censures; and
yet laics they are, for they may not preach nor baptize. Churchmen they are,
for they bear rule in the Church; yet Churchmen they are not, for they may
receive no maintenance from the Church. They are the Elders that rule well, and
labor, not in the word, for such they will have intimated by St. Paul, yet the
honor which their own Interpreters there expound honorable maintenance, is
not due unto them. Spare me Men, Fathers, and Brethren, if I spare not them who
go about to bereave us of our spiritual Fathers, qui saeviunt in plagas and
vulnera ecclesiae, who seek to ruin the ruins, and spoil the very spoils of
Ecclesiastical dignity and distinction left among us. To place such Bats as
these, rather mice than birds, must Christ's Apostles and their successors be
displaced, and all ranks of Ecclesiastical order confounded: is there any
justice in this, to break all Crosier staves, and tread all Miters under foot,
and tear all Rochets in pieces. Vnius obnoxam and furias Ajacis Oilei. for the
usurpation and tyranny of one Bishop the Pope of Rome? By this reason take away
the Reverend order of the Apostles for Judas sake, take away the sacred order
of Prophets for Balaams sake, take away the sovereign order of Princes for
Iulians sake, take away the glorious orbs of stars for the stars sake called
Apoc. 8. 11.
wormwood in the Apocalypse, nay take away the highest regiment of Angels for
Lucifers sake, and the rest of his faction, sometime in the highest order in
heaven, but now reserved in chains of darkness till the great day.

This may suffice to be spoken of, and for your calling: two words of the two
duty; employed in the words, (...) and (...), feed and take the oversight. You
are Pastors and Bishops, make good your titles, feed as Pastors, take the
oversight of your Diocese as Bishops. The three orders in the Church,
Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, resemble the three faculties of the soul, the
vegetative, sensitive, and reasonable. For as the sensitive faculty includes
the vegetative, and aliquid amplius and somewhat more, to wit, sense; and the
reasonable implies the sensitive, and aliquid amplius and somewhat more, to
wit, reason; for a Priest implies a Deacon, and aliquid amplius; and a Bishop
implies a Priest, and aliquid amplius. Ye are (my Lords) both Bishops and
Priests, and as you are invested into a double honor, so you have a double
charge: as Bishops you are to rule well; as Priests to labor in the word; as
Priests you are to preach, as Bishops to ordain Priests, and countenance
Preachers: as Priests you are to smite simony and sacrilege, schism and
heresy, impurity and impiety, gladio oris, with the sword of your mouth; as
Bishops, ore gladii, with the mouth, that is, the edge of the sword, the sword
of ecclesiastical censures which Christ has put into your hand: bear not this
sword in vain, be not pertakers of the sins of any of the Clergy, or bribes
of the laity; use this your sword for, not against the Church. V^^g* Aen. 4.
Non hos quaesitum munus in usus.

Hold not too strict a hand over your too much oppressed Clergy; let it not be
said of the clergy of your Diocese, as it was said of the Roman soldiers
under Severus, that they were more afraid of their Captain then of the enemy.
For as St. Paul speaks to the Corinthians, if I make you sad who shall
comfort you? so I may say to you, if you dishearten poor Ministers who shall
comfort them, or stand for them? the laity? no, they take two much of the
nature of the stone, from whence they have their name given them, (...)
signifies people, (...) (...) stone.
(...) from (...): if a faithful Minister of Jesus Christ, if a diligent
preacher, that spends all his Oil and Week, his body and soul to give them
light, sue but for his dues, especially if he mutter but a word against their
great Diana, their sacrilegious customs, which often deprive the Ministers of
the Gospel of nine parts of the Tenth, and leave them but decimam decimae, the
tenth of the tenth: they will all fall upon him, and unless your power and
authority relieve him, grind him to powder. They use their godly Preachers,
whom the world cannot parallel, as the Hawk in Hesiod dealt with the melodious
Nightingale, Hesiod. op. and ^^ies, l. 1.
they plum them and devour them, (...), although they be the sweetest singers
of Israel. Many of them after they have spent their strength in preaching in
season and out of season, catechizing and lecturing on the Lords day, and on
the week days, may truly say as Synesius sometimes complained that they
carried nothing away from their parishes or cures, but bonam conscientiam and
malam valetudinem, a good conscience, and an ill crazed body.

No more of (...), taking the oversight: but a word of (...), feed, lest
whilst I exhort you to feed, I detain you from better feeding, viz. upon the
blessed Sacrament now set before you. As in Churches and Noblemens Halls, where
there hang great Candlesticks with many branches, the lights are first let down
to be tinded, and when they are fully lighted, then they are drawn up by
degrees to give light to the whole room: so our Church first sends her sweet
wax lights, made and formed in private schools, down to the Universities to be
tinded, and when they are fully enlightened with knowledge, then draws them up
by degrees, first to pastoral charges, then to dignities, Deanaries, and
Bishoprics; not that then they should be put out, but to the end that as they
are set higher they should give more light. You are, Right Reverend, the silver
Trumpet of Zion, whom God lifts up on high that you may sound the louder and
shriller, as bells are hung higher in the steeple, that they may be heard
further. Let it be never said of you as it was of Saul, that when he came to
the high places he made an end of prophesying. The more God has honored you,
the more you ought to honor him; the higher Christ has preferred you, the
more you ought to love him, and show this your love by your treble diligence in
feeding his sheep. To which end these words, Peter love thou me? feed my
sheep, etc. are by the order of our Church appointed to be read for the Gospel
at your consecration. I grant you feed many ways: you feed when you appoint
pastors to feed, you feed when you instruct them how to feed, you feed when you
censure them for not feeding their flocks, or not feeding them with wholesome
food, you feed in a Synod when you make good Canons, you feed in your
visitations when you encourage good Ministers, and reform abuses in the Church;
lastly, you feed at your tables when you keep good hospitality. And after all
these manners the Apostle; and ancient Fathers fed; yet they thought themselves
in danger of a vae, or curse if they fed not by preaching the Gospel in their
own persons. Woe be to me, says St. 1 Cor. 9. 16.
Paul, if I preach not the Gospel. Saint Gregory was a Bishop himself, and
that of a very large and troublesome Diocese (for he was Pope of Rome) yet he
deeply charge Bishops with this duity, thus inferring upon Christ's words to
Peter, love thou me? feed, etc. Greg in verb. evang. secundum Johan. Si
dilectionis argumentum est cura pastoralis, quisquis virtutibus pollens gregem
Dei renuit pascere, summum pastorem convincitur non amare.
If care and diligence in a pastoral charge be an argument, and certain
evidence of the love we bear to Christ, whosoever furnished with gift, and
abilities thereunto, refuses to feed Christ's flock, is to be taken pro
convicto, that he bears no good affection to the chief Pastor and Bishop of our
souls. If the love of Christ constrained us not to stir up the grace of God
in us, which we have received by imposition of hands, and even like lambs to
spend our selves to give light to our flocks, yet methinks the excellency of
this function should inflame us thereunto. Where can we fix our thoughts with
more delight and contentment than upon heaven and heavenly objects? how can we
put our tougues to a better use than to declare the word of life? to preach the
Gospel of the Kingdom? to sound out our makers praises? how can our hands be
better employed than about the seals of grace? Hear Saint Chrysostom. homil. 1.
in Matthew
Chrysostom open his golden mouth, and weigh his words in the scales of the
sanctuary; See thou not, says he, how thine eyes water whilst thou stayest
in the smoke, but are cleared and refreshed if thou go out into the open air,
or walk a turn in a pleasant garden? so the eye of our mind is cleared, and
our spiritual senses much revived by walking in the garden of holy Scriptures,
and smelling to the flowers of Paradise; but if we run about in the smoke, that
is, busy our selves about earthly affairs, we shall shed many a tear, and be
in danger of quite loosing our sight.

I will conclude, and briefly represent all the principal points of the
Apostles exhortation to your view in one type of the law. In the Ark of the
covenant there was the rod of Exodus 24. 25.
Aaron that budded, and about it a Crown of gold. By the rod of Aaron you
easily apprehend the Priests office or pastoral charge: the buds of this rod,
or parts of this charge are two, feeding and overseeing; which ought to be
performed not by constraint, but willingly, as the buds were not drawn out of
Aarons rod, but put forth of their own accord. And herein we are not to respect
our own good, but the good of our flock: we must do nothing for filthy lucre,
but of a free mind to benefit others, as the rod of Aaron bare not blossoms or
fruit to, or for it self, but to, and for others. By the fruits of Aarons rod
you may understand the good life of a faithful Pastor, who is to be an example
to his flock; this fruit enclineth him to true humility opposite to Lord-like
pride, as the fruit of a tree weighs the branches down to the earth. Lastly,
by the Crown above the rod, and round about the Ark, is represented the reward
of a faithful Shepherd and vigilant Bishop* You have the emblem of your
office, the word or Motto shall be Germinet virga Aaronis, Let the rod of Aaron
blossom in your mouth by preaching the word, and bud in your hands by the
exercise of Ecclesiastical discipline, and bear fruit in your lives by being
ensamptes to your flock, and the crown above the rod, and about the Ark shall
be yours, as it is promised ver. 4. And when the chief shepherd shall appear,
you shall receive a crown of glory that fades not away; Which God the Father
grant for the price of his Sons blood, to whom with the holy Spirit be all
honor, glory, praise, and thanksgiving, now and for ever, Amen.

FINIS.

