An EPISTLE FOR THE Strengthening and Confirming OF FRIENDS, in their Most Holy
Faith.
FRIENDS,
ALL abroad every where, think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial, which
is but to try you; for is it not written, Every man's work must be tried?
neither think the time long; neither look at Sufferings, nor at the Potentness
of those that cause you to suffer; but look to the Lord, that is able to
deliver: Did the Lord ever leave or forsake his People in a suffering
Condition, that stood for his Name, or gave up themselves freely to whatever
the Persecutors could do: For there were Informers, and Laws, and Decrees made
in Ahasuerus's time, but the Lord frustrated them; and those that stood for the
Name of the Lord came over all at last, when the Lord saw their Faithfulness,
and the trial of their Faith. Haman was an Informer, and said unto King
Ahasuerus, There is a certain People scattered abroad, and dispis'd among the
People in all the Provinces of thy Kingdom, and their Laws are diverse from all
people's, neither keep they the King's Laws, therefore it is no^ for the King's
profit to suffer them so; if it please the King let them be destroyed, and he
would give so much Money, as you may read in Esther 3. 9. and this was but for
want of poor Mordecai's bowing to him: So the King granted this great
Informer's Request, to destroy all the seed of the Jews that were within his
Provinces: But read on in the third and fourth Chapters of Esther, and see what
came to pass in a little time; the Jews were delivered, and the Informer went
to the Gallows: Now if Haman had been quiet, it is a question, if he had been
destroyed, or not; for the Adversaries lifting up themselves against the Lord's
Remnant never lengthens their days: For when the Faithfulness of his People,
and Uprightness of their Hearts to him are seen, he soon brings Deliverance;
they need not find the Lord a way out to deliver.

Therefore all Friends every where, give up all you are and have, and wait to
find a Godly Resolution springing up within you; and say, The God whom we serve
is able to deliver us; if not, we are resolved to Serve and Worship the Lord.
In Nebuchadnezer's time (as you may read in the 3d of Daniel) how there were
Informers; in the 8th verse, Certain Caldeans came to accuse the Jews: in the
10th verse, Thou, O King, made a Decree, That they that would not fall down and
worship the Image, at the sound of the Music, should be cast into the
Burning-Fiery-Furnace; and so they go on, and tell the King, There were such
three Men, which regarded him not, neither served his Gods, nor worshipped the
Image that he had set up: Then the King, in his Rage and Fury, commanded the
men to be brought before him; and he asked, If these things were true, That
they served not his Gods, nor worshipped the Golden Image which he had set up;
now if so be they would be ready at the sound of the Music, to fall down and
worship the said Image that he had made; but if not, in the same Hour they
should be cast into the midst of the Burning-Fiery Furnace: Now their Answer
was, The God whom they served was able to deliver them; but if not, we will not
Bow: And he did d^liver them to his own Praise and Glory, but they that cast
them into the Fire were slain with the Flame; but Shadrah, M^shach, and
Abednego came out of the Furnace without harm, which did astonish the King; and
he blessed the God of Shadrach, Meshech, and Abednego. Now Friends, if such a
Work should be brought forth through your Faithfulness, would it not make your
hearts glad, that God should be so honored by your Faithfulness? For if these
men had shrunk and bowed, the Lord's Power had not been so manifested: For the
Faithfulness of Friends puts an opportunity into the Lord's Hand to make his
Power known. For, Did not the Lord raise up Pharaoh to make his Power known;
when Moses led the Children of Israel out of Egypt. Pharo^h with his Host
followed in great haste, and pursued them to the Red Sea, thinking to have
destroyed them ^ll; and some began to Murmer against Moses, why he would bring
them thither, to be destroyed; yet Moses his Faith was in God, and he bid them
but Stand still, and see the Salvation of God, and the Egyptians, whom they had
seen that day, they should never see again: and so it came to pass; for Israel
had a Way through the Sea, but Pharaoh and his Host were drowned, and not a man
escaped. Now Friends, if those that were with Moses should have drawn back to
Pharaoh in this seeming Distress, thinking to go to Moses again when the Danger
was over, had they not run from their Safety to their Destruction?

So now Friends, none to draw back again, neither to be slack in keeping your
Meetings; For he that draws back, the Lords Soul has no Pleasure in him; and
the Back-slider in heart shall be filled with his own ways: And therefore
Friends, be of a Noble Mind, and Valliant for the Truth upon the Earth; the
Noble Seed brings to be of a Noble Mind.

And Friends, it is convenient that Trials come, that the Chaff may be
separated from the Wheat, for they who are of this noble Seed will not be
Treacherous nor Falsehearted, but have a faithful Respect to the Honor of God
forever.

And observe in Daniel's day, how that they could not bring him to suffer, but
concerning the Worship of his God (so they can find nothing against us but
concerning the Worship of our God, for which Blessed be the Name of the Lord
forever) so a Decree was made, that whosoever asked a Petition either of God or
Man, for thirty days, save of the King, should be cast into the Den of Lions;
and Daniel was constant to pray to the Lord three times a day, with his Window
open toward Jerusalem, as his manner was: Now Daniel might have shut his
Window, and forbore to pray to his God for so many days; but then how could
the Lord have appeared in his Deliverance, if he had not kept to his Worship as
his manner was, by which the Name of the Lord came to be exalted: And he that
made the Decree, Commanded all to call upon the God of Daniel. So that you may
see always it was Faithfulness and Constancy that brought Honor to God, and
Deliverance to themselves, and Destruction upon the Adversaries.

So Friends, stand in the Fear and Dread of God, and you will become a Dread to
all Nations: what need you fear any but the Lord God, that made Heaven and
Earth? What, will a Living Man be afraid of a Dead Man? So you that are alive
in Christ Jesus, what need you fear them that are dead in Adam, in Sin and
Transgression, a body of Sin and a body of Death? What need a living Body be
afraid of a dead Body?

So F^iends, be of a valliant Mind; they who are of the noble Birth, will be of
a valliant Mind, and I know will give their Appearance for God, who has
appeared for us, and in us, and among us: Many comfortable and peaceable
Meetings we have enjoyed, wherein we have been refreshed together, and
satisfied together, and our Hearts made glad together* in the en^oyment of the
Goodness of our God; which is (I know) not wanting in this suffe^ing Time.

Now in the consideration of these things Friends, hold up your heads; for God
he will be our Deliverer: I dare be bold to speak in the Name of the Lord, That
the Lord will bring a Calm; for, was the Old World so rude and cruel as this
Generation? they let Noah build the Ark, and did not go about to make a Spoil
of his Work, though they were against him, and called him, Old Fool, yet they
let him alone with his Work.

But this Generation will not let the Lord's People work the Works of God, nor
Worship Him whom the Ark was a Type of.

And if the Lord overthrew the old World for their Wickedness, and their
slighting of Noah's warning of them; what will he do to this Generation, that
not only rejects the Warnings of them that are called and chosen of God to work
his Works, but seek to destroy them? I say, how can the Lord hold his Hand, but
let it fall heavy upon those that have dealt thus cruelly with his People;
seeing he overthrew those that never dealt so cruelly?

So Friends, let your confidence be in the Lord God that made Heaven and Earth;
trust in his Arm; let him be your Shield; he will set up a Standard for you,
that all Nations of the Earth shall never be able to pull down; for the Lord
never leaves nor forsakes his Heritage: Or where was there ever any that
suffered for God, but their Enemies fell before them? Though they sought to
ruin the Lord's People, yet the Pit they had dug for others, themselves fell
in^o it; and it will never fall otherwise to them that think to destroy the
Lord's Heritage.

Friends, let none think that the Beast's worship shall spread again, neither
shall People wonder after him, as they have done; neither shall the great Whore
spread her Skirts over Nations, as she has done, neither shall she be heard to
make her boast; for the Lord has and will confound her, with those that have
committed Fornication with her: And his own Name, and Power, and Kingdom he
will set up over all the Names and Kingdoms upon the Earth.

Two things the great Whore has boasted should never come upon her, yet she
shall meet with them both; that is, loss of Children, and Widdowhood.

It is observed in the North part of the Nation, what sort of men they are that
are Infomers, the most part of them are either High-way-men, or such as have
been a reigned for Felony, or such as are come out of Goals, or idle Fellows
that have spent their Estates, if they had any; and now would live upon the
spoil of other honest Men's Estates: Now it is thought strange, that Justices
of Peace and Wise men of the Country, should disobliege the sober People, to
gratify such men as are here mentioned; it is not for their Honor I am sure.

Written the 10th of the 11th Month 1670. Leonard Fell

THE END.

