ARTICLES OF Visitation and Enquiry Exhibited to the MINISTERS, CHURCHWARDENS,
and SIDEMEN Of every Parish in the primary Episcopal Visitation Of the Right
Reverend Father in God JOHN By Divine Permission Lord Bishop of OXFORD.

(...)

The tenor of the Oath to be administered to the Churchwardens, and Sidemen of
every Parish.
YOu Shall swear truly and faithfully to execute the Office of a Churchwarden
within your Parish, and according to the best of your skill and knowledge
present such Things and Persons, as you know to be presentable by the laws
Ecclesiastical of this Realm. So help you God, and the contents of this Book.

ARTICLES OF INSTRUCTION FOR Visitation and Enquiry IN THE DIOCESE of OXFORD.
TIT. I. Concerning Churches and Chapels, with the Ornaments and Furniture
thereunto belonging.
1. IS your Church or Chapel in good and sufficient repare, and so decently and
cleanly kept as becomes the house of God?

2. Is the furniture of your Church or Chapel, as Bells, Communion plate and
Cloths, Ministers surplice, Pulpitcloth, Herse-cloth, with other usual
Ornaments duly provided, and decently kept?

3. Have you a fair Bible, book of Common Prayer, books of Homilies, and
Canons; a Register of Births, Burials and Marriages, and is the said Register
duly kept, and the transcript returned every year into the Bishops Registery?
Have you also a Register of such Strangers as are admitted to Preach; and a
book for the entry of the Churchwardens accounts? And are the said books
carefully looked to, and constantly employed?

TIT. II. Concerning the Churchyard, the Houses, Glebes, and Tiths belonging
to the Church.
1. IS your Churchyard sufficiently fenced and preserved from anoiance,
encrochments, and wast?

2. Is the dwelling house, and all the outhouses of your Parson, Vicar, or
Curate kept in good repare: and are the Glebe-lands, Orchards, Gardens, and
other easements belonging to them, preserved from being embezel'd, or
endammag'd? And have you a perfect Terror of such Glebe-lands, Orchards, etc.
and also of Pensions, Tiths, and compositions as belong unto them?

TIT. III. Concerning Ministers.
1. HAve you a Parson, Vicar, or Curate legally settled among you?

2. Is he constantly resident? or how long, and on what occasion is he absent?
has he a Curate? how is he licensed, and how maintained? During his absence,
what care is taken for hospitality, and charity to the poor?

3. Does your Parson, Vicar, or Curate constantly, reverently, and regularly
Officiate on the Lords days, Holidaies, and the Eves of them; as also read the
Letany upon all wenesdaies; and fridaies weekly; and observe Rogation and
Emberdaies according to the order of the Church; and so perform all offices,
without addition or diminution?

3. Does your Minister diligently instruct the youth of your Parish in the
Church Catechism? and does he endeavor to reclame all profane persons, Papists,
and Sectaries; and press the great duties of piety, justice, temperance,
charity, allegiance, and conformity? And is he diligent in visiting the sick,
and satisfying the doubts of troubled consciences? Lastly, is he peaceable,
sober, and exemplary in his conversation, and grave in his demeanor, company,
hair, and apparel?

TIT. IV. Concerning the Parishioners.
1. ARE there in your Parish any persons known or reputed to be Jews, Heretics,
or Sohismatics, whether Papists, or Fanatics? what are the numbers of each
particular Sect of them? and are they studious to pervert the Orthodox; or
insolent toward them for doing their duty?

2. Are any of your Parish known or suspected to be guilty of Incest, Adultery,
Fornication, or any other enormous crimes? Do any profane the Lords day, or the
Name of God, or are irreverent in the Church, or neglect the respective duties
incumbent on them in reference to the Sacraments of Baptism, and the Lords
Supper, and other Rites; as of Catechizing, Confirmation, Marriage, thanksgiving
after Childbirth, burial of the dead, or the censures of the Church?

3. Are the Wills and Testaments of the dead in your Parish, or the
administration of their Goods duly taken out and executed? Have any Lands,
Legacies, or charitable gifts bestowed on your Parish, or any other good uses;
bin embezled, or unduly disposed of?

TIT. V. Concerning Parish Clerks, and Sextons.
HAve you belonging to your Parish or Chapelry a sufficient Clerk or Sexton,
and does he faithfully and diligently execute his office?

TIT. VI. Concerning Hospitals, Schools, Scholemasters, Physicians,
Chirurgions, and Midwives.
1. JS there in your Parish any Hospital, Almes-house, or Free-schole? How are
they endowed, ordered, and governed? Does any one keep Schole without license
from the Bishop: or if licensed, neglect to teach the Youth committed to him
the Catechism of the Church, and Grammar set forth by authority; and to bring
them to the Service of the Church?

2. Does any in your Parish practice Physic, or Surgery, or do the Office of
a Midwife, without approbation and license from the Ordinary?

TIT. VII. Concerning Ecclesiastical Officers.
1. HAve any Officers that exercise Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in this
Diocese; taken, or exacted any excessive Fees for any Cause or Act; or any
Bribe, or Reward for the concelement or impunity of delinquents: or sped any
Act privately, and not in the presence of a public Notary?

2. Is the number of the Apparitors in this Diocese excessive; have they
summoned any person unlawfully; or taken reward for concelements; or threatened
prosecutions where they had no reward, or otherwise misbehaved themselves in
their Office?

Advertisements.
I THe Minister of every parish may join in presentment with the Churchwardens
and Sidemen; and if they fail to present, the Ministers themselves (who have
the highest obligation to endeavor the suppressing of impiety and disorder)
may do it.

II. The Minister, Churchwardens and Sidemen, at the delivery of their bill of
presentment, are required to draw up in writing and attest under their hands, a
particular account of the number of Recusants, whether Popish or other; and
also the number of the Orthodox and conformable in their Parish, as follows.

1. What number of Persons is there in common estimation in your Parish? 2.
What number of Popish Recusants, or persons thereof suspected, is there? 3.
What number of other Dissenters is there, who relinquish the Communion of the
Church?
III. The Ministers are to take notice, that the Bishop at his Visitation will
be ready to confirm the Youth that shall be fitted and brought before him: and
therefore are desired by diligent Catechizing to prepare those under their
charge, and to bring them, at the time appointed, unto the Bishop.

FINIS

