THE PRIVILEGES OF THE University of OXFORD, In point of VISITATION: Clearly
evidenced by LETTER To an Honorable Personage. TOGETHER WITH The Universities
ANSWER to the Summons of the Visitors.

ANNO MDCXLVII.

THE PRIVILEGES OF The University of OXFORD, In point of Visitation, etc.
Honored Sir,
HOw violently active the resentments of Liberty and Freedom are in the minds
of men there needs no other evidence then this late War, wherein the most
earthy souls, with earnest zeal, have sacrificed their blood unto the name
and empty shadow of it. And if the bare shape, and apparition could actuate
those Icie spirits; I cannot but wonder you should think, that the more Free
and Aeriall ones, whose industry, endeavors, to restore the Soul to its native
Privilege and Birthright, should be senseless of their just interest,
especially where Religion adds his Title unto Right; and private Liberty, built
upon public Privilege, in its fall engages his Foundation, and renders the
neglect of a single safety, a desertion to the General, and Treason to
Succession. But since you take no knowledge of these so high engagements; and
seem pre-possest with the specious design of reforming of Errors, and the
Authoritative name of a Visitation: I shall endeavor to Demonstrate the
proposition I glanced upon in my last Letter, and you so much startle at, that
the right of Visiting the University of Oxford is only in the Kings Majesty:
and that it is exempt from all other jurisdiction, both by reason of its
foundation, in regard that all Societies whereof the King or his Predecessors
were Founders, are only Visitable by the King, by the Common Law of this
Realm. 6 Hen. 7. fo. 14. 2 Hen. 5.
And secondly, by reason of several grants of Exemption: Malmesbur. de Antiq.
Glaston. Auth. Annal. de Monast. de Hide, (...)o: Rossus de Regibus. Literae
Hen. 4. (...)d Papam Johannem: ex fund. Regis.
First, That the University of Oxford wholly refers to the King as its Original
and Founder, is clear, in that almost 800. years since King Alured founded not
only Public Schools of Arts and Lectures, but their Privileges and
Immunities, having got them confirmed by the then Pope, Martin. 2.
and although the bounty of inferior Benefactors added to the bulk and
magnifience of the Foundation, yet the King still assumed the Title, as being
the total founder of the Design; and his immunities deriving and
communicating themselves to the whole; and those more particular founders were
also in a lower rank acknowleged by the University, who ever both submitted
and sheltred themselves under the title of the Kings Foundation, Instrum.
Univer. Ox(...)n. ad Ric. (...)cundum: Vestrae Fundationis and Patronatus. Hare
memor. Univer. Oxon. (...)ol. 92. Vetus Epistolarum Lib. page 51. and 56. Ad
Regem Hen. 6. page 90. and (...)08. Antiqu. Oxon. Lib. 2. a page 182. ad page
202.
and as yet do; (the power of the Chancellor being immediately, and only
derived from the Edvar. Potestate^ r(...)giam per no(...) and progenitores
nostros i(...) concess(...)m. Hare, memo(...) Univ. Oxo(...) in Edvar. 3. fo.
65. The v(...)olation of h(...) Privileges, i(...) particular that of not
obeying his Citation, is called, Laesio Coronae, etc. ex To(...) claus(...)de
an. 34. reg. Edv. (...). in dors. memb. 27. Tur. Land. Rot. patent. de an.
3(...) part 2. memb. 44. in dors. in Tur. Land. Rot. patent. de an. 18. part
2. memb(...) 31. Tur. Land.
King) and are obliged to do so; unless that Logic whick makes Protection
and Subjection Relatives, dispute us out of submission to the Kings only
jurisdiction, because He is disabled from the maintenance of our Privileges;
and will not let Him be our Visitor, because He cannot be our Defender. And
here you may please to consider, that the Foundation of the University, being
the Kings and His Predecessors Personal act, His interest lies not within the
reach of that beaten evasion of a public or politic capacity.

And as this right and title of Visiting is the Kings Prerogative as Founder,
so the privilege of being by him only Visited, is our lawful inheritance,
which we claim by prescription, Indult. Dom. Papae Bonif. 8. confirm.
privile(...) Regal. ipsamque Vniversitate^ eximens ab omni Iurisd. Archiep.
Episcop. etc. and a Vi(...)tatione: adding, that they had had these privileges
a tempore cujus contrarii mem(...)ria non existit: Hare, li. de Priv. Vniv. Ox.
Lib. Vet. Statut. Ox. p. 95. Lib. Vet. Se(...)nior. procur. p. 4. the same
ratified and confirmed by Sixtus 4. Lib. Epist. Vniv. Ox(...) in Hen. 3. Act of
Parl. 25 H. 8. c. 21. fo. 556. all power of Visitation is given onel(...) to
such as shall have immediate authority by the Kings Commission under th(...)
Great Seal of England, in places formerly exempted, as Colleges, etc. A(...)
Letters Patents heretofore made by the Kings Progenitors, in behalf of th(...)
Universities, are confirmed by Act of Parliament, 13. Elizab. And in 19.
El(...)zab. part 12. in dors. rot. the Privileges of the University are
confirmed in the v(...)ry words of Bonif. 8. acknowledged they had them by
Prescription: the imm(...)diate subjection of the University to the authority
and jurisdiction of the Princ(...) and all their other exemptions ratified; and
these acknowleged to be swo(...) to, in the Oath taken by every Graduate, ad
observe. Statut. Privil. Co(...)suet, etc.
allowed and confirmed by Charters from several Kings, both by themselves and
in Indult. Dom. Papae Bonif. 8. confirm. privile(...) Regal. ipsamque
Vniversitate^ eximens ab omni Iurisd. Archiep. Episcop. etc. and a
Vi(...)tatione: adding, that they had had these privileges a tempore cujus
contrarii mem(...)ria non existit: Hare, li. de Priv. Vniv. Ox. Lib. Vet.
Statut. Ox. p. 95. Lib. Vet. Se(...)nior. procur. p. 4. the same ratified and
confirmed by Sixtus 4. Lib. Epist. Vniv. Ox(...) in Hen. 3. Act of Parl. 25 H.
8. c. 21. fo. 556. all power of Visitation is given onel(...) to such as shall
have immediate authority by the Kings Commission under th(...) Great Seal of
England, in places formerly exempted, as Colleges, etc. A(...) Letters Patents
heretofore made by the Kings Progenitors, in behalf of th(...) Universities,
are confirmed by Act of Parliament, 13. Elizab. And in 19. El(...)zab. part 12.
in dors. rot. the Privileges of the University are confirmed in the v(...)ry
words of Bonif. 8. acknowledged they had them by Prescription: the
imm(...)diate subjection of the University to the authority and jurisdiction of
the Princ(...) and all their other exemptions ratified; and these acknowleged
to be swo(...) to, in the Oath taken by every Graduate, ad observe. Statut.
Privil. Co(...)suet, etc.
Parliaments; and whatsoever free Royal grant was before the Reformation,
confirmed unto us by the Pope, (that being then thought necessary) was (after
that the Royal Authority had asserted to its Prerogative the Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction) by the succeeding Princes in the Indult. Dom. Papae Bonif. 8.
confirm. privile(...) Regal. ipsamque Vniversitate^ eximens ab omni Iurisd.
Archiep. Episcop. etc. and a Vi(...)tatione: adding, that they had had these
privileges a tempore cujus contrarii mem(...)ria non existit: Hare, li. de
Priv. Vniv. Ox. Lib. Vet. Statut. Ox. p. 95. Lib. Vet. Se(...)nior. procur. p.
4. the same ratified and confirmed by Sixtus 4. Lib. Epist. Vniv. Ox(...) in
Hen. 3. Act of Parl. 25 H. 8. c. 21. fo. 556. all power of Visitation is given
onel(...) to such as shall have immediate authority by the Kings Commission
under th(...) Great Seal of England, in places formerly exempted, as Colleges,
etc. A(...) Letters Patents heretofore made by the Kings Progenitors, in
behalf of th(...) Universities, are confirmed by Act of Parliament, 13. Elizab.
And in 19. El(...)zab. part 12. in dors. rot. the Privileges of the University
are confirmed in the v(...)ry words of Bonif. 8. acknowledged they had them by
Prescription: the imm(...)diate subjection of the University to the authority
and jurisdiction of the Princ(...) and all their other exemptions ratified; and
these acknowleged to be swo(...) to, in the Oath taken by every Graduate, ad
observe. Statut. Privil. Co(...)suet, etc.
same words established: Nor did the practice of Visitations dissent, for all
those that happened in the remainder of Hen. 8 time, Four Visitations since
the Reformation, all by the Kings Commission, except in Q. Mary's time, when
the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction was again returned to the Pope, then Cardinal
Pool visited, as Legatus a latere, which is Equivalent. Citat. Cardin. Poli. ad
Universe.
Ed: 6. Q. Mary, Q. Eliz. were held by the respective Princes Authority, and
the Persons Visiting were only their Representatives, and whosoever sat, the
King Visited.

I have thus far as much as may be expected from one, not used to such
encounters, nor advantaged by any of the University writings and muniments,
(they having been of late At the beginning of this Parl. the University
Writings were required, and ever since are detained.
withheld from us) discovered our Privileges in point of Visitation; being put
to this unequal Combat, to engage with persons armed with power and our own
weapons too, only shielded by naked Truth.

But should I wave the former debate of Interest, and only look upon the tie
of Honor, I cannot but with wonder and just scorn resent the mean opinion we
are now fallen into, who for almost 800 years the care and strife of Alured
(...)imself visits (...)n. 886. Ex Asser. Me(...)eu. Epis. Reg. Alured. Scrib.
Ex edit. Cambd. Edvar. 3. and Rich. 2. themselves decided controversies, that
a(...)ose in the University. The late Visitations performed by Commissioners,
the (...)hief Nobility of the Kingdom: and His Majesty that now is, visited
Christ-Church personally with 8. Lords of the Counsel.
Princes, are made now the prize and spoil of our fellow subjects; and what
speaks more dishonor submitted to the strict Tribunal of our own members, who
having Iur. in admis. ad gradus.
sworn the observation of our Statutes, liberties, and customs, cannot appear
as Judges over us, without a violation of their oaths so often and solemnly
taken; nor yet without a manifest opposition of Nature, where parts judge the
whole; and the Laws of justice too; especially if we consider the Interests
and engagements, nay often professions of the most active instruments of this
work.

But to go a step farther, and rest satisfied both in the Visitation and
Visitors, it is evident that neither the one or the other can concern us, till
by some Legal way their Power is manifested. It is true, about three months
since, a Citation was publicly set up to summon our appearance, but the force
of that being lapst, we are to expect a new one, not only by the common rules
of Justice, but their own also, who conceived a Citation at first necessary,
and know the former to have been voyded by their own default. Now let the world
be Judge, what obligation can lie on any man to leave his occasions and
affairs, to appear, and that under the penalty of imprisonment, before those
men he knows not, or at least is not Legally supposed to know, to have any
Authority over him?

But should we be willing to sacrifice our Honor to a more Christian virtue of
humility, and our freedom unto patient sufferance (as in most cases we may
lawfully recede from our strict rights:) Yet would there a greater stop to our
desires then any yet mentioned interpose it self, the severe law of
Conscience; from whose commands neither hope may lead, nor danger force us.
Protest. M(...) 5. 1641.
We are all engaged by solemn prostestation before Almighty God to defend and
maintain our Lawful Rights and privileges, (in the number of which I am
confident I have showed our exemption from this Visitation to be:) and hereby
our adversaries are themselves bound to protect and defend us in whatsoever we
shall do, in pursuance of them: But if this be not of force to us, as it is not
conceived to be by them, we have yet a more strict and particular obligation,
being sworn by our respective statutes, to allow or submit to no Visitation,
but from those who are nominated by our founders, and enabled by the Kings
grant and Patent, confirmed by Act of Parliament, and so enlivened to the
strength of Laws.

Thus far briefly of Privilege and Exemption, I am now to clear a part yet
untoucht, but of no less concernment; that is, the necessity and want of
Visitation. It being given out by the Outcries and clamours of our
Adversaries, that we are wholly corrupt and lost, and not to be redeemed to any
thing that is good and virtuous, but by extirpation and ruin. To the malice of
which imputations, how uncharitable soever, I can observe no return but prayers
and silence, finding in the general, breasts neither conscious of the crimes
they are accused of, nor revengeful ones toward the persons of their Accusers,
but cheerfully receiving their many injuries (having for whole years together,
been publicly slandered to their faces:) and burying in silence those dark
Arts, and strangely false suggestions which have been used to procure this
Visitation, commit themselves to the protection of providence: assured either
by clearing all Accusations, or by a Christian suffering of whatsoever shall be
unjustly inflicted, to evidence to the world, they are not those monsters that
their Enemies Character would speak them: Nor yet men altogether unworthy their
Education, or their founders munificence. For my particular, next to the
testimony of Conscience, Ambition cannot name unto me a higher note of
Innocence, then to be acknowledged as

Sir, Your most humble Servant.


POSTSCRIPT.
SIR,

AS I was Sealing, there came to my hands, the Answer of the University, to the
Visitors Summons, which I here present to your view; and doubt not but the
Candor and Reason, backed by the Authority of so great a Name, will add
something of weight and moment to what has been already said.

To the Right Worshipful, Sir Nathaniel Brent, and the rest of the
Commissioners, sitting at Merton-Colledge.
WHereas by several Citations, subscribed, Guiliel. New-house Reg. Com. the
Vice Chancellor and Proctors (being the Magistrates and public Officers of
this University) have been required respectively to appear before the said
Commissioners, sitting in Merton College. They having imparted the same to us,
the Delegates of the University, upon due Consideration and deliberate
Examination of the Premises; We the said Delegates, together with the
Vice Chancellor and Proctors, do in the name of the University, with all
humble Reverence to the two Honorable Houses of Parliament; and all due
respects to the Persons, and places of those that are employed by them, Humbly
Conceive, we cannot acknowledge any Visitor but the King, or such as are
immediately sent by His Majesty; it being one of His Majesty's undoubted Rights
(all which we are bound to defend, as by many legal obligations, so by our
late Protestation) and one of the chief Privileges of the University, (all
which we are obliged by diverse Statutes, and Oaths, to maintain also) That
His Majesty, and without Him, none other is to Visit this University. And
therefore we cannot (as we conceive) without the manifest danger of incurring
multiplied Perjuries, submit to this Visitation, or acknowledge, those now sent
by the Honorable Houses of Parliament to Visit us, to be our Visitors. And as
we are persuaded, That if the weighty Affairs of the Kingdom, would have
permitted the Two Honorable Houses to have taken this Obligation of ours into
Consideration, they would not have thought fit to reduce us to this extremity,
either of displeasing them, or doing violence to our own Consciences; so we
believe, and hope, that if it shall please those that are employed by them,
heartily and charitably to represent to them, this our Answer, with the Reasons
thereof, (which we most earnestly desire them to do) the Honorable Houses
will be pleased to admit of this our Answer, and suffer us in the mean while
to enjoy what by the Law of the Land (which is the Birthright of the Subject)
as well as by the Privileges of the University is due unto us; until we shall
be proved to have made a Legal forfeiture of it, before such as are our proper
and competent Judges: Before whom we shall be always ready to appear, and to
Answer whatsoever crimes or misdemeanors shall be laid to our charge.

FINIS.

