FALSE PROPHETS, ANTICRISTS, DECEIVERS, Which are in the World, which John
Prophesied of, which has been long hid and Covered.

But now is unmasked in these last days with the Eternal Light which is risen,
are they seen and discovered, praises be to the Living God.

And with the Scriptures which they have made a trade of and deceived poor
people withal, are they tried and made manifest to be those which the
Scripture speaks of, which with fained words and Covetousness makes
Merchandise of the people, and so betrays their Souls.

Also a Word to the Heads and Governors of this Nation, who have put forth a
Declaration for the keeping of a Day of Humiliation for the Persecution (as
they say) of the poor Inhabitants in the Valley of Lucerna, Angrona, and others
professing the Reformed Religion which has been transmitted unto them from
their Ancestors.

By M. Fell.

And I saw three unclean spirits, like frogs come out of the mouth of the
Dragon, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and out of the mouth of the false
Prophet,

Rev. 16.13. But there were false Prophets also among the people, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in damnable
heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and bringing upon themselves
swift destruction,

And many shall follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of
truth is evil spoken of,

2 Pet. 2.1, 2. And also James Milners Condemnation upon that which erred from
the Light.

LONDON, Printed for Giles Calvert, 1655.

John 8. Isa. 42.
I Am the Light of the world, and does enlighten every one that comes into the
world, says Christ Jesus. I the Lord who has called thee in Righteousness,
and will hold thine hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant to
the people, and for a light unto the Gentiles. Now all people see where you
are; And try your Teachers what they lead you into, which draws you from the
light which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, who says, He that walks
in the Light, shall have the Light of Life: and John says, in John 1. that In
him was life, and the life was the light of men. Now try your Teachers, which
draws you from the light, by the Scriptures, which they take to speak unto
you, and (as they say) is their Rule. Let it likewise be your rule to try them
with; and search the Scriptures, and examine them honestly, and see whether ye
be not Deceived by them which draws you from the Light, which is and ever was
the Saints Teacher, and ever shall be. And John says, that he was not the
light, but he was sent to bear witness of that light which was the true Light,
that enlightens every man that comes into the world. Now all people try and
see your Teachers, whether all your Priests of England be not witnesses
contrary to John. He bears witness to the light, which enlightens every man
that comes into the world; and they bear winess against the Light, and says,
he does not enlighten every one that comes into the world. And tells people
that they must look after them for Means and Ordinances, and so blind poor
people, and keeps them in Ignorance and Darkness: But all people who love your
own souls, search into the Scriptures, and try them by the Scriptures, which
you call the Word and Rule to walk by, and you shall find them the Deceivers
and the Antichrists, and the false Prophets, which they tell you so much on,
that should come in the latter days; John says, Many false Prophets are gone
out into the world. Now try your Teachers by this, and see whether they be not
in the world, nor separated from the world, but draws from the light, which
separates from the world, and leads out of the world. But they witness against
the light, and pleads for sin and the Kingdom of Antichrist which is of the
world: And John says, This is the Condemnation, that light is come into the
world, But men love Darkness rather then Light, because their deeds are evil.
For every one that does evil, hates the light, neither comes to the light,
lest his deeds should be reproved. But he that does truth comes to the light,
that his deeds may be made manifest, whether they be wrought in God. Now all
poor people, see whether these be not the false prophets, which are entered into
the world, which draws from the Light, which is the worlds condemnation. And
whether these be not Deceivers and Antichrists, which John speaks on, that are
entered into the world, which draws from the Light, and does not confess
Christ Jesus come in the flesh; But does deny the Light, and does persecute,
and call them Deceivers and false Prophets which witnesses Christ come in the
flesh, and walks in the light which he has enlightened them withal; these
they stock, and prison, and cause to be beat in their Synagogues, as all did
that went before them, who ever persecuted the Righteous seed, who denies the
light. The same John which says, False Prophets, Deceivers and Antichrists are
gone into the world; says, These things have I written unto you, concerning
them that seduce you; But the Anointing which ye have received of him abides
in you, and ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing
teaches you all things, and is truth, and is no lie: and even as it has
taught you, you shall abide in him. Now, all people, see who be the false
prophets, whether John and those that witness the Anointing; or your Teachers,
which draws from the Anointing? Christ Jesus says, I am come a light into the
world, that whosoever believes on me shall not abide in darkness. This same
Christ says in the 7. of Matthew. Beware of false Prophets which comes to you in
sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are Ravening Wolves; by their fruits ye
shall know them. Now try your Teachers by this Scripture, and see whether they
have not been clothed all this while with sheeps clothing, the Saints
clothing, the words and profession of Christ: but now when the sheep comes,
who knows his voice, and will not follow strangers, such as they; now see if
they do not appear outwardly to be Ravening Wolves; what they were before
inwardly, their fruits does make them manifest: Therefore let the Scripture try
them. The same Christ Jesus says unto the Disciples who came unto him
privately on the Mount of Olives, Matthew. 24. And Jesus answered and said unto
them, Take heed that no man deceive you; for many shall come in my Name,
saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. Now try your Teachers, and see
whether they have any thing but a name and a profession of Christ, who draws
from the Light. Whereas Christ Jesus says, he is the Light: And Christ says,
Then shall they deliver you up, and kill you, and ye shall be hated of all
Nations for my Names sake.

Now see whether these Priests of yours be hated and killed, which draws from
the light, or those who witness Christ Jesus; which is the light, which says,
many false Prophet shall arise, which shall deceive many: and try if they be
not them which says, Lo here is Christ, and lo there: But Christ's Command
is, believe them not; for there shall arise false Christ's and false Prophets,
and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch, that if it were possible,
they would deceive the very Elect. But the Elect, who dwells in the light which
comes from Jesus they cannot deceive, in it they are seen, and known and tried,
and made manifest to be the deceivers, to be the false Prophets and
Antichrists, And with the light which comes from Jesus, they are condemned with
the world, and turned from, with all the Children of light* therefore poor
people who are out of the light, you they do deceive; but those whose minds are
turned to the light, and abides in the light, they cannot deceive. And Christ
Jesus says, woe unto you, when all men shall speak well of you; for so did
their Fathers to the false Prophets. Now try them by the Scripture, and see
whether this woe be not upon them, and whether they be not of the false
Prophets. And Peter says in 2 Pet. 2. But there were false Prophets among the
people. Now try them by that Chapter, and see whether they be not these false
Prophets, which denies the light, which comes from Christ Jesus, their Lord
that bought them: And through Covetousness shall they through fained words make
Merchandise of you; Let that in your Consciences now try and search them by
this Scripture. The same Apostle in the Chapter before, says, We have also a
more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed, as unto a
light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise
in your hearts: Knowing this first, that no prophecy of the Scripture is of
any private Interpretation: For the prophecy came not in the time of old, by
the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. Now see whether Peter and these that draw to the Light, be the false
Prophets; or them that denies the Light, and hates it: Read 2 Timothy 3. and try
them by that Scripture, and see if they be not them that the Apostle speaks on
there, having a form of Godliness, but denying the power: and he says, from
such turn away. And see if they be not of this sort, which creeps into houses,
and calls them Churches, (when as the Apostle says, the Church is in God,) and
leads Captive silly women, laden with diverse lusts: Ever learning and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth. Now see and try your Teachers by
these Scriptures, and see what you have learned of them all your days that you
have followed them; what you can witness of God or of Christ, made manifest:
Nay, that in your Consciences will confess that you do not know this outward
Scripture, which makes them manifest to be the false Prophets and Deceivers,
who draws from the light which gave forth the Scriptures; even in the
knowledge of the outward letter you are blinded by them: Read 2 Pet. 3.3. and
see if ye and they be not found those scoffers, walking after your own lust,
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? And read Jude, and try them, and
see whether they be not found there under the Woe that he speaks on, whether
they run not greedily for rewards, and so perish in the Gainsaying of Core. And
let that in your Consciences which is of God, which respects no man's person;
read and examine those Scriptures, and try them, and see whether they be not
erred from the Light, and so draws others from the Light, which is and ever
was the Saints Teacher, and ever shall be; from which all the holy men of God
ever spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost: And from which Light all these
Scriptures were given forth, which these Deceivers takes in their mouths, and
draws people from the Light which gave forth the Scriptures, and so betrays
their souls. Therefore all people to the light in your Consciences, which
Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, turn within keep to it, and go not
forth, not look not outward, and it will let you see the deceivers and
betrayers of your souls: And if ye be faithful and obedient to it, it will let
you see your Savior. False Prophets is in the world, and Antichrists is in the
world, and the Deceivers is of the world, and those that does not confess
Christ Jesus come in the flesh is of the world; But those that dwell in the
Light, which Christ Jesus has enlightened them withal, this leads out of the
world, out of the worlds ways, fashions and Customs, and this makes a
separation from the world, and this leads up to God: And this Light is the
Condemnation of the world, and the condemnation of all the deceivers, false
prophets, and Antichrists which are in the world: And who is faithful and
obedient to the light, witnesses Christ made manifest and come in the flesh;
and these are no Antichrists; And these are they that go forth to bear witness
against the false Prophets and Antichrists which are in the world; and these
are they that are stockt and beat, and Imprisoned, and persecuted by those
which are of the first nature, which is Cain who slew his brother; and this is
of the world. And by this Generation all that will live godly in Christ Jesus,
must suffer persecution, and it is our joy and rejoicing not only to believe on
his Name, but also to suffer for his sake.

All poor people who are in the dark world, blind, led with the blind, beware
and look where you are, lest you both fall into the ditch, and try your Leaders
by the Scripture, who is pleading for sin and transgression, and telling you,
that ye shall not be free from sin, nor perfect while you are upon earth. Now
is that fulfilled which the Apostle speaks on in 2 Timothy 3. And the perilous
times are come: and woe unto you if you do not hearken to the warning of the
Lord God who calls unto you for Repentance, and to return to the Light of
Christ in your Consciences; and to return from that sort which the Apostle
speaks on, having a form of godliness, denying the power; of this sort are
your Teachers which are to be turned away from, which creeps into houses, and
leads silly women captive, and so keeps you ever learning, and never able to
come to the knowledge of the truth: And tells you none can be perfect while
they are upon earth: And so they plead for sin, and against Christ Jesus, and
the Apostles and Prophets, and all the holy men of God: For Christ says, Be ye
perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect, Matthew. 5.48. And again, Christ said
to the young man, which asked him what he lacked yet; If thou will be perfect,
Sell all that thou have, and give to the poor, as in Matthew. 19.20, 21. And
again, the Apostle says, We speak wisdom among them that are perfect. And
when he parted with the brethren, he bad them, Be perfect, Be of good comfort,
be of one mind, 1 Cor. 2.6. 2 Cor. 13.10, 11. And your Teachers tells you, that
you must never be perfect, but that you must sin as long as you are upon Earth;
And so they are Ministers of Antichrist, and upholders of sin, and the Devils
Kingdom; try them by the Scripture, and you shall find them contrary to the
doctrine of Christ, and of the Apostles, and not to have received the gifts,
which he gave to the Prophets, Apostles, and Evangelists, for the perfecting of
the Saints; as you may read in Ephesians. 4.11, 12, 13. And the same Apostle went
about warning every man in all wisdom, that he might present every man perfect
in Christ Jesus. Now see your Teachers and Leaders, if they have not another
spirit, then that Christ and the Apostles had, who makes it their trade to
plead for sin, and against perfection, which all that ever were sent of God
prayed and preached for: As the Apostle did night and day, praying exceedingly,
that he might see their faces, and might perfect all which was lacking in their
faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3.10. And the Apostle Peter prayed that they might be perfect
when they had suffered awhile; And the Apostle said, who was a Minister of
Christ, that the Scripture was given forth by Inspiration of God, that the man
of God might be perfect. And here your Teachers are found to be denyers of the
Scriptures, and so are found to be Ministers of Antichrist, and not so much as
Ministers of the letter, who pleads against it, and the ends it was given forth
for. And they are out of the practice of all that ever taught for God. Noah was
a Preacher of Righteousness, and he was a perfect man: Abraham was a friend of
God, and God said unto him, Walk thou before me, and be thou perfect: and Lot
was a just man, and the Lord delivered him: and Job was a perfect and a just
man: and David says, Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end
of that man is peace, Psalm. 37.37. And Solomon says, that the upright shall
dwell in the Land, and the perfect shall remain in it Prove. 2.21. And again he
says, The righteousness of the perfect shall direct his way, Prove. 11.5. Now
all people search the Scriptures, and try these deceivers, and betrayers of
your souls; And let them be witnesses against themselves, that they teach, nor
you receive nothing of God from them; for what ever is of God in the least
measure is perfect; the first principle that comes from God is perfect; Every
perfect gift is from above. And the Apostle said, As many as be perfect, be
thus minded, Phil. 3.13. And the Apostle says, We are glad when we are weak
and ye are strong, and this also we wish, even also your perfection. And again
he says, Let us go on to perfection. Now see your blind guides, whether they
be not the Ministers of the Mystery of Iniquity, and under the dark powet, who
pleads for sin, and against perfection, which all that ever were sent of God
preached for, and prayed for, and labored for; for the perfecting of the
Saints, and for the perfecting of holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Cor.
7.1. Ephesians. 4.12.

Given forth for the good of poor deceived people by the Spirit of God, as the
Scriptures was by the Holy men of God who spoke them forth as they were moved
by the Holy Ghost.

TO all you who look outward to your Teachers without you, blind guides, which
plead for sin, contrary to the Scriptures, and the Apostles, and all the holy
men of God: Who were sent of God, were sent to reprove sin, and to direct their
minds unto that which leads out of sin up to God who is pure, and cannot behold
Iniquity: And contrary to this your Teachers brings those Scriptures, that were
spoken to the wicked, and to the world, and so keeps you in sin and blindness,
and thereby maintains the Kingdom of sin; as some of them have said, Ye must
still be sinners, and never be perfect, nor without sin: and for the upholding
of this, they bring such Scriptures as these, where Solomon is speaking of
Drunkards, Mockers, and of the Sluggards, and of those that have diverse
weights, and diverse measures; and he says to those, Who can say, I have made
my heart clean, I am pure from my sin. And this they bring to cross Christ,
and the Apostles, and all the holy men of God who ever taught, and labored,
and prayed for holiness and perfection, and purity. And likewise Solomon says
in the same Chapter, The just man walks in his Integrity. Now all people, try
your Teachers by that Chapter, and see who it is that Solomon is speaking
amongst, when he spoke these words, and see how grossly you are deceived by
them, and how they betray and murder your souls.

Another Scripture they bring in, Eccles. 7.20. Solomon speaking of the things
he saw in the days of his vanity, and of the just and righteous man that
perishes, and of the wicked that prolongeth his life in wickedness; and he
says in the 29. verse, Lo, this only have I found, that God has made man
upright: but he has sought out many Inventions. And when he is speaking of
these he says, that there is not a just man upon the earth that does good, and
sins not. And this they bring to maintain sin, and speak against that which
Christ said, and the Apostles, and all the Holy men of God. And the same
Solomon says, The labor of the righteous tends to life; the fruits of the
wicked to sin; fools make a mock of sin, and sin is a reproach to any people.
Now try and see whether ye be not bewitched with these Idol Shepherds that
prophesies for Baal, and makes merchandise of your souls, and keeps you under
their bondage: But Christ is come to redeem you from their mouths who goes
about to devour you.

Another Scripture they bring in 1 John 1.8. If we say that we have no sin, we
deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us. And this Scripture they bring
to testify against John's own words in the same Chapter, who says in the next
verse, if we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins,
and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness; and in the sixth verse he says, If
we say that we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do
not the truth; but if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus his Son cleanses us from
all sin: Now dear people, see how you are besotted and blinded with these
Babylons Merchants, which sells your souls for getting money to themselves. Oh
go not after them, for they lead you into the dark, and so under the power of
the Prince of darkness, and from the light, which all the Saints of God walks
in, and so are cleansed from all sin.

Another Scripture they bring to plead for sin, in Romans 4.5. where the Apostle
is speaking of the two Covenants of faith, and of works, where the Apostle
says, To him that works not; but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly, his faith is counted to him for righteousness: and this Scripture they
bring to justify the wicked and ungodly, and to uphold the Devils Kingdom of
sin to cross the Scriptures, and overthrowe all which Christ and this Apostle
and all the Apostles labored and suffered for: David says, the ungodly shall
not stand in judgment, but the way of the ungodly shall perish. And the
Apostle says in 1 Timothy 1.9. the Law is for the ungodly, and for sinners; and
the Apostle says in Romans 1.18. For the wrath of God is revealed from Heaven
against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. Now all people, let that of
God in your consciences examine, and try you how you dare stand in the presence
of the living God, when that in the time of that which you call your worship,
your teachers Doctrine is to uphold the Kingdom of sin, which whosoever commits
is of the Devil. And another Scripture they bring in, Rev. 8.3. where the Angel
that took the golden Scepter, offered up the prayers of the Saints. And this
Scripture they bring to uphold sin, and say, if they had no sin, what need they
pray. Now let all the children of light, who have but the least measure of God,
behold the abomination of these blasphemers, who says, that the Saints were
sinners, because they prayed, and would bring all the Saints of God too under
the sin, and the transgression, and so to be the servants of the Devils, as
they are. Jesus Christ says, he that commits sin is the servant of sin, as in
John 8.34. and in Romans 6.16. he says, his Servants ye are to whom ye obey,
whether of sin unto death, or obedience unto righteousness; and read the 20.
verse, and the prayers of the wicked is abomination to the Lord. And David
says, if I regard iniquity in my heart, God will not hear my prayer; and yet
these deceivers pleads for sin, and brings the prayers of the Saints to prove
it. And here they would make Christ Jesus the only begotten of the Father a
sinner, who fell on his face and prayed, Mat. 26. as you may read 3 several
times in that Chapter; And again, in Mark 14.35. he fell on the ground, and
prayed, and again he went away and prayed; and so ye may read, that he prayed
in several places of Scripture, Jesus Christ who is the everlasting offering
and substance of all prayers, he offered up prayers to his Father. And now ye
people of Cartmel, come hither and try your teachers Bermelt and Camelford, and
all ye people of England, try your teachers, who has preached to you these
scriptures, to uphold the Devils Kingdom of sin, And let them come and try
their God, and let the scripture try them what God they serve, seeing that they
have brought these Scriptures that are before mentioned, to uphold the Kingdom
of darkness, iniquity and sin, And do you who are their hearers that goes after
them: see what ye uphold, and what ye can learn of them, that are under the
power of the Prince of the Air, which rules in the Children of disobedience,
as their fruits makes them manifest, and labors with all their strength to
keep you there with them, who are blind, ignorant people, who are led with them
blind guides, and so both falls into the ditch. Therefore a warning to you
all, as you will answer it before the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, from whose
presence you can never fly, that you turn away from these blasphemers against
the truth of God, as you your selves may see, if ye be not wilfully blind. Let
the Scripture judge them, and try them, their fruits makes them manifest to be
deceivers and Antichrists, and no Ministers of Jesus Christ, neither shall you
ever learn any thing of them, that ever shall be owned of the living God; for
their portion is cursed in the earth, as Mal. 2.1.2. And now Oh ye Priests, this
Commandment is for you, if ye will not hear, and if ye will not lay it to
heart, to give glory unto my name, says the Lord of Hosts, I will even send a
curse upon you, and will curse your blessings, yea I have cursed them already.
And the Lord says, cursed be the deceiver, as in Mal. 1.14. So all dear
people, as ye love your souls, turn from these cursed deceivers, which are of
the Generation of Cain, where sin lies at their doors, and they lie wallowing
in it, as you may see by their filthiness, drunkenness, and quarrellings: and
mind the light of God in your consciences, which Christ Jesus has enlightened
you withal, which light bears witness, and testifies against all such filthy,
unclean practices as they live in; and that which checks you for sin, and
shows your sin and thoughts of your hearts, and lets you see how you have
spent your time, and lets you see that God is pure, and cannot behold iniquity:
to this turn your minds, and to this hearken and be obedient to it, and turn
away from these Murderers of your souls, as you will answer it before the
Lord: and remember that ye are warned in your lifetime, and called to
repentance while it is to day, which shall be an eternal witness and testimony
for God, and your eternal condemnation, if you disobey it.

From a friend of your souls, and your eternal good, Margaret Fell.


ANd to all you that beat the Servants of God, you fulfill Christ's words, who
said, They shall beat you in the Synagogues; which ye do now in this
Generation; Mark 13. And Paul was haled out of the Temple and beaten, Acts 21.
and you now hale out of your Synagogues, and that you call your Temples: and
Christ speaks in Mark 12. of beating the servants of God: and the Apostle was
beaten after they were brought before the Chief Priests and Rulers of the
people, Acts 14.5. And the people and Governors rose up against the Apostles,
and beat them very sore, and cast them into prison; these are the Marks by
which ye may know what Generation these are of, that beats and persecutes the
Saints of God, and casts into prison: and the Apostle says, in 2 Cor. 11.
thrice was he beaten with rods, and they beat him openly: So now the wicked and
sloathfull servant appears, which beats his fellow servants; who is to be cut
asunder, whose portion is with the hypocrites and unbelievers: Luke 12. such as
are drunk, and eat and drink with drunkards, And Christ said, Ye shall be hated
of all men for my Names sake they shall persecute you in the City, and will
scourge you in their Synagogues, and will bring you before Governors; but he
that endures to the end, shall be saved; the Disciple is not above his Master,
nor the servant above his Lord, if they have called the Master of the house
Beelzebub, how much more them of his household? And all you that spit at the
people of God now, you may read your examples, as them that did not spare to
spit at Job, Job 30. and you may read your example, when the chief Priests rent
his Clothes, how they spit at Christ in his face, and buffetted him, and struck
him with rods, and asked him, saying, prophecy unto us O Christ; who smote
thee* and here again you may read your example, in Mat. 26. and again you may
read another example in Mat. 27. how they spit upon Christ, and took a Reed,
and smote him upon the head. And again, you may read another example in Mark,
How the high Priests and Scribes condemned Jesus to death, and he said, they
should mock him, and spit upon him. And again you may read another example, how
some began to spit at Christ, and covered his face, and beat him with their
fists, and the Sergeants smote him with rods; for this example you may read,
Mark 14. and another example you may read Mark 15. how they smote Jesus on the
head with a Reed, and bowed the knee, and mocked him, and began to salute him:
and here you mockers, beaters, and that spit at the Children of God, you may
read your example in Mat. 15. And again, ye that stone the people of God in the
Markets, and high ways, you may read your selves to be of that Generation that
took up stones to stone Christ. And they said, they stoned him for blasphemy,
John 10. And the Disciples told Christ, that the Jews sought to stone him, and
they said unto him, Will thou go thither again? And the High Priests gathered a
Council, and they consulted together to put him to death: And the Apostles was
used despitefully, and they stoned them, Acts 14. And Steven who was examined
before the chief Priests, he was stoned to death with such as held up the
outward Temple, and they gnashed upon him with their teeth, as the world do
now; And there is your example, Acts 7. and Matthew 21.35. how they killed and
stoned the servants of the Lord: and the Apostle Paul was stoned and drawn out
of the City, supposed to have been dead: and in the 2 Cor. 11. the Apostle
speaks there how he was stoned: and another example you may read, Heb. 11. how
the people of God was stoned whom the world was not worthy of. So ye that stone
the people of God now, here you may read your examples before mentioned; And
you are the Generation that stone such as ye are not worthy of.

The 13. day of the 4. Month.
TO all Friends and People every where, where this may come, do I James Millner
and Elizabeth my Wife, who are of them, whom the world scornfully calls
Quakers; we do for the truths sake, and for the clearing of it, and wiping away
those reproaches and scandals which have been cast upon it, by the rude wicked
world, who lies in wickedness and uncleanness; and have taken occasion to cast
many slanderous reproaches upon the truth; which was occasioned by some
weakness which proceeded from us, when we were young in the truth, about half a
year after we were Convinced: We witness the Living power made manifest in us,
and the promise of God we did then witness in measure, where it is said in the
second of Joel, Your sons and your daughters shall prophecy: and the testimony
of Jesus (which is the spirit of prophecy) we did then witness in measure: but
being then young in the truth, and the dark mind being above the prophecy
which was in the light, which dark mind could not comprehend and see the
prophecy what it was to; so the mind being carnal took the prophecy, and
looked out at Carnal things: But now that is born up in our understandings, the
Light which comes from Jesus, which comprehends the darkness; and now we see
where we mist, and erred from the light; praises be to the Living God for ever.
And therefore do we in the presence of the Living God, own our Condemnation due
to that which erred from the Light; and do witness it present upon us, and the
Judgment of God to be just: And we do also witness the Living truth to be pure
and just, which by us has suffered; though we had perished in that Condition:
but glory be unto the Eternal God for ever; who has turned us from the
darkness, unto the light and from the power of Satan unto God: And whereas the
enemies of God, and of his truth, some of the Priests which took Information,
from some which took occasion about that time to stumble, and fall back from
the truth, and has put it several times in print, to make the truth odious,
and to cause weak ones to stumble; and to keep others from receiving of the
truth: We do here therefore openly declare in the Eternal light, whereby we see
and comprehend, and condemn and deny, that which turned from the light, and
with the light which never changes do we shut it out, and condemn it too
amongst the false Prophets and Antichrists that are in the world; and in the
light which is Eternal, do we see that mind that erred from the Light to be one
with all the Priests of England. And I James Millner, and Elizabeth my Wife do
here jointly together in the presence of the Living God deny that which led us
from the light, and all the Priests of England, and all the professions in the
world which is out of the light; with which light we see them and the false
prophet which spoke unto us to be one: And therefore do we pass Condemnation
on them both; And in the light which never changes, do we stand witnesses
against them for ever: Knowing them, and seeing them to be deceivers, and no
Ministers but of Antichrist: And they are them who takes occasion, by all means
they can, to render the truth odious, and to keep the Seed of God in bondage;
that so they may make Merchandise of souls, and so betray the simple: But the
Lord God of life is laying their Abomination open, and uncovering their
filthiness: Therefore thou Priest, Shaw, and all thy partakers, who have made
this our error a cloak for your filthiness, take it to your selves, it is your
own, (and stop your mouths with it) for in the Eternal light which never
changes, we deny both it and you, and condemns you into the pit for ever: And
in the Eternal light we do stand witnesses against the blind guides; and for
the living truth which never changes, are we witnesses: And this are we ready
to seal with our blood: And this are we moved of the Lord to declare to all the
world, for the clearing of the truth; and wiping away the reproaches which lies
upon it, and taking away the stumbling blocks: And we do likewise testify to
all the world, and do see it in the eternal light which comes from Jesus Christ
the true Prophet which Moses writ of, who said, A Prophet shall the Lord your
God raise up like unto me, him shall you hear; which we witness to be come and
made manifest in us: Therefore do we know, and see, and to all the world
declare, that all the false Prophets that ever prophesied falsely, (who
prophesies for Baal,) whose minds have turned and erred from the light, as ours
was when we looked out from the light which never changes: Therefore do we
declare and witness to all the world, That all the false Prophets that ever was
and ever shall be, is of that Generation, and of that nature, and one with the
Priests of England, and all the Priesthood which is in the world, which is
changeable, and erred from the light, which is eternal, and unchangeable,
which comes from Jesus Christ, the unchangeable Priest, and end of the
Prophets; and this we know, and witness in our measure: whereby we see the
deceit they all live in; glory and praises be to the Living God for evermore.

James Millner. Elizabeth Millner,

To all you who yet know not the true Ministers of Jesus Christ, from the false
Teachers of the world.
1. WHether he be the true Minister of Jesus Christ, that preaches the Word in
season, and out of season, at all times and in all places where he comes: or he
that observes a set day, time and place, judge ye.

2. Whether he be the true Minister of Jesus Christ, that is content with the
Gospel ways, food and raiment: or he that will have the tenth of men's estates,
or a great sum of money yearly for his pains; judge ye.

3. Whether he be the true Minister of Jesus Christ, that is humble, lowly, and
meek, willing to be servant to all, that live in the truth; or he who is proud,
covetous, and idle, Judge ye.

4. Whether he be the true Minister of Jesus Christ, that is despised, hated,
and persecuted of the world, or he who is set up by the world, called Master,
loved of the world; given to pleasures, and who lives in idleness, devouring
the Creation upon his lust; judge ye.

5. Whether he be the true Minister of Jesus Christ, that speaks the Word of
God in power, from the mouth of the Lord, and no more but what he can and dare
witness to have received from the Lord; or he who only trades with the
letter, and sells it for Money: speaking of the Saints Conditions, and knowing
nothing of it in himself, who only lives in the form without the power of God;
judge ye.

Friends,
HEre you have a clear distinction betwixtt he Ministers of Christ, and the
Ministers of the world, who are set up by man, Matthew. 23. Mark 12. Isa. 55.
Isa. 54.13.
which Jesus Christ cries Woe against; therefore hold not them up any longer,
Lay not out your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that
which satisfies not; but Hearken diligently unto me, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
that your souls may live. For he has promised to teach all his himself: And
he is nigh you, even in your mouth, and in your heart. If you hearken to the
true Light of God in your Consciences, it will teach you to deny all
ungodliness, and to live soberly justly, and righteously in this present evil
world, Looking up unto Jesus, Ier. 31.33, 34.
who is the author and finisher of your faith. Dear Friends, I know both these
sorts of men by experience, and therefore I do utterly deny the one as false
Teachers, their fruits every way shows it: Heb. 12.1, 2.
and the other I do witness to be the Ministers of Jesus Christ; and to preach
the Gospel and the Cross of Christ, which is foolishness to them that perish,
1 Cor. 1.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. 2 King. 22.2.
but unto us that are saved it is the power of God. Consider of all the false
prophets, in the time of the true Prophets; and you shall find them to be of
the same Generation now as was then: Read and consider of these places I have
given you in the Margent; Ier. 29.8, 9.
for it is the love to your Souls, I have freely given you this, as I freely
received it from the Lord. Herein I have discharged my self, and you will be
left without excuse, when the Lord comes to plead with you. I am your servant
in the Lord in a weak measure.

T. A.

To the Heads and Governors of this Nation, who have put forth a Declaration
for the keeping of a day of solemn fasting and Humiliation, for the persecution
(as they say) on the poor Inhabitants in the Valley of Lucerna Angrona, and
others professing the reformed Religion, which has been transmitted unto them
from their Ancestors.
Answ. PRofessing their reformed Religion, may be transmitted to Generatio^s,
and so holden by the tradition, and in that where the profession and tradition
is holden, in that is the days of humiliation kept, which stands in the will
of man, which is not the fast which the Lord requires, to hold down the head
like a Bul-rush for a day, and the day following be in the same condition, as
you were the day before: To the light of Christ Jesus, in your Consciences do I
speak, which testifies for God every day, and witnesses against all sin and
persecution, which measure of God if you beguided by it, does not limit God to
a day, but leads to the fast which the Lord requires, which is to loose the
bonds of wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go
free, and to break every yoke, Isa. 58.6. this is the Fast the Lord requires,
and this stands not in the transmission of times, nor in the tradition of men;
but this was before time was, Mark 7.7, 8, 9, 13. Col. 2.8.15. Mat. 3.9. and
this leads out of time, and this shall be when time shall be no more. And those
that teach for Doctrine, the Commandments of men, are they which ever
persecuted the life and power when it came.

And a Decree or Edict (as you call it) proceeds from the ground of the Popes
Religion and Supremacy, and there stands his tyranny and cruelty, acted in that
will which is in that nature which exercises Lordship over another, as you may
read, Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25. as all the Heathen do and ever did, and in the
heathenish nature is all the tyrany, and persecution exercised, who are out of
the obedience of the light of Christ Jesus in the Conscience, which is the
guider and leader of all who are tender of that of God in the Consciences; and
who is not led by this, knows not what it is to suffer for Conscience sake.

And whereas you take it into your consideration, the sad persecution, tyrany
and cruelty exercised upon them, whom you call your Brethren, Protestants, and
therein do contribute and administer to their wants outwardly: this is good in
its place, and we own it, and see it good to administer to the necessities of
others, and to do good to all; and we who are sufferers by a Law derived from
the Pope, are willing to join, and contribute with you to their outward
necessities; for the Earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, who is good
to all, and gracious to all, and willing that all should be saved, and come to
the knowledge of the truth; but in the mean time while you are doing this, and
taking notice of others cruelty, tyrany and persecution: turn your eye into
your own bosoms, and see what is doing at home. To the light of Christ Jesus in
all your Consciences, which never changes do I speak, which cannot lie, nor
cannot err nor cannot bear false witness: which does witness for God, and cry
for equity, and justice, and righteousness to be executed. See what is a doing
among them who professes the Scriptures, as they were given forth by the
Saints in light, who dwell in the light, and in the life of them, and them who
do now witness the same light in the same life; and the same power which gave
forth the Scriptures, (which ye profess) them, are persecuted, hailed out of
the Synagogues and Markets, beat, stockt, and imprisoned. Now let that of God
in your Consciences (which is just, and righteous, and equal) examine and try
whether there be any example or president to exercise this persecution, which
now many in this Nation suffer under. A people harmless and innocent, walking
in obedience toward God, and toward man (though it be accounted heresy) but
therein do they exercise themselves to have always a Conscience void of
offense toward God and man, as you may read Acts 24.14.15, 16. not wronging
any man, neither giving any just cause of offense, only being obedient to the
Commands of the Lord, to declare as they are moved by the Holy Ghost, for the
testimony of a good conscience, and say the truth of Christ, and lie not: their
consciences also bearing them witness, Romans 9.1. And for this do they suffer
under them, who profess the same things for which they suffer. Now see if any
age or Generation did ever persecute as this does, who professes Christ Jesus
who reveals the Father; and persecutes them that witness it so. Who professes
Christ Jesus the light of the world, which enlighteneth every one that comes
into the world: and persecutes them who bear this witness and testimony. They
who profess that the Word is become flesh, and persecutes them who witness it
so. They which profess, that whosoever confesses not that Jesus Christ is come
in the flesh, is an Antichrist: and yet persecute them who does confess him
come in the flesh, and calls them Antichrists and Deceivers. They profess
that the Kingdom of Christ is come and they persecute them that witness it
come. They profess Christ Jesus, who is the Resurrection and the life, and they
persecute them who witness him to be so.

But you will say, How shall we know that these people who say they witness
these things do so or no?

Answ. Turn your minds to the light wherewith Christ Jesus has enlightened you
withal, which is one in all; and if you walk in the light you shall know the
light of life, and then you will know, and then you will see what you have
done, who have persecuted the Lord of glory, in whom is life, and that life is
the light of men: and to no other touchstone shall we turn you, but into your
own Consciences, and there shall ye find the truth of what we have declared
unto you, and of what we bear testimony to: and when the books of Conscience
shall be opened, and all judged out of them, then shall you witness us to be of
God, and our testimony to be true; though now you may stop your ears, and
harden your hearts while it is called to day, but then you shall know what you
have done, and whom you have transgressed against; and then you will see that
no persecutors in any age or generation that ever went before you, did ever
transgress against that light (as some of this age does) and measure of God
made manifest, who persecute the same which themselves profess.

But you will say, That Christ and the Apostles were persecuted in their times.

Answ. The Jews did not know that he was the Christ when he came, though they
had the Scriptures which prophesied of him; neither did they believe that he
was risen again, when the Apostles preached his resurrection. But you say you
believe he is come, and you say you believe his resurrection; and yet you
persecute those that witness him come in the flesh: and those that are buried
with him in Baptism, and those that are conformable to his Death, and knows
the power of his Resurrection according to the Scriptures; those you persecute,
hayl before Magistrates, suffer to be beaten in your Synagogues, whipped and
stockt, and shamefully entreated, and into prison cast, and kept, great sums
of money fined and laid upon many of them: as many Goales in this Nation (at
this day) does testify to your faces by a Popish Law.

Therefore honestly consider what is done, whilst you are taking notice of
others Cruelties abroad, lest you overlook what is done at home: for there is
much difference in many things between the Popish Religion and the Protestant
(as they call it) but in this persecution there is no difference; for you will
confess, that the foundation of your Religion is grounded upon the Scriptures;
and now some men are persecuting the same life as spoke forth the Scriptures,
under a profession of the words, thus spoke; and this you shall eternally
witness. So you have the profession and the form, and persecute the possession
and life and power of that form. Therefore know assuredly, that you must come
to Judgment: for he is made manifest, which is without form, to whom all
Judgment is committed.

Therefore to the light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences (which changes
not, which searches and tries you) turn your minds, and stand still, and wait
there to receive the righteous Law which acts according to that of God in the
Conscience, which is now rising and bearing witness against all ungodliness,
and unrighteousness of men. And those whom you persecute is made manifest to
that of God in all Consciences, and that of God in all Consciences shall
witness for us to be of God, and this you shall eternally witness, whether you
will hear or forbear. And our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our
Consciences, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God we have had our conversation in the world, and more
abundantly to you-wards.

And therefore do we bear witness and testify against the form and profession
of it, who persecute the life and power. Therefore to the Eternal light of
Christ Jesus which is the searcher and tryer of all hearts, turn your minds,
and see what ye are doing, lest you overturn your foundation and bottom whereon
you stand, while you are professing the Scriptures; and persecuting the life,
light, and power that gave them forth: for the stone cut out of the Mountain
without hands, is now striking at the feet of the Image which the profession
(that stands in the will of man) has set up. Now is that made manifest, that
all must appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive
the things done in the body, according to that which they have done, whether it
be good or bad. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men, but
we are made manifest unto God; and shall be made manifest in all your
Consciences, which you shall eternally witness.

The Afflictions and the Sufferings of such that suffers by the Popish Laws
and ways, beyond the Seas, by which Law of Queen Mary's that guarded the
Jesuit Priests and the Popish ways, does now the Babes and Children of God,
which are in the unlimited power and spirit suffer imprisonment, yea and great
fines of money, and have had both bread and drink kept from them, within your
own Nation; therefore consider, that within the Nation they be set free from
those Popish laws which the Priests have yet to guard their Church, which
guarded the Jesuits and their Catholic Church; (by which Law the Children of
God now suffer: therefore consider and break down all the Supremacy of the
Popish Church, and that which guarded their Priests in your own Nation, that
now suffer by that; but let the sword be upon that laid which would limit the
Spirit of the Lord God: That with one Consent all dwelling in the light, which
comes from Christ who is the way to the Father where the Church is, may relieve
their brethren, without any pretense, go relieve others in another Nation, and
leave that Popish law to make others suffer in your own Nation. Therefore that
Condemn, the Lord God dread and fear, that him you may know, who does good to
the Just and the unjust, for them we are not against: So be ye merciful even
as your heavenly Father is merciful; therefore we and many others which have
suffered by Queen Mary's Law in this Nation, does send some relief to them who
does suffer by the Papists Wills, Laws and Inventions in other Nations, that
the sufferes bowels may be refreshed, and they anointed; though many do suffer
by the same Law given forth by the same nature, which causes them to suffer
beyond Sea: and many which gathers them relief causes them to suffer, which
all with the light condemned and answered shall be with the light in all
Consciences; which light being comed to and obeyed keeps from Idols, and leads
to the Church in God, and which brings to do good unto all, especially to the
household of faith.

Margaret Fell.
Written from the Spirit of the Lord the 16. Day of the 4. Month.
THE END.

