The Description of the several (...) OF ANABAPTISTS With th^re manner of
Rebaptizing

Cyprian de Habitu Virg: Sordidat i^ta Lavatia non abluit n^c emundat membra
Sed commaculat.

W. M. sculpsit.



(...). The Dippers dipped. OR, THE ANABAPTISTS DVCK'D AND PLVNG'D Over Head and
Ears, at a Disputation in Southwark.

TOGETHER WITH A large and full DISCOURSE of Their
1. Original. 2. Several sorts. 3. Peculiar Errors. 4. High Attempts against
the State. 5. Capital punishments: with an Application to these times.


By DANIEL FEATLEY, D. D.

Valens and Gratianus ad Florianum Vicarium Asiae.

Antistitem qui sanctitatem baptismatis illicita usurpatione geminaverit,
sacerdotio indignum esse censemus. Eorum enim damnamus errorem qui Apostolorum
praecepta calcantes Christiani nominis sacramenta sortitos alio rursus
baptismate non purificant, sed incestant sacramenti nomine polluentes.

LONDON, Printed for Nicholas Bourne, at the South Entrance of the Royal
Exchange: And Richard Royston, in Ivie-Lane. 1645.

TO THE MOST NOBLE LORDS, WITH THE HONORABLE KNIGHTS, CITIZENS and BURGESSES
Now Assembled in PARLIAMENT.
THe bright burning Taper of Geneva, Call. praef. ad Reg. Gal. Est hic divini
verb^ quasi quidam genius, ut nun quam emerga quieto and dorm^ ente Satana.
as warm in his Devotions, as clear and lightsome in his Disputes, truly
observes, that the pure doctrine of the Gospel never appears as it were above
the water, but Satan's watchful eye is upon it, and he casts an envious gloate
at it, and has his Tobiases and Sanballats either to jeere or fright the
sincere Professors out of the powerful preaching thereof. In which regard it
is, that as the Jews in their edifying the material Temple, so you in the
repairing of the Spiritual, Neh. 4. 17. Wi^h one of his hands he wrought in
the work, with the other he held a weapon,
have a weapon in the one hand, and a tool in the other; and you have hitherto
more employed the Sword then the Mattock or Spade, by reason of the great
opposition on all hands: and after you shall (through Gods blessing) have laid
the roof on this sacred building, and grateful posterity put a garland of
glory upon your heads for it, yet still there will be use of an arming sword,
not of War, but of Justice, to cut off Superstition and Idolatry on the one
side, and Profaneness and Sacrilege on the other: Heretics with one edge,
and Schismatiques with the other. For as in the beginning of the Reformation,
so now in the endeavored perfection thereof, the mortal enemy of our
immortal souls sets on work all sorts of Heretics and Schismatiques to
hinder, disturb, and (if it were possible) destroy this excellent work. The
Heretics he employeth to pervert the Catholic doctrine, the Schismatiques
to subvert the Apostolic discipline of the Church: the Heretics endeavor to
shake the foundations, the Schismatiques to make breaches in the walls: the
Heretics to rot the maine timber, the Schismatiques to pull in sunder the
rafters of this sacred structure.

Now of all Heretics and Schismatiques the Anabaptist in three regards ought
to be most carefully looked unto, and severely punished, if not utterly
exterminated and banished out of the Church and Kingdom.

First, In regard of their affinity with many other damnable Heretics, both
Ancient and Later; for they are allied unto, and may claim kindred with, 1.
The Millenarians in the first Age, proclaiming Christ's Temporal Kingdom upon
earth for a thousand years, before the day of Judgment. 2. With the
Marcionites in the second Age, who denied the substance of Christ's humane body
made of a woman. Gal. 4. 4.
3. The Catharists or Novatians in the third Age, who denied Repentance and
restitution to the Church thereupon, to those that fell in time of persecution.
4. With the Donatists in the fourth Age, who rebaptized all those that had
received Baptism before in the Catholic Church. Lastly, with a rabble of
Heretics in the latter Ages, namely, the Apostolici, the Adamites, the
Enthusiasts, the Psycopannychists, the Polygamists, the Jesuits, the Arminians,
and the Brownists; of all which and their Errors, I have set down a
particular Catalogue, Chap. 2. As it was said of Caius Caesar, In uno Caesare
multi Marii; and as Cicero says of the Family of the Bruti, that it had in it
multorum insitam atque illuminatam virtutem: so in one Anabaptist you have many
Heretics, and in this one Sect as it were one stock, many erroneous and
schismatic positions, and practices ingraffed, and as it were inoculated.

Secondly, in regard of their audacious attempts upon Church and State, and
their insolent acts committed in the face of the Sun, and in the eye of the
high Court of Parliament. Whereas other depravers of the Doctrine, or
disturbers of the Peace of the Church, whether Papists, Socinians, or
Arminians, who in the later times have braved it and set up their top and
top-gallant, yet since Argus with his hundred eyes has pryed into every corner
of this Kingdom, and several rooms in the great Ship of the Church, have
bestowed themselves under the hatches, and layne close in obscurity: these with
the forwardest of the Brownists strut in the upper deck, and discover
themselves with open face, (...), and upbraid the State with their merit in
hazarding their estate and persons in this present War, and boast with swelling
words of vanity that they expect somewhat more then a toleration. See The
compassionate Samaritane, p. 75, 76. that the Parl. will stop all proceedings
against them, and for the future provide that as well particular and private
congregations as public, may have public protection; that all Statures
against the Separatists be reviewed, and repealed; that the Press may be free
for any man that writes nothing scandalous or dangerous to the State; that this
Parliament prove themselves loving Fathers to all sorts of good men, bearing
respect unto all, and so inviting an equal assistance and affection from all.
They preach, and print, and practice their Heretical impieties openly; they
hold their Conventicles weekly in our chief Cities, and Suburbs thereof, and
there prophecy by turns; and (that I may use the phrase of Tertullian)
aedificantur in ruinam, they build one another in the faith of their Sect, to
the ruin of their souls; they flock in great multitudes to their Iordans, and
both Sexes enter into the River, and are dipped after their manner with a kind of
spell containing the heads of their erroneous tenets, and their engaging
themselves in their schismatic Covenants, and (if I may so speak)
combination of separation. And as they defile our Rivers with their impure
washings, and our Pulpits with their false prophecies and phanaticall
enthusiasmes, so the Presses sweat and groan under the load of their
blasphemies. For they print not only Anabaptisme, from whence they take their
name; but many other most damnable doctrines, tending to carnal liberty,
Familisme, and a medley and hodg-podge of all Religions. Witness the Book
printed 1644. Pref. p. (...)
called The Bloody Tenet, which the Author affirms he wrote in Milk; and if
he did so, he has put much Rats bane into it, as namely, That it is the will
and command of God, that since the coming of his Son the Lord Jesus, a
permission of the most Paganish, Jewish, Turkish, or Antichristian Consciences
and Worships be granted to all men in all Nations and Countries; That Civil
States with their Officers of Justice are not Governors or Defenders of the
Spiritual and Christian state and worship; That the doctrine of Persecution in
case of Conscience (maintained by Master Calvin, Beza, Cotton, and the
Ministers of the New English Churches) is guilty of all the blood of the souls
crying for vengeance under the Altar: Witness a Tractate of Divorce, in which
the bonds of marriage are let loose to inordinate lust, and putting away wives
for many other causes besides that which our Savior only approves, namely, in
case of Adultery. Witness a Pamphlet newly come forth, entitled, Man's
Mortality, in which the soul is cast into an Endymion sleep, from the hour of
death to the day of Judgment. Witness a bold Libell offered to hundreds, and
to some at the door of the house of Commons, called The Vindication of the
Royal Commission of King Jesus, wherein the brazen faced Author blusheth not
to brand all the Reformed Churches, and the whole Christian world at this day,
which christen their children, and sign them with the seal of the Covenant,
with the odious name of an Antichristian faction.

Thirdly, In regard of the peculiar malignity this heresy has to Magistracy;
other heresies are stricken by Authority, this strikes at Authority it self,
undermineth the powers that are ordained of God, and endeavors to wrest the
sword out of the Magistrates hand, to whom God has given it for the cutting
off of all heresy, and impiety; and if this Sect prevail, we shall have no
Monarchy in the State, nor Hierarchy in the Church, but an Anarchie in both.
It grieveth a Religious eye to see other vermin corrupting other Flowers of
Paradise, as our sweet Violets, and fragrant Roses, and fairest Lillies, and
various Iulyflowers, and blushing Emmenies, and beautiful Tulips: but most of
all to see this heresy, like a venomous serpent, lying at the root of the
Crown-Imperiall, which if it be not killed, will so poison it, that the leaves
will fall off by degrees, and the stalk it self shortly wither. We read in
the Prophecy of Zachary of two staves, the staff of beauty, and the staff
of bonds, which supported the State and Church of Israel. By the staff of
beauty or comeliness, the Laws of every Kingdom and Commonwealth may be
understood, which bear up the State, and preserve decent order and comeliness
among men; By the staff of bonds the covenants and oaths whereby the members
are firmly tied to their head, and one to another. If the staff of beauty be
broken, there will be a downfall of all good order and government: if the
staff of bonds be broken, all things will be at a loose end. Me thinks I see
these two staves shining in the golden Maces borne before you; the staff of
beauty in that borne before the House of Commons, in which the Legislative
power and the beautiful order of the several Estates of this Kingdom are
conspicuous; the staff of bonds in that which is carried before the House of
Peers, in which the power of Judicature, even to bonds and death, principally
resideth. Now because these heretics alone professedly teach the exautorating
all Christian Magistrates, ^ Bloody ^net, p. 2.
and in express terms deny both the Legislative power in the Commons to
propound or enact Laws in matter of Religion, and all coercive power in the
house of Peers, or any other, to inflict civil punishment for the violation
of them, and so as much as in them lies, they endeavor to break both these
staves of the Prophet, they deserve the smartest stroke from both. ^dec. 1. l.
10. ^irius cum ^ates Sam^^n galeas ^^osque insig^^ armorum tratus vi^t, multa
de ^enti hosti^vana magis ^^e quam ef^i ad even^ disseruit: ^nim cri^vulnera
fa-^ and per pi^ and aurata ^ transire anum pi^ and cando^tanicarum ^^temque
a^ubi res geratur, ^tari.


With these Heretics I enter into Lists in the ensuing Tractate, and without
any flourish of Rhetoric at all fall upon them with Logical and Theological
weapons, weilded after a Scholasticall manner; for it is most true which
Papirius Cursor sometimes spoke in the head of his Troops, advancing on in
their march against the Army of the Samnites, more glorious in show then
formidable, as consisting of men more sumptuously then strongly armed,
encouraging his soldiers after this manner: Fear not this Pageant rather then
Army; their large feathers and imbroydered scarfes give no wounds; their rich
belts, and painted targets, and thin gilt breast-plates will not endure the
push of the Roman pike. It is not beauty, and gorgeous apparel, but strength,
and valor, and Armor of proof makes a Warrior. And therefore that brave
Commander of the Trojans, Hector, deservedly checked his brother Paris, a
Paragon of beauty, and an excellent Carpet Knight, in the flower of his age,
^er. Il.
for undertaking a single combat with Menclaus, saying, (...),
(...),
Picked phrases and witty conceits and ornaments of Rhetoric do well in
Panegyricks, and Paraeneticks, but they are of little or no use in Polemicks,
in which thus Ennius informs us, Vi geritur res: Spernitur orator bonus,
horridu' miles amatur.

But why do I trouble my self with these new upstart Sectaries? There is a
learned and reverend Assembly of Divines attending on you, who will take care
nequid Ecclesia detrimenti capiat. Who pressed me for this service? My Answer
hereunto is as ready as true, That though I were not pressed, yet I was
challenged to it. And if I had declined this Combat, as others did, the
Adversary would have grown most insolent, Theod. hist. l. Gast. de Ana^ l. 1.
Quoties ^ ve public, s^^ privatim congrederemur cu^ Anabaptistis, semper vict^
abibat verit^ quae a nobis stat.
and all the City and Borough rung of their vaunting brags, and confidence in
their cause, and our diffidence in ours; therefore I gave them a meeting at the
time and place appointed. And though I were but one, and they many, yet they
were not able to withstand (...), the irresistible and all-conquering force of
truth: neither did they after that send any more challenges. And I had then
pursued the combat with my pen, had not the more necessary functions of my
Pastoral charge See Romarue^^
hindered me. But now being discharged against my will, Solin. pol. his^ c. 9.
Fons est i^ Sardin. qui con^tra venenum S^ lifugae (est eni^ animantis ej^
morsus mortifer) a summo omnium opific in remedium conditus est; u^ oritur
malum ibi quoque invenitur prompt^^ remedium.
of preaching at my Cures, and having lately published an Answer to a Popish
Challenge: I could not think of any fitter employment for the present, then to
perfect the notes taken long since in that Disputation, and to supply
whatsoever might seem lacking to the fuller confutation of those erroneous
tenets, and to commend both to the public view, that the Antidote might be
there ready, where the infection first brake out. As Solinus writes, that in
Sardinia where there is a venomous Serpent called Solifuga, (whose biting is
present death) there is also at hand a Fountain, in which they who wash
themselves after they are bit, are presently cured. This venomous Serpent (
vere Solifuga) flying from, and shunning the light of Gods Word, is the
Anabaptist, who in these later times first showed his shining head, and
speckled skin, and thrust out his sting near the place of my residence, for
more then twenty years: And if these Disputations and Writings of mine may
prove like the Waters of the Fountain in Sardinia, ^etron. Arbit. ^nde datum
est ^ulnus, contigit ^de salus.
sovereign against the sting and teeth of this Serpent, I shall account my
pains well spent; and whilst I endeavor to free others from spiritual
thraldom, forget the tediousness of my corporal, and possess my soul in
patience, till God shall send deliverance; to whose gracious direction, and
powerful protection, I commend you, beseeching God to crown your sincere
intentions, and religious endeavors, for the Reformation of Church and State,
with such success, that this your meeting may be like to that in the 25. year
of Edw. 3. which is known to posterity by the name of Benedictum Parliamentum,
the blessed Parliament.

Yours in the Lord Jesus, DAN: FEATLEY.
From Prison in the Lo: Peter's house in Aldersgate Street, Ian. 10. 1644.
TO MY REVEREND, and much esteemed Friend, Mr. JOHN DOWNAM.
Worthy Sir,
I Have now finished my Polemicall Tractate against the Anabaptists; which had
slept securely by me in a whole skin of Parchment, had not the clamours of the
Adversaries awaked it, who cry down Paedobaptisme, and cry up Anabaptisme, not
only in the Pulpit, but also from the Sea A. Bar^ his Treatise Dipping: F^
Cornwell his Pamphlet, entitled, The Commission of King Jesus: A. Ritter his
Libell, calle^ The Vanity of Childish Baptism: Ch: Blockwood, The storming of
Antichrist, and the Confess of the Anabap^ists, printed at London, 1644.
Press, to the great offense of godly minds, and the scandal of the Church.

You will peradventure return me an Answer in the words of the Poet, Ole quid
ad te? What does this concern me, whose Restraint is a necessary Supersedeas
from proceeding against these presumptuous and daring Sectaries? And the
unfurnishing me of all Books, and helps of mine own Notes and Collections
lately taken from me) furnishes me with too just an excuse for not writing. I
confess to my grief it does, but what will you have me do, Situ and otio
torpescere? Such a rest would be most restless and tedious; The less I do,
the more I must needs suffer; and the more I do, the less I suffer. And
believe me, Sir, it is not an ambition to be seen in the Press, but a desire
for the time to forget my unsufferable pressures, which has now set me on
work. As when we have the world at will, and can give our Mind her vagaries at
pleasure, to fix or thoughts on any certain subject, is a kind of
incarceration of the spirit; so when our Estate is sequestered, and our person
confined, and no theme is given us daily to enlarge upon, but the valuing of
our unvaluable losses, and the present supplying of our importunate wants, to
divert our minds from commenting upon our deplorate estate, and forcibly
confining our meditations to a more pleasant subject, is a great ease and kind
of liberty to immured thoughts.

But this is not all, for as S. Jerome thought wheresoever he was, whatsoever
he did, he heard the sound of the last Trumpet, and the summons of the
Archangel, Surgite mortui, and venite ad judicium: So me thinks wheresoever I
am, and whatsoever my business is, I hear that Vae of the Apostle, Woe be
unto me if I preach not the Gospel: And preach the Gospel I can now no
otherwise then from the Press, for both my Pulpits are taken from me, and
possessed by others, and I cannot obtain (though by my self and friends I
earnestly sough^ it) that liberty which S. Paul enjoyed when he was imprisoned
at Rome, to preach the Gospel to my fellow prisoners. Now therefore since I
cannot lingua, I must be content as I am able evangelizare calamo, to preach
with my Pen; which I can hardly dip into any other liquor, then the juice of
Gall, in regard of the malignity of the times, and the insolences of the
enemies of the truth. As Adders, Efts, and other venomous serpents breed in old
broken walls: so all sorts of Heretics and Schismatiques breed and are
exceedingly multiplied by reason of the ruptu^es in State, and distraction of
the time. Among all these the Papists and the Anabaptists are most dangerous
and pestilent enemies, the one to the Church, the other to the State; These
above all others having bestirred themselves, since the waters were troubled;
and they boast in secret of their great draughts of fish, the Papists of 20000.
Proselytes, the Anabaptists of 47. Churches.

Si natura negat facit, indignatio versum.
As well Indignation as Zeal has stirred up my drooping spirit, See Romar^
printed by Bourne at the old Exchan^
and encouraged me, though (as I said before) unarmed, to fall upon both; the
former, in my Answer to a Popish Challenge; the latter, in this my
Catabaptistarum Catacrisis. Jerome comforting a young Hermit, bade him look up
to heaven, and Paradisum mente deambulare, assuring him that so long as he had
Paradise in his mind, and heaven in his thoughts, tamdiu in eremo no eris so
long he was not in the wilderness. So verily it seems to me, so long as I can
draw the sword of the spirit, and pursue freely the enemies of the doctrine and
discipline of the Church of England, and beat them out of their trenches, so
long me thinks I am not in bonds. The Lord in mercy look upon the Convul^ions
in the State, and Distractions in the Church, and turn our Baptism of blood
into a Baptism of tears: in which we may and ought all to be Anabaptists. This
is the hearty wish of him, who loves the truth for it self, and you for the
truths sake,

Dan: Featley.

The Preface to the Reader.
IN nova fert animus mutatas discere formas Corpora. I am to tell thee
(Christian Reader) this New year of new changes never heard of in former Ages,
namely, of Haras turned nito Aras, Stables into Temples, Stalls into Quires,
Shopboards into Communion Tables, Tubs into Pulpits, Aprons into Linen Ephods,
and Mechanics of the lowest rank into Priests of the high places. Thou shall
hear in this Treatise not of a line drawn after Protogenes, nor of an Iliad
after Homer, but of a Metamorphosis after Ovid: not made by Poetical license,
but by Prophetical liberty: not of men into beasts, ^tus 1. 12.
but of S. Paul's (...), evil beasts, shall I say, into men? nay into men of
God, and Prophets of the New Law.

If ever Saint Ieroms Complaint were in season, p. ad Paulin. ^uod medico^m est
promit^nt medici, ^actant fab^lla fabri: sola ^cripturarum^rs est quam si^i
passimo^^^es ^ndicant, ^ane ga^rula nus, ^an delia sen^x, hane ^ophista
^^bo^us, ha^c universi praesununt, do^ent ^riusquam discunt.
it is now: Physicians keep within the bounds of their Science; Smiths meddle
with the Hammer and Anvill; the Linen Draper deals not in Woollen cloth, nor
the Woollen Draper in Linen; the Carpenter takes not the Ioyners work out of
his hand, nor the Ioyner the Carpenters; the Shoemaker goes not beyond his
Last, nor the Tailor beyond his Measure; only the trade of expounding
Scripture is a Mystery which every Artizan arrogateth to himself. The
Physician here will be prescribing receipts, the Lawyer will be demurring upon
dubia Evangelica, and every handy-crafts man will b^ handling the pure Word of
God with impure and unwashed hands. This the prattling huswife, this the old
dotard, this the wrangling sophister, in a word, this men of a^^ professions,
and men of no prof^ssion, take upon them to have skill in, readily teaching
that they never learned, and abundantly pouring out that which was never
infused into them.

The Apostle comparing the dignity of the ministerial function with the
indignity and insufficiency of most men's gifts for it, cries out, Who is
sufficient for these things? Bern. in Cant. I'antae coa^^tatis sunt pe^ quos
nobis fluenca coelestia cinanant, ut antea effundere quam infundi velint, laqui
quam audi^e paratio^es, prompti doc^re quod no^^ didicerunt. 2 Cor. 2. 16.
Bellar. l. 2. de verb. D^ i* c 15. Quod obsecro nunc diceret Basilius, (...)
Pharmacapolas, sutures, caeterosque opifiees etiam a pu^p^^ts sacra eloquia
tractare apud Lutheranos and Calvinistas videret?
But if we consider men's opinions of their own gifts, and their practice at
this day, we may say, Who is not sufficient for these things? Not the meanest
Artizan, not the illiteratest Day-labour^r, but holds himself sufficient to be
a Master Builder in Christ's Church. When the Jesuit heretofore cast this in
our dish, we always flung it back into his face, with a confident denial,
answering him in the words of the Archangel, Jude 9. The Lord rebuke thee,
thou false tongue. But now those whose Religion, if they have any, is a
negative one, and stands in a mere opposition to Popery, notwithstanding
herein strengthen the Papists hands against us, and put us to that miserable
Apology of the Poet, -- Pudet haec opprobria nobis,
Et dici potuisse, and non potuisse refelli.
It is a thousand pitties, that not in the dawning of the day from the night of
Popery, and first glimmering of the light of Reformation, as in Luthers first
standing up for the Truth; but now in the noone tide of the Gospel, such owls
and bats should fly abroad every where, See Sleid. Com. l. 5.
and flutter in our Churches, and sile upon our Fonts, Pulpits, and Commnnion
Tables, and not either be caught, and confined to their nests in barnes, or
rotten trees, or put in Cages fit for such night-birds. I wonder that our
doors, posts, and walls sweat not, upon which such Notes as these have been of
late affixed, On such a day such a Brewers Clerk Exercises, Such a Tailor
Expounds, Such a Waterman Teaches. If we have Pers. pro^ Sat. 1. Corvo^
Poetas and Po^ tridas picas.
Crow-Poets, and Pye-Poetesses; if Turners turn Bezaliels, and Aholiabs to mend
the polished works of the Temple; if Cooks, with Demosthenes, (deservedly
reproved by Theod. his li. 4. c. 17. (...), and
S. Basil) instead of mincing of their meat fall upon dividing of the Word; if
Tailors leap up from the Shop-board to the Pulpit, and patch up Sermons out of
stolen shreds; if not only of the lowest of the people, as in Ieroboams time,
Priests are consecrated to the most high God; but if like as Novatus
consecrated himself a Bishop, so these ordain themselves Priests and Deacons;
if they enter not unto the Church, but break into it; if they take not holy
Orders, but snatch them to themselves: do we marvel to see such confusion in
the Church as there is? As Christ sometimes spoke, Si lumen tenebrae, quantae
tenebrae? If the light that is in thee be darkness, Mat. 6. 23.
how great is that darkness? So may we truly say, If in Order it self there
be Confusion, how great is the confusion? What are all the Prophets become mad,
2 Pet. 2. 16.
that the asses mouth must needs be opened by miracle to reprove them? Though
some would be content to have it thought so, and we must not refuse to wear
our masters cognizance, who was said by some of his ki^red to be besides
himself: Mar. 3. 21.
yet we must tell them the case is far different; for there the Ass saw the
Angel in his way, Nun. 16. 23.
but here the Angels see the Asses in their places; there the Ass spoke once,
because he was twice struck, but here the Asses speak often, because they are
not so much as once struck for their presumption. Now if any man desires to
know from whence this Clergy of Laics, come, that he may not think that these
Russet Rabbis, and Mechanic Enthusiasts, and profou^d Watermen, and Sublime
Coachmen, and Illuminated Tradesmen of almost all sorts are dropped from the
clouds: Let him peruse the Catalogues of Heretics written by Alfonsus a
Castro, Pontanus, Slussenburgius, and Ambrosius de Rusconibus, together with
the History of Sleiden, Bullenger, and Gabriel Abres, and others, and he shall
find that they all proceeded Doctors out of the School of one Stock the Johan.
Gast. de exord. Anab. ^. 35. Anav ap^ist^e su^unt ^ioi omnes prae^dicandi
officium, atque de ali^s qu^ legitime a Christiani; Ecclesits ^an^iorati sunt
^ciscitantur Quis te ^legit cum isti ne a sua quidem ^aeco-Eccl ^ia ^nittantur.
See the Hist. of ^he Anab. prin^ed at London, ^641.
Ana^. Of whom we may say, as Irenaeus sometime spoke of the Heretic Ebion,
the father of the Ebionites, His name in the Hebrew signifies silly, or simple
and such God wot was he: So we may say, the name of the father of the
Anabaptists signifies in English a senseless piece of wood, or block, and a
very blockhead was he: yet out of this block were cut those chips that kindled
such a fire in Germany, Holsatia, and Suevia, that could not be fully quenched,
no not with the blood of 150000. of them killed in war, or put to death in
several places by the Magistrates.

The fire in the reigns of Queen Elizabeth, Et Joh. Gast l. ^e exord. Ana. p.
247. Ego vi^i Nicol. Stock ^ui primus in Germ. videtu^ barsisse vene^um illud
imiorum dogmaum. Hunc au^ierunt Monearius and Phi^rus quibus elut emissari^
usus totam ^erturbavi^ ^ermaniam. ^ont. cata. haer. ^ommota sedione rustica
per^erman. Alsat. Sueviam ad 50000. fi^e^nt trucidaeti.
and King James, and our gracious Sovereign, till now, was covered in England
under the ashes; or if it brake out at any time, by the care of the
Ecclesiastical and Civil Magistrates it was soon put out. But of late, since
the unhappy distractions which our sins have brought upon us, the Temporal
sword being other ways employed, and the Spiritual locked up ^ast in the
scabberd, this Sect, among others, has so far presumed upon the patience of
the State, that it has held weekly Conventicles, rebaptized hundreds of men
and women together in the twilight in Rivelets, and some arms of the Thames,
and elsewhere, dipping them over head and ears. It has printed diverse
Pamphlets in defense of their Heresy, yea and challenged some of our Preachers
to disputation. Now although my bent has been always hitherto against the
most dangerous enemy of our Church and State, the Jesuit, to extinguish such
balls of wildfire as they have cast in the bosom of our Church, yet seeing
this strange fire kindled in the neighboring parishes, and many Nadabs and
Abinu's offering it on Gods Altar, I thought it my duty to cast the waters of
Siloam upon it, to extinguish it.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, D. F. Prisoner in Peter-house.
Calend. Ian. 1645.
A TABLE of the especial Contents.
I. A True Relation of a Disputation in Southwark, with four Anabaptists. page
1. II. Aaditions to the former Disputation: In which, to clear Texts of
Scripture before alleged, are adjoined diverse Arguments drawn from the
testimony of the Fathers, and consent of the Church, and reasons for Childrens
Baptism. 18 III. A Tractate of the names and several sorts of Anabaptists. 23
IV. Of the Errors of the Anabaptists both common to other Sects, and those
which are peculiarly their own. 28 V. A particular confutation of six of their
erronerus tenets: 1. Concerning Dipping, and the pretended necessity thereof.
2. Concerning the baptizing of Children, p. 39. To which is added, A censure of
Master Cornwell his Book, entitled, The Vindication of the Commission of King
Jesus, p. 64. As also of A. R. his Tractate, entitled, The vanity of childish
Baptism. 69 3. Concerning Set-formes of Prayer. 84 4. Concerning the
d^stinction of the Clergy and Laity. 129 5. Concerning taking oaths before
the Magistrate, especially the Oath Ex Officio. 157 6. Concerning the office of
the Civil Magistrate. 178 VI. Remarkable Stories of the Anabaptists; wherein
it is proved experimentally, 1. That they are an illiterate and sottish Sect.
199 2. That they are a lying and a blasphemous Sect, falsely pretending to
divine Visions and Revelations. 204 3. That they are an impure and carnal
Sect. 207 4. That they are a cruel and bloody Sect. 210 5. That they are a
profane and sacrilegious Sect. 212 VII. The fearful judgments of God
inflicted upon the ringleaders of that Sect. 217 VIII. Animadversions upon the
Anabaptists Confession, printed at London, Anno Dom. 1644. 219 IX. The
conclusion of all. 227
Errata, sic corrige.
Page 1. line 15. read end. p. 4. l. 8. r. a visible Church. p. 23. l. 24. r.
reiteration. p. 36. l. penult. r. 1. Cor. 14. 19. p. 41. l. 22. r. sexes. p.
44. l. penult. r. and they are no where prohibited. p. 48. l. 3. r. And. p. 51.
l. 15. r. or a legitimate wife. p. 53. l. 33. r. from. p. 57. l. 27. r. in the
principles of. p. 67. in marg. ad lin. 19. r. Valentinian. p. 70. l. 9. r. that
they. and lin. 25. r. rue it by. p. 89. l. 17 r. propounded. p. 120. l. 24. r,
Prayer himself. p. 125. lin. 18 r. hebetetur, p. 185. lin. 6. dele to. page
189. l. 8. r. Scepter. p. 195. l. 4. r. abjiciunt. p 198. l. 13. r. the man. p.
207. l. 14. r instance. p. 211. l. 21. r. reliquo, p. 215. l. 31. r. habet. p.
216. l. 17. r. stagello. p 218. l. ult. r. as well as an Arrian. p. 219. in
marg. l. 5. r. bini. p. 225. l. 35. r. evident. p. 226. l. 37. dele of.

Greg. Naz. Theol. Orat. 40.
(...).

What will thou say of Infants that neither experimentally know the grace of
Baptism, nor the loss by want thereof? Shall we baptize them? Yes, by all
means, if there be any danger; For it were better that they should be
sanctified, though they be not sensible thereof, then to go out of this world
without the seal and badge of their initiation into Christianity.

A true Relation of what passed at a meeting in Southwark, between D. Featley,
and a company of Anabaptists, October 17. 1642.
AFter the Company were placed, and Dr. Featley had made a short ejaculatory
Prayer to GOD, to give a blessing to the meeting, a Scotchman began thus.

M. Doctor, Scotch-man.
we come to dispute with you at this time, not for contention sake, but to
receive satisfaction: we hold that the Baptism of Infants cannot be proved
lawful by the Testimony of Scripture, or by Apostolical tradition; if you
therefore can prove the same either way, we shall willingly submit unto you.

Are you then Anabaptists? I am deceived in my expectation, D. Featley.
I thought that the ending of this meeting had bin to have reasoned with you
about other matters, and that my task would have been to have justified our
Communion-Booke, and the lawfulness and necessity of coming to the Church,
which I am ready to do. Anabaptisme (which I perceive is the point you hold)
is an heresy long since condemned both by the Greek and Latin Church, and I
could have wished also that you had brought scholars with you, who knew how to
dispute, which I conceive you do not, so far as I guess by your habit, and
am informed concerning your professions: for there are but two ways of
disputing, First by Authority, Secondly by reason.

First by Authority, if you will dispute in Divinity, you must be able to
produce the Scriptures in the Original Languages,

For no Translation is simply authentical, or the undoubted word of God.

In the undoubted word of God there can be no Error.

But in Translations there may be, and are errors.

The Bible Translated therefore is not the undoubted word of God, but so far
only as it agrees with the Original, which (as I am infermed) none of you
understand.

Secondly, if you will dispute by Reason, you must conclude syllogistically in
mood and figure, which I take to be out of your Element. However, since you have
so earnestly desired this meeting, and have propounded a Question to me I
little expected: before I answer yours, I will propound a Question or two to
you concerning the blessed Trinity, that I may know whether you are well
instructed in the principles of Catechism, who yet are so well conceited of
your selves, that you take upon you to teach others.

This, M. Doctor, Scotch-man.
is nihil ad Rhombum, we would know of your whether the Baptism of Children can
be proved lawful (as we said before) as it is practiced among you.

Whereas you say this my question is not ad Rhombum, you mistake the matter. D.
Featley.
For it is ad Rhombum, Section 1.
if you know what the Phrase means. Two Questions of the Trinity propounded.
Is not the form of Baptism this? I Baptize thee in the name of the Father,
the Son, and the Holy Ghost? therefore my questions concerning the Trinity
appertain to the Doctrine of Baptism. Before therefore I answer you concerning
the persons fit to be Baptized, whether men and women only in riper years, or
children also: to try your skill, I will propound an argument to each of you
out of Scripture, concerning the blessed Trinity.

And first, (turning to the Scotchman)

Do you believe, says he, that each of the three persons is God? how then
does Christ, John 17. 3. say that the Father is the only true God?

2. After turning to the other.

Do you believe that the Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father, and the Son? if
you do so, how then do you answer the words of our Savior, John 15. 26. The
Spirit which proceeds from the Father? there is no mention at all of proceeding
from the Son, but the Father only. To the latter of these queries nothing was
answered, by either of them; to the former they both answered. First the
Scotchman.

We never intend to deny that every person in Trinity is God, Scotchman
for the text you allege, it proves not what you bring it for.

Her^t be Text being read, the Scotchman answered, Christ opposes his Father,
as the true God, to all false Gods.

I do not urge the word true, D. Featley.
for that indeed is spoken in opposition to false Gods, but the word only, and
thus I frame the Argument.

If God the Father be the only true God, then the holy Ghost is not God.

But God the Father is the only true God;

Ergo the Holy Ghost is not God.

The Father is said to be the only God in respect of Essence. Scotch-man.


This Answer contains in it Blasphemy; D. Featley.
for if the Father be the only true God, in respect of Essence; The venterous
Scotch-man was so slunnied with this blow, that he gave in, and spoke no m^re
for a good space.
then is not the Son or the Holy Ghost God in respect of Essence; but that is
false and blasphemous, for then the three persons should not be one God in
Essence; or in respect of Essence.

Here the Scotchmans answer being exploded, he wrote something, and gave it
some there present, and in the mean while one M. Cufin Cufin.
interposing, said.

I come not here to dispute, but to receive satisfaction of some doubts, which
if you can resolve me in, I shall submit. Now for the place you allege out of
S. John, I conceive it may be thus answered: Christ spoke this as man, and his
meaning is that his Father is only God, and no Creature is so.

It is very true, that only excludes all creatures; but whereas you say that
these words are spoken by Christ, D Featley.
as man only, it cannot stand with the Text; for it is added, and whom thou
have sent, Jesus Christ. Christ says it is life Eternal to know the Father to
be the only true God, and whom he has sent, Jesus Christ; but it is not life
Eternal to know Christ only as man, but as true God and man, and so a perfect
Mediator: neither is Christ said only the Son of God, in respect of his
temporal generation, as man; but also in respect of his eternal generation as
he is the second person in Trinity; this answer therefore of yours is not
sufficient nor pertinent.

M. Doctor, Sir John Lenthall.
the company is not satisfied with their Answers, I pray, resolve the doubt
your self.

I will, as soon as they have propounded their objections; for, I moved these
Questions only to make it appear to the auditors, See the Solution of those
doubts, in the additions to the Conference.
how unfit these men are to take upon them the office of Teachers, who are so
imperfect in the fundamental points of Catechism. Now let them propound what
questions they please.

What is the nature of a visible Church? Cufin.
what is the matter and f^rme of it? This Cufin is said to be one of the first
that subscribed the Anabaptists confession. printed 1644. London.
or what is the visible Church of Christ made up of, by authority of the
Scriptures?

Your Question is, Quid constituit visibilem Ecclesiam, what makes a Church.

Yes.

I answer, according to the Scriptures and the joint consent of of all
protestant Churches in the world, D Featley.
French, Dutch, etc. in the harmony of confessions, Cufin.
that the sincere preaching of the Word, D. Featley. Section 2^
and the due administration of the Sacraments, constitutes or makes a true
visible Church. The Papists make many notes of the Church, Of the definition of
a true Church,
as antiquity, universality, succession, miracles, and diverse other: but the
reformed Churches make but two only, namely those above mentioned.

What is a true particular visible church? Cufin.


A particular company of men, D Featley.
professing the christian faith, known by the two marks above mentioned, the
sincere preaching of the word, and the due administration of the Sacraments.

Is the church of England such a church? Cufin.


It is so. D. Featley.


How prove you that? Cufin.


First, D. Feateley.
I answer, I need not to prove it, but you are to disprove it. For as Hooker
teaches, in his Ecclesiastical Polity, they who are in possession are not
bound to prove their right, but they who go about to thrust them out are to
disprove their right, and bring a better title for themselves.

Secondly, yet to give you further satisfaction, thus I prove the church of
England to be such a church.

Every church in which the word of God is sincerely preached, Section 3.
and the sacraments lawfully and rightly administered, That the church of
England is a true Church.
is such a church.

But in the church of England the word is sincerely preached, and the
sacraments lawfully administered.

Ergo, the church of England is such a church.

I deny that in the church of England the word is sincerely preached, Cufin.
or the sacraments rightly administered.

I have here two things to prove.

1. That the doctrine of the church of England is agreeable to Gods word.

2. The sacraments are rightly administered in it.

First, the doctrine of the church of England is contained in the 39 Articles.

Secondly, the due administration of the sacraments in the communion-book. But
both the one and the other are agreeable to Gods word.

Ergo, the preaching of the word and administration of the sacraments in the
church of England are agreeable to Gods word.

I deny that the 39 Articles and the book of common prayer are agreeable to
Gods word. Cufin.


1. I will prove that the book of Articles is agreeable to Gods word.

In the book of Articles, the first which concerns the blessed Trinity, the
2. 3. 4. which concern the incarnation of Christ Jesus his death and
resurrection, the 5. which concerns the holy Ghost, the 6. the perfection of
scriptures, and the 18. following, which impugn popery, are agreeable to Gods
word; and you cannot name any one of the rest which is not agreeable; therefore
they are all agreeable. If you know any one that is not agreeable, instance in
it, and I will presently show how it is agreeable to scripture.

For the 39 Articles, Cufin.
I know not what they are, I never saw them that I remember.

Then for ought you know they are all conformable to scripture, D. Featley.
at least you can except against none of them. Now for the book of
common prayer, it consists partly of Psalms, Epistls, and Gospels, partly of
Prayers, and the form and manner of administration of the sacraments. But the
former are taken out of scripture, the latter are agreeable to it. What do you
except against it?

I except against your administration of Baptism, it is not rightly administered
in your church; Cufin.
for you baptize children, and that is not agreeable to Gods word: Anabaptist.
if you say it is, Section 4.
how do you prove it by scriptures?

This D. F. undertook to prove out of scriptures, That the Magistrate may
compel men to come to church, and serve God there according to his word.
but before he alleged any text of scripture for it, another Anabaptist
interposed.

You say your church is a true church; that cannot be: for the true church
compells none to come to church, or punishes him for his conscience, as the
church of England does.

Josiah was supreme governor of the true church in Judah and Israel, D.
Featley.
but Josiah compelled all Israel to come to the house of God and worship him
there, 2 Chronicles. 34. 33. So Josiah took away all the abominations out of all the
countries that appertained to the children of Israel, and compelled all that
were found in Israel to serve the Lord their God.

Ergo, men may be compelled by the civil magistrate to the true worship of God.

Josiah compelled them to come to Jerusalem; Anabaptist.
but that law is not now in force.

There is a threefold law of God delivered by Moses. D. Featley.


1. Ceremonial. 2. Judicial. and 3. Moral. The ceremonial and judicial are
not now in force; but the moral is, and Josiah did this by the command of the
moral law. For the text says not that he compelled them to come to Jerusalem,
but to serve the Lord their God, which is a duty required by the moral law,
and the law of nature. For though the place of Gods Service and the manner be
changed, yet the substantial worship of God still remains, and princes are now
as much bound to compel their subjects to the true worship of God, as Josiah
was. And moreover it is to be noted, that Josiah did this by virtue of a
covenant, which he made before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and keep his
commandments, with all his heart and all his soul, 2 Chro. 34. 31. And the
spirit of God sends this testimony after him, 2 King. 23. 15. Like unto him
there was no King before him, that turned to the Lord with all his heart, and
with all his soul, and with all his might, Here this third Anabaptist was
blank't, and, to save his credit, starts up another doubt.
according to the law of Moses; which words have an apparent reference to that
first and great commandment, Deuteronomy. 6. 5. thou shall love the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might, which law is
moral and perpetual, as all grant.

Prove that any ought to be compelled by the gospel. Anabaptist.


That which Josiah did agreeably to the moral law, D. Featley.
binds us under the gospel; for Christ in the gospel both repeateth and
confirms this commandment of loving the Lord, with all our heart, and all
our soul, calling it the first and great commandment, Mat. 22. 37. 38.
Therefore our princes are as much bound, as Josiah was, to compel their
subjects to serve the true God. Yet farther to give you satisfaction, I will
prove that it is agreeable to the new law to compel men to come to church, and
hear Gods word and receive the sacraments, for this Christ teaches in the
parable recorded by S. Luke chap. 14. 23. Of a King who made a great supper,
and bade many guests, and when they made excuses, he said to his servant, g^e
to the highways, and hedges, and compel them to come in, that my house may be
full.

To this nothing being answered, D. Featley proceeded in his argument. Besides
this command in the parable, thus I prove, that you ought to come to our
churches; the Apostle commands, Romans 13. 1. Let every soul be subject to the
higher powers, and Heb. 13. 17. Obey them that have the oversight of you, and
submit your selves, for they watch for your souls, etc. To which, if we add
those places in 1 Timothy 2. 2. and 1 Pet. 2. 13. 14. An undeniable argument may
be framed, to convince your conscience, after this manner.

All lawful superiors, either temporal or spiritual, commanding lawful
things, are to be obeyed.

But your lawful superiors in church and commonwealth, require you to come
to our church, which I proved to be a true church of Christ.

Ergo, you ought to obey them, and you sin against God by your disobedience to
lawful authority, if you come not.

The word of God does not command us to come to your steeple houses, Anabaptist.
the King has nothing to do to command us in that kind.

The King has power to command you in all things that are lawful, D. Featley.
and not repugnant to Gods word: (indeed if he should command any thing against
Gods word, you ought rather to obey God than man, by the example of the Apostle
in the Acts 4. 19.)

But it is a thing lawful and no way repugnant to Gods word, but most
agreeable thereunto to come to our steeple houses, (as you call them) where the
servants of God assemble on the Lords day and other times, Anabaptist.
to worship him in spirit and truth.

Ergo, D. Featley.
the King has power to command you to come to our church. Anabaptist.


The King makes an Idol of the church, Here the Anabaptist yields the
buckler, viz. that the Magistrate ought to be obeyed, when he commands men to
hear Gods word in the church,
where does Christ command us to come to it?

Where he commands us to hear the word preached; for, in our church the word
of God is preached, and therefore there we ought to hear it.

I am not so averse, but if one of our society should preach in Olaves, or Mary
Overis church, I would hear them, I would come where the church is gathered,
for therein I obey Christ.

Then you will hear none but one'of your society, D. Featley.
as if your society were the true church, This was the plea of the old
Donatists.
and none of the true church but those of your society. I have proved already,
that we have a true church among us, but you have none.

For where there are no lawful pastors, Section 5.
nor flocks, there is not a true church. That the Anabaptist shave no Church.
But amongst you there are not lawful pastors, nor flocks.

Ergo, no true church.

We have amongst us lawful Pastors. Anabaptist.


There are no lawful Pastors but those who are sent, D. Featley.
To. 10. 15. No man ought to assume unto himself that honor, but he that is
called, as was Aaron, Heb. 5. 4. all Presbyters are to be made by imposition of
hands, 1 Timothy 4. 14. and 5. 22. 2 Timothy 1. 6.

But your Pastors have no sending, no calling, no imposition of hands on them,
Ergo you have no lawful pastors.

None amongst us teach; but they have Ordination, for they are elected,
examined and proved. Anabaptist.


Have you imposition of hands of the Presbytery?

We are not bound to tell you, D. Featley,
if you will come to our Church you may see. Anabaptist.


I pray you M. Doctor come to the point: how prove you the Baptism of Children
to be lawful by the Word of God? Cufin.


It seems you will willingly fall upon no other point but this of Anabaptism,
D. Featley.
which heresy was condemned near fifteen hundred years ago. Here, after a long
space, the Scotchman puts in a word, saying, Section 6.


Not sixteen hundred years ago. Of the christening children,


If it were but a thousand, it is long enough, being condemned by the whole
Christian Church, D. Featley.
Greek and Latin.

Sir, that is neither here nor there, you know what the woman of Samaria said,
Joh. 4. Cufin.
Our fathers worshipped in this mountain, and ye say that at Jerusalem is the
place where men ought to worship; they continued in an error above 2000 years.

You are mistaken in your chronology, for there were not 2000 years between
Jacob and Christ. D. Featley.
But to let that your error pass, the Samaritans indeed were in an error a
long time; but this is no error, but a doctrine of truth, that children ought
to be baptized.

There are three sorts of arguments of great force with all understanding men,
the first and chiefest from 1. Scripture. 2. From consent of the universal
church. 3. From evident reason.


I will produce all these for the baptism of children.

We desire to have it proved by scripture. Scotch-man.


Our proofs out of scripture are of two sorts; D. Featley.
some probable, some necessary.

First probable; as where it is said in the Acts 16. 33. that the Apostle
baptized the Jailer, with all that belonged to him and Lydia, and her household,
Acts. 16. 15. and 1 Cor. 1. 16. that he baptized the household of Stephanas, and
in a whole household in all probability there were some children.

I cannot tell that; let us hear your necessary proof out of Gods word.
Scotch-man.


There is as good ground, D. Featley.
reason, or warrant for the baptizing of children now, as there was of old for
circumcising them. But of old children were to be circumcised; Deuteronomy. 10. 16.
many plain places there are where that was commanded. Joshu. 5. 2. etc^


Ergo now by the same warrant they are to be baptized.

We deny that there is the same warrant or ground now for the baptizing of
children, Scotch-man.
that there was of old for the circumcising of them. For there is an express
command for circumcising of children; but there is none for the baptizing of
any but those who can hear the word preached, Mat. 28. Go teach and baptize.

1. That which circumcision was in the old law to the Jews, D. Featley.
that is baptism now to us, the sacrament of entrance into the church; for so
St. Austine and all sound divines hold, that our sacrament of baptism
answers theirs of circumcision, as the sacrament of the Lords supper does
their Paschall Lamb.

2. Circumcision was instituted, as appears, Romans 4. 11. to be a seal of the
righteousness of faith. But for the same end also was baptism instituted, to
be a seal of the covenant of grace, and the free remission of our sins by
faith. And though children in the old law before eight days had not actual
faith, nor could make profession thereof, yet they received the sacrament
thereof. Therefore by the same reason children under the gospel, though they
have not actual faith, nor can make profession thereof, yet may and ought to
receive the sacrament of baptism, (...) this argu^ent drawn (...) analogy
(...) Anabaptists (...) swered no^ing at all.
which is a seal of the covenat of grace, and righteousness by faith.

Children ought not to be baptized, because there is no command for it.

Mark, I pray, how uncertain they are in their grounds; sometimes they say that
children are not to be baptized, ^cotch-man.
because they have not actual faith, (...) Peatley.
which I overthrew but even now; sometimes, because there is no commandment
for it. Which as the future arguments disprove, so, see a punctual refutation
of this answer. Infra art. 2. ob. ja

Prove it by scripture that they ought to be baptized. ^cotch-man.


So I will: (...) Featley.
first, I will allege you the text of scripture, and then frame my argument
from it; the place of scripture is, Ioh. 3. 5. Verily, verily, I say unto you,
except a man he born of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the
kingdom of God. My argument from this place for the baptizing of infants is
this:

If none can enter into the kingdom of God, but those that are born of water
and the spirit; that is, those that are baptized with water, and regenerated by
the spirit, then is there a necessity of baptizing children, or else they
cannot enter into the kingdom of God; (that is, ordinarily) for we must not tie
God to outward means.

But the former is true.

Ergo, the latter.

By this your reason it would follow that all that are baptized are
regenerated, ^cotch-man.
and none regenerated but those who are baptized; what becomes then of those
who dye without baptism?

I conceive the same of them as of those among the Jews who dyed before they
were circumcised; D. Featley.
we leave them to the mercy of God, conceiving charitably of their salvation,
because the children of the faithful are comprised in the covenant, Genesis 17.
7. and Acts. 2. 39. and the Apostle says, They are holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14. All
that I will conclude from this place, is, that no children enter into the
kingdom of heaven by the ordinary way chalked out by Christ but those who are
baptized; or, which comes all to one, that the sacrament of baptism ought to
be administered to children, as the ordinary means of their salvation.

This text speaks not of children, but of men; Cufin.
children are not men,

You might as well and better say, D. Featley.
that women are not men; and do you think that women ought not to be baptized?
this text speaks of children as well as those in riper years, male, or female;
for, as the Apostle speaks, In Christ there is no difference of sex or age.

All that are to enter into the kingdom of God, ought to be born of water and
the spirit. Talium enim est regnum c^^ lorum, Mat. 19. 14.


But children enter into the kingdom of God as well as men of ripers years.

Ergo children ought to be born again with water, etc.

How prove you that children enter into the kingdom of God? Anabaptist.


All those that are holy enter into the kingdom of God. D. Featley.


But the children of the faithful are holy, 1 Cor. 7. 14.

Ergo they enter into the kingdom of God.

The Apostle means that such are not bastards. Anabaptists.


At which the company laughing, as a ridiculous answer, See the refut^tion of
this an^swer in the ce^sure of a book, entitled, The Vanity of childrens
baptism.
as if all that were not bastards were holy; or that no children could be holy
in the Apostles sense who were base-born. Another Anabaptist came in, and
propounded a question concering Laymens preaching.

I will prove unto you M. Doctor, that neither you, nor such men as you are
ought to preach, but such only ought to perform that office of preaching, Infra
and articl 2. argum. 8.
as are appointed by us.

How prove you that? D. Featley.


Those who are ordained ministers by ungodly men, Anabaptist.
ought not to preach. But you, and others as you are, be ordained by ungodly
men.

Ergo, you ought not to preach.

I deny both your propositions. D. Featley.
First, because although we should suppose the bishops, who ordained ministers,
to be ungodly men, yet if they were themselves lawfully ordained, and had power
of imposition of hands, the ministers ordained by them, may and ought to
discharge their function. Judas the Apostle, and Nicholas the deacon, were
ungodly men; yet the ministerial acts they did, either in preaching the word,
or administering the sacraments, were never accounted void. Secondly, I deny
that our bishops were ungodly men.

They that persecute good men are ungodly men. Anabaptist.

But all your bishops persecute good men.
Ergo, the bishops are ungodly men.
I answer: first, D. Featley.
some of our bishops never persecuted any man; as namely, the Archbishop of
Armagh, and bishop Potter. Secondly, though some of our bishops by their
places, as they were high commissioners, punished some men by Mulcts,
imprisonments, or other censures; yet they persecuted no godly man, but
executed justice upon delinquents: namely, factious schismatics that disobey
the Kings ecclesiastical laws, and disturb the peace of the church.

Yea, Anabaptist.
but they are good men whom your bishops persecute, and you cannot except the
bishop of Armagh; for when I was called in question before the high commission,
the Primate of Ireland sat there, and by silence gave consent.

The Primate of Ireland was never a Judge in our high commission in England, D.
Featley.
as it is well known: sometimes he might sit with the rest, but he had no power
to give sentence in the high commission in England; and if I might know truly
for what cause you were brought into the high commission, I doubt not but to
prove the sentence given against you to be just; for you are one who come not
to church, nor will hear our preachers, but only some of your own sect, and
those no better then mere Laymen.

We do no read of any such distinction in the word of God, Anabaptist.
as Laymen and Clergymen, SECT. 7.
these are popish distinctions; Of the distinction of the Clergy and Laics.
the word. Lay is not in all the scriptures.

No more is the word Trinity, nor sacrament, nor many others read in scripture,
D. Featley.
yet the sense of them is there, and so is the distinction of Clergy and
Laity; And that none may exercise the function of a minister of the Gospel,
without a special calling thereunto
for God commands that the people should learn the law from the Priests
mouth; the Priests were no other then the Clergy, and the common people then
the Laity.

Their Priesthood was not the same with yours.

It was the same for substance, but not for ceremony and manner of worship;
their Priesthood was typical, ours evangelicall; they by the figures of the
ceremonial law fore-shewed Christ to come, Anabaptist.
we preach that Christ is come. D. Featley.


Can you prove any such distinctions in the new testament? Anabaptist.


We can: D. Featley,
for we read in the new testament of pastors and flocks; they who feed with
the word, are the Clergy; and the flocks who are fed, are the Laity. All are
not pastors or teachers, 1 Cor. 12. 29. Are all Apostles? are all Prophets?
are all Teachers? That is, all are not so.

Deacons preached, they were Laymen, Anabaptist.
therefore may Laymen preach; I instance in Steven, etc.

The Deacons were not mere Laymen, D. Featley.
but men full of the holy Ghost, and of wisdom, upon whom the Apostles laid
their hands, Acts 6. 6. Prove that any preached who had not imposition of hands.

Here that Anabaptist failing, Cufin undertook it, saying;

In the 8. of the Acts we read plainly, Cufin.
that, after that great persecution of the church at Jerusalem, they were all
scattered abroad throughout the regions of Judea, and Samaria, except the
Apostles; and that they who were scattered abroad went every where, preached
the gospel; and that God gave a blessing to their preaching, it is plain, Acts
11. 19. Again, (Peter says) 1 Pet. 4. 10. As every man has received the
spirit, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of Christ. If God have given us a talent, it is our duty to
improve it.

They that were scattered and preached the gospel, D. Featley.
were such as the Apostles had laid hands on, and sent to preach, and among
them Philip the Deacon there mentioned. For the text of S. Peter; he speaks
not there of public preaching, and administering the sacraments, which
appertains only to pastors by their special function; but of edifying one
another, and teaching and admonishing in private, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 11.
according to the precept of S. Paul, Colos. 3. 16. Let the word of God dwell
richly among you, in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another: this
was no public preaching, or expounding the word, but godly conference in
private houses with those whom they met, such as every godly master of a family
uses in his house, instructing his children and servants the best that he can,
telling them their duty out of Gods word. It is true, in time of persecution we
read of one Frumentius a Layman, who in his travailes converted some to the
christian faith, confirming the truth of christian religion by scriptures.

That is all we desire to do, as Frumentius did.

That was no preaching publicly by virtue of a pastoral function, Cufin.
or expounding scriptures, D. Featley.
but holy conference and exhortation; such as that of Aquila and Priscilla. And
the historian adds, after the church had notice how God blessed Frumentius
his labors, in turning many heathen to christinity; the bishops sent ministers
unto them, to confirm them and administer the sacraments unto them; and himself
also received holy orders, to accomplish that work which he had so happily
begun.

The scripture puts no difference betwixt public and private; Another
Anabaptist.
it is as lawful to worship God in a private house, to preach there, as in one
of your Steeple Houses.

The Apostle puts a difference, 1 Cor. 11. 22. D. Featley.
What? Have you not houses to eat and to drink in? Or despise ye the church of
God?

The word in the original is ecclesia, Anabaptist.
not templum, which never signifies your Steeple-house in all the scripture.

The word ecclesia is taken diversely in holy scripture: D. Featley.
sometimes,

1. For a company of men, and that either of the wicked, as Psalm. 26. 5. Odi
ecclesiam malignantium.

Or, of the godly, Acts 20. 28. and 11. 26. etc.

2. For the place of their public meeting; and so the word ecclesia is here
taken.

If the people of God meet in a private place, is not that then the house of
God? Anabaptist.


There is a public house of God, D. Featley.
that is, a place sequestered from common use, and dedicated to Gods service,
and there is a private house of God, as we read To. 16. 5. where some of the
faithful privately meet, and that also is called the church; greet the church
in thine house: and in such private houses it is lawful to preach in time of
persecution, but not now, when we have public churches for the service of God,
to which we may and ought to repair, and in these churches no layman ought to
preach, nor at all exercise the pastoral function, either there or any where
else. Which I prove by two reasons especially.

First, none ought to take upon them the office of pastor, or minister of the
word, 1. Reason.
who are not able to reprove and convince Heretics, and all gainsayers: but
your lay and unlettered men are not able to convince Heretics, and stop the
mouths of gayn-savers, because they can allege no scripture but that which is
translated into their mother tongue, in which there may be and are some
errors: for, though the Scriptures be the infallible word of God, yet the
translators were men subject to error, and they sometimes mistook.

Will you say that those learned men who translated the bible at Geneva
committed any error in their translation? Scotch-man.


I will; and for instance, Luke 22. 25. D. Featley.
in the Geneva translation, printed 1569. we read, the Kings of the Gentiles
reign over them, and they that bear rule over them are called gracious Lords:
whereas in the original it is Euergetai, that is, (...)
benefactors, or bountiful; yet this place has bin much urged against the
titles of our Archbishops and Bishops, as if Christ forbad any ministers of
the gospel to be called by the titles of Lords or gracious, whereas there is
never a word in the text that signifies either Lord or gracious, neither does
Christ there speak only to the ministers of the gospel, but to all Christians.
Besides this, I could produce many other errors in that translation, which are
corrected in the Kings translation.

Though we cannot prove the letter to be well translated, Anabaptist.
that matters not much, The Anabaptists blasphemy against the scripture.
for the letter of the scripture is not scripture.

That Is blasphemy, I pray take notice of it, he denies the letter of the Text
to be scripture.

The letter of the word of God is not scripture, D. Featley.
without the revelation of the spirit of God; Anabaptist.
the word revealed by the spirit is scripture.

Very fine doctrine; if God reveal not to us the meaning of the scripture, D.
Featley.
is not the letter of the text scripture? By this reason, the greatest part of
the Revelation, and other difficult texts of scripture should not be scripture,
because God has not revealed to us the meaning of them.

Here one that stood by demanded of the Anabaptist; how prove you the bible to
be Gods word?

By experience. For, whatsoever is written in the word of God comes to pass,
Anabaptist.
concerning Christ and Antichrist; experience is the best doctor that teaches
us.

This reason alone will not prove the bible to be Gods word; D. Featley.
for Moses says, If a false prophet shall arise, and foretell any thing, and
it come to pass, Deuteronomy. 13. 2. thou shall not hearken to the words of that
prophet, for the Lord thy God proves you; it is true, that argument with
others makes a good proof.

There is no false prophet in the scripture, the penmen thereof were all true
prophets, Anabaptist.
and spoke from the mouth of God.

I grant you, they did; yet by this argument alone you cannot convince an
Atheist, D. Featley.
or a Mahumetan: for in Mahomets Alc^^ron it is said, that Mahomet was a true
prophet, and that the Angel spoke to him from God; you see to what a miserable
plunge you are put, if you have no more knowledge then merely the translation
of the English bible.

Secondly, for the event of prophesies you speak of, how prove you the event of
them? For the events of the latter prophesies are not set down in scripture; as
namely, of the destruction of the temple, and the dispersion of the Jews into
all nations.

Travelers can testify the truth of that. Anabaptist.
Besides, some here, I doubt not, can witness.

I believe it; D. Featley.
but these travelers their report, and the testimony of those witness you
speak of, are no ground of our christian faith; you see therefore that you are
still to seek, and not able to convince any Jew, Pagan, or Mahumetan, out of
your translated bible without other helps of learning, which you want.

Secondly, 2. Reason.
I prove that none of your Laymen, who have not received holy orders, may take
upon them the sacred office of preaching the word, and administering the
sacraments. The office of a minister is a holy office, which none may meddle
with but those who have a lawful calling thereunto. To which purpose I
alleged diverse texts out of the new testament before: whereunto I will add
the fearful judgments of God in the old testament, which fell upon Laymen who
meddled with the priests office. As first, the judgment that fell upon Corah,
Dathan, and Abiram, Numb. 16. 3: Ye take too much upon you, seeing all the
congregation is holy, every one of them, and the Lord is amongst them:
wherefore then lift ye up your selves above the congregation of the Lord? v. 28.
And Moses said, if these men diethe common death of all men, or if they be
visited after the visitation of all men, the Lord has not sent me. v. 31. And
as soon as he had made an end of speaking all these words, the ground clave
asunder that was under them, v. 32. And the earth opened her mouth, and
swallowed them up with their families, and all the men that were with Corah,
and all their goods. Secondly, Uzza, who put forth his hand to stay the Arc, 2 Samuel 6. 6. 7. And when they came to Nachons threshing floor, Uzza put his hand
to the Ark of God, and held it, for the oxen did shake it. v. 7. And the Lord
was very wroth with Uzza, and God smote him in the same place for his fault,
and there he dyed by the Ark of God. Thirdly, upon Uzziah, who, for taking
upon him to offer incense which belonged to the priests office, was stricken
with a Leprosy that clave to him till his death, 2 Chronicles. 26. 18. 19. 20. 21.
And they withstood Uzziah the King, and said unto him, it pertains not to
thee, Uzziah, to burn incense unto the Lord, but to the priests, the sons of
Aaron, that are consecrated for to offer incense: go forth of the Sanctuary,
for thou have transgressed, and thou shall have no honor of the Lord God. Then
Uzziah was wroth, and had incense in his hand to burn it; and while he was
wroth with the priests, the Leprosy rose up in his forehead, before the
priests, in the house of the Lord, besides the incense Altar. And when Azariah
the chief priest with all the priests looked upon him, behold, he was Leprous
in his forehead, and they caused him hastily to depart thence, and he was even
compelled to go out, because the Lord had smitten him. And Uzziah the King was
a Leper unto the day of his death, and dwelt as a Leper in a house apart,
because he was cut off from the house of the Lord. Fourthly, upon husbandmen
and heards-men, that took upon them to prophecy, Zach. 13. 4. 5. 6. And in
that day shall the prophets be ashamed, every one of his vision, when he has
prophesied; then they shall wear a rough garment no more to deceive. But he
shall say, I am no prophet: I am a husbandman; for men taught me to be an
herds-man from my youth up. So you artificers may be ashamed of your
prophesying, and say, I am a tradesman; I am no prophet; men taught me to
exercise a handy-craft from my youth. At this, one Cufin being very angry, said;

M. Doctor, Cufin.
I am more lawfully called to preach the word then you; and that I will prove
by scripture.

You will have a hard task of it; D. Featley.
for neither my name, nor yours, are found in scripture; neither is there any
color in all Gods word for any Lay-mans preaching; much less such an
illiterate artificer as you are.

He that is called by saints to preach, Cufin.
is better called, then he that is called by ungodly men.

Such saints as John of Lydan, who had 15. wives; and Cniperdoling, who died
likeabeast.
But I am called by saints.

Ergo my calling is better then yours.

You are like the Pharisees, who justify your selves; what arrogancy and pride
is it in you, to term your societies a company of saints?

Neither were you called by saints, nor I by ungodly men.

I am called by those who live in no known sins. See Sleidan. Comment. l. 10.

But you are called by bishops, who lived in known sins.
Ergo, Mr. Morgan.
I am more lawfully called then you.
Such a company of saints, D. Featley.
as you are, Cufin.
two of your holy society was, lately accused for a Rape. M. R.


How can you know that none of your society live in known sins, D. Featley.
who cannot say so of your self? Much less of any of them. For I appeal to
your own conscience, whether you and they in your prayers to God do not ask him
forgiveness as well for sins against conscience, as for sins of ignorance; as
well for known as unknown sins: besides, have you no idle thoughts, or fleshly
lusts, or desires in you?

I do not deny but I have. Cufin.


And do you not know that these are sins? D. Featley.


I know they are. Cufin.


Then by your own confession you live in known sins. D. Featley.


Though I know them, Cufin.
yet I do not approve of them.

And can you prove, D. Featley.
that he who ordained me approved himself in any known sin? He, who ordained
me, was a learned, grave, and religious bishop, who lived and dyed without spot
or taint; and I cannot sufficiently admire your boldness, who charge him who
ordained me with walking in known sins, and approving them, who knew not the
man who he was: take heed of these flanders, the tongue that lies slays the
soul.

Whosoever he was, Cufin.
he was but a particular man, and Christ gave the power of ordaining to his
church, not to any particular men.

Though Christ has given this power to the church, D. Featley.
yet some particular men in the church ought to execute this power of
ordination. Here it grew late, and the conf^rence brake off.


The issue of the conference was; first, the Knights, Ladies, and Gentlemen
gave the Doctor great thanks: secondly, three of the Anabaptists went away
discontented, the fourth seemed in part satisfied, and desired a second
meeting; but the next day, conferring with the rest of that sect, he altered
his resolution; and neither he, nor any of that sect ever since that day
troubled the Doctor or any other Minister in the Borough with any second
challenge. Finis.

Additions to the former Conference.
IN the conference above mentioned, D. F. promised to prove the baptism of
children: 1. By scripture. 2. By consent of the universal church. And 3. by
evident reason. And the arguments drawn from the first head he prosecuted, but
was not permitted at that time to urge the arguments drawn from the second and
third heads: yet, because they were desired by some persons of note, it was
thought fit they should be added to the former.

Next to the arguments drawn from express testimony of scripture for the
baptism, D. Featley.
of children, we have a most forcible argument drawn from the consent of the
universal church, The consent of the catholic Christian church for the
baptism of infants.
testified by their constant practice of admitting children to baptism, even
from the Apostles days unto this present. This argument, if it be well
weighed, is of very great moment, and may convince the conscience of any
ingenuous Christian. For no Christian doubts, but that the Apostles were
inspired by the holy Ghost, and Christ promised his spirit to lead his church
into all truth; which promise he has hitherto made good in such sort, that it
cannot be proved that ever the whole church of Christ unversally erred; it is
true, particular churches have erred, and may err, and general councels,
which the schools term the representative church, are subject to error, and
have sometimes decreed heresy and false-hood for truth; but the formal church
as they speak, that is, all the assemblies of Christians in the world cannot be
impeached with error at any time: whence I thus frame my argument.

That which the Apostles in their days began, and the whole christian church
scattered over the face of the whole earth has continued in all ages, and all
countries where christianity has been, and is professed, cannot be an
erroneous practice.

But the catholic christian church, in all places and ages, even from the
Apostles times, has admitted the children of faithful parents to holy
baptism.

Ergo the practice of christening children cannot be erroneous or
unwarrantable, as the Anabaptists teach.

The major or first proposition is already sufficiently proved; the minor or
second proposition is proved by the testimony of Origin for the Greek church,
and S. Austin for the Latin, and the Ecclesiastical stories in all ages.
Origin, in his Commentary upon the sixth chapter of St. Paul to the Romans,
having alleged the words of the prophet David, Psalm. 51. 5. I was born in
iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me; adds, proper hoc ecclesia
ab Apostolis traditionem accepit parvulis dare baptismum (for this reason,
namely, because all are conceived in sin) the church has received a tradition
from the Apostles to administer baptism to little infants. And St. Austine, l.
10. de genesi ad literam, c. 23. Consuetudo matris ecclesie in baptizandis
parvulis non spernenda est, nec omnino credenda esset nisi Apostolica esset
traditio; the custom of our mother the church, in baptizing infants, is no way
to be slighted or rejected; neither were it at all to be believed if it were
not an Apostolical tradition. As for the continuance continuance of it, the
history of all ages of the church confirms it; neither can there be brought an
instance in any Christian church in the world that denied baptism to children,
til this sect arose in Germany, since the reformation began there, in the days
of Henry the eight.

After the testimonies of scriptures, and the practice of the catholic church,
we have a third proof drawn from evidence of Reason; against which, if it be
excepted that the eye of reason in matter of faith is but dim; and therefore,
that such arguments are no way convincing: I answer, that it is true, that such
arguments drawn from reason, as have no other ground but philosophical axioms,
or sensible experiments are of little force in matter of faith, which is above
reason; but such reasons as have ground and foundation in scripture, and are
firmly built upon those foundations, are of exceeding great force, and such are
those I purpose to allege.

First, Arguments drawn from reason for ^bristening children.
where the disease is, there ought the remedy to be applied.

But the disease, to wit, original sin is in children, as well as men. For,
all have sinned in Adam, Romans 5. 12. and are by nature the children of wrath,
Ephesi. 2. 3.

Ergo, the remedy which is baptism, ought to be applied to children as well as
men.

Secondly, those who are comprised within the covenant of grace, ought to be
admitted into the church by baptism. For to them appertain both the promises
of the new testament and the seal thereof, which is baptism.

But the children of the faithful are comprised within the covenant of grace,
Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and thy seed
after thee, for an everlasting covenant.

Ergo, children ought to be admitted into the church by baptism.

Thirdly, no means of salvation ought to be denied to the children of the
faithful, whereof they are capable.

But baptism is an outward means of salvation, whereof children are capable
under the gospel, as well as the children of the Jews were capable of
circumcision under the law.

Ergo, baptism ought not to be denied to children.

Fourthly, all those who receive the thing signified by baptism, ought to
receive the outward sign. It is the argument of St. Peter, Acts 10. 47. Can any
man forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have received the
holy Ghost as well as we?

But the children of the faithful receive the thing signified by baptism; to
wit, regeneration and remission of sins.

Ergo, they ought to receive the sign; to wit, the baptism of water.

The proposition or major is proved already; the assumption or minor is thus
proved; Christ bad children come to him, and he blessed them; (and said) of
such is the kingdom of God, Mar. 10. 16. and that their Angels continually
behold his Fathers face in heaven, Mat. 18. 10. and unless the Anabaptists
will grant that children are regenerated, and receive remission of sins, they
must needs hold that all children are damned, which is a most uncharitable and
damnable assertion.

The ANABAPTISTS Objection.
Yea, but the Anabaptists object, Mat. 28. 18. Go teach all nations, baptizing
them. Whence they would infer that none are to be baptized but those to whom
the gospel has before bin preached; and consequently, that children ought not
to be baptized before they can hear and understand the gospel preached to them.

ANSWER.
1. The setting preaching before baptizing does no more prove that preaching
must always go before baptism, then the naming repentance before faith, (
Mar. 1. 15. Repent, and believe the gospel) proves, that repentance goes
always before faith, which the Anabaptists themselves hold not.

2. Christ sets in that place preaching before baptizing for two reasons,
neither of which make any thing against the baptism of children. The first is,
because it is the more principal act of the ministerial function, for it is
preaching which through the operation of the holy Spirit begets faith, which
the sacraments only confirm; preaching draws the instrument as it were of
the covenant between God and us, whereunto the sacrament is set as a seal.
Secondly, because Christ there speaks of converting whole nations to the
Christian faith, in which always the preaching of the word goes before the
administration of the sacraments. For, first men believe, and after are
admitted to baptism, but after the parents are converted, their children being
comprised within the covenant are admitted to baptism; and whenever any
proselyte is to be made, this course is likewise to be taken, they must
profess their faith before they be received into the church by baptism: but
the case is different in children, they have neither the use of reason to
apprehend the gospel preached unto them, nor use of their tongue to profess
their faith, and God requires no more of them then he has given them; the
like course God himself took in the old law, before any men of riper years were
circumcised, the commandment of God was declared, and his covenant made known
unto them, but children were circumcised the eight day before they were capable
of any preaching unto them, or such declaration.

Nothing remains, but that the two objections concerning the doctrine of the
Trinity in the beginning propounded by D. F. for no other end, but to try how
well verst these ringleaders of the Anabaptists were in the more necessary
points of catechism; he answered:

The first was framed out of Ioh. 17. 3. This is life eternal, to know thee to
be the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ. If the Father be
the only true God, how is the Son or the holy Ghost very God? Hereunto the
Anabaptists gave two answers; the first, blaspemous, the second, unsufficient
and impertinent, as appears in the beginning of the conference. The true answer
is, that Christ, Ioh. 17. prays to God, and not to any of the three Persons
particularly; for though he uses the word Father, v. 1. yet Father is not
there taken for the first Person in Trinity, but as a common attribute of the
deity, as it is also taken, Mat. 6. 9. Our Father, v. 14. your heavenly Father,
Gal. 1. 4. God and our Father. Jam. 1. 27. Before God and the Father. 1 Pet. 1.
17. If you call him Father, who judges without respect of persons: So then,
the meaning is, O God, Father of heaven and earth, This is life eternal, to
know thee to be the only true God, and whom thou have sent, Jesus Christ.
According to which interpretation, this text is parallel to that of the
Apostle, one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and man; the man, Christ Jesus,
1 Timothy 2. 5.

The second objection was out of Ioh. 15. 26. The spirit of truth which
proceeds from the Father. If the spirit proceed from the Father only, how do
we say in the Nicen creed, and that other of Athanasius, and in the Letany,
which proceeds from the Father and the Son? To this none of the Anabaptists
gave any answer at all, yet the answer is very easy; for the spirit is said to
proceed from the Father in the place above alleged, because he proceeds from
the Father originally, not because he proceeds from the Father only, for he
is elsewhere called the spirit of the Son, as well as of the Father, Gal. 4. 6.
And in this very text, Ioh. 15. 26. it is said, the spirit whom I will send you
from the Father; which shows that the holy Spirit has a dependence from
both. To whom, three Persons and one only true God, be ascribed all glory,
honor, power, and dominion, for evermore.

FINIS.
A TRACTATE against the ANABAPTISTS.
CHAPTER I.
Of the name and several sorts of Anabaptists.
THe name Anabaptist is derived from the preposition (...) and (...), and
signifies are-baptizer; or at least such an one who allows of, and
maintains re-baptizing; they are called also Catabaptists from the
preposition (...) and (...), signifying an abuser or prophaner of baptism. For
indeed, every Anabaptist is also a Catabaptist; the reitteration of that
sacrament of our entrance into the church, and seal of our new birth in Christ
is a violation and depravation of that holy ordinance.

Of these Anabaptists, or Catabaptists, who differ no more then Bavius and
Maevius (of whom the poet elegantly writes, Qui Bavium non odit, Conpen^ Theol.
amat tua carniua Maevi) Alstedius makes fourteen sorts: first, the
Muncerians, 2. the Apostolical, 3. the Separatists, 4 the Catharists, 25, the
Silents, 6. the Enthusiasts, 7. the Libertines, 8. the Adamites, 9. the
Hutites, 10. the Augustintans, 11. the Buchedians, 12. the Melchiorites, 13.
the Georgians, 14. the Menonists.

But in this, as in other things, he is more to be commended for his diligence
in collection, then for his judgment in election. For although there are
schismatic and heretical persons, Guil. Malms. De gest. reg. Angli. l. 5.
Mi^i debeat collectionis gratiam, sibi habeat electionis materiam.
that have near affinity with Anabaptists, known by all these names: yet these
are not so many distinct and several sorts of Anabaptists. For some of these
differ only in respect of their doctors or teachers, and not of their
doctrines, as the Muncerians, Hutites, and Menonists; others were heretics,
more ancient then the Anabaptists properly so called: as namely, the
Apostolical, the Catharists, the Adamites, and Enthusiasts; though as I shall
show hereafter, some of our present Anabaptists trench upon their heresies; the
Augustinians, Melchiorites, and Georgians are Anabaptists, and aliquid amplius;
though they agree with them in their main doctrine of re-baptizing, yet they go
beyond the ordinary Anabaptists, holding far more damnable tenants then they.
For the Augustinians believe that none shall enter into paradise till the
prince of their sect, Austine the Bohemian shall open the way. The Melchiorites
expect Melchior Hofmannus to come with Elias to restore all things before the
last day. The Georgians blasphemously boast, that their master David George was
a holy person, composed and made of the soul of Christ, and the third person in
the Trinity. Lastly, he omitteth one sort of Anabaptists, called
Hemerobaptists, who in the summer time quotidie baptizaba^tur, were christened
every day; Gastius De Anabapt. exord. P. 50.
senserunt enim aliter non posse hominem vivere, si non singulis diebus in aqua
mergeretur ita ut abluatur and sanctificetur ab omni culpo. To leave therefore
these detestable Sectaries, whom to detect is to consute, and to name is
everlastingly to brand; there are but three only sorts to whom that name
properly and peculiarly appertains.

That all those who had been baptized by Novatus, or any other heretics, ought
to be rebaptized by the orthodox pastors of the church.

That none were rightly baptized, but those that held with Donatus, and
consequently, that all other, who had received baptism in the catholic
church, by any other save those of his party, ought to be rebaptized.

The third broached theirs in the year 1525. which was this; That baptism
ought to be administered to none, but such as can give a good account of their
faith; and in case any have been baptized in their infancy, that they ought to
be rebaptized after they come to years of discretion, before they are to be
admitted to the church of Christ.

For the first sort, though their opinion and practice were erroneous, yet some
conceive, -- causas habet error honestas, that they had very plausible
pretenses for it; namely, that heretics were miscreants, and had no place
themselves in the true church of God; and that therefore they had no power by
their baptism to admit any into it: that they had not the holy Ghost, and
therefore could not confer the gifts thereof upon any: that they were foul
themselves how then could they by their baptism wash others clean? (...).
Against this opinion and practice of theirs, Erasm Ad^g.
Pope Stephen mainly opposed himself, and in a Synod held at Rome condemned it,
as being repugnant to the tradition of the church; which, as he affirms,
received heretics upon their submission, and recantation of their heresies,
without re-baptizing them. But St. Cyprian, a famous bishop in Africa in those
days, and afterward a glorious Martyr, took Pope Stephen to task, refelled
his argument drawn from unwritten tradition by scripture, and in a provincial
Synod held at Carthage, whereof he was president, Anno Dom. 258. with the joint
suffrages of 87. bishops, condemns the sentence of the Roman Synod, and
determines the flat contradictorie thereunto; namely, that the baptism
administered by heretics was invalid and Null; and that all that had no better
baptism ought to be brought again to the font, and be christened anew, and no
otherwise to be accounted members of the true church. And truly Erasmus, in
his Preface to his Edition of St. Cyprian, affirms it to be an even lay
between both opinions; and that though the church in latter ages took part with
Stephen, yet that they might as well have confirmed St. Cyprians opinion,
without any prejudice at all to the catholic faith. Howheit, with Erasmus his
good leave be it spoken, whosoever shall dive deep into the point, and ponder
what St. Austine has written in his exquisite tractates against the Donatists,
especially in his third book, where professedly he scans all the arguments
alleged by St. Cypran, De bapt. con. Don. l 3. c. 4. 5. and 6. and l. 7. c. l.
and his colleagues in the abovenamed third Synod at Carth^go, will find that
St. Cyprian had the better parts and gifts, but yet the worst of the cause; and
therefore in the first and most celebrious council of Nice it is ordered, can.
8. that the Catharists or Novatians, who shall renounce their heresy, and seek
to be reconciled to the church, shall be received by imposition of hands,
without requiring any new baptism of them: yet in the nineteenth canon it is
decreed, that is the heretics, called the Paulians, (taking that name from
Paulus Samosatenus) fly to the catholic church, Syn. Nic. c. 19. (...).
that they shall be rebaptized by all means. By which seeming contradiction of
the decrees of this most sacred Synod, as it were by the collision of flint
stones, the fire of truth is thus clearly beaten out. That we must distinguish
of heretics, whereof some destroy the foundation, as the Paulians, Gnostics,
Cataphrygians, and the like; others held the foundation, but built upon it hay
and stubble, as the Catharists, and Novatians, and such heretics as had a
right belief in the blessed Trinity, and the natures and offices of Christ,
yet upon this good seed, super seminarunt zizania: some depraved the essential
form of baptism prescribed by our Savior, as did that Arrian of whom
Nicephorus writes; L. 10 hist. c. 35 Refert quenda^ Episcopum Arrianum nomine
Deutrum baptizasse in nomine patris per filiu^ in spiritu sancto, and addit
miraculose accidisse, ut aqua quae ad baptismum parata eret repent in
detestationem Arrianae harcsi^ quam ille praedictis verbis profiteri intendebat
disparuerit.
that after he had used an heretical kind of form, and dipped his hand in the
font to christen the child, all the water suddenly vanished away: others,
though they had ill opinions concerning other articles of faith, yet were right
in doctrine of the Trinity, and maintained the true form of baptism; and all
those, who were baptized by these latter sort of heretics, the church held
their baptism good, and therefore did not re-baptize them when they received
them into the church, but only enjoined them publicly to renounce their
errors: but those who had been baptized by the former sort of heretics, in
regard their baptism was indeed no baptism, the church appointed, agreeably
unto this decree of the Synod of Nice, that they should not be admitted without
a new baptism.

For the second sort of Anabaptists, they were far worse then the former; for
they made a separation from the catholic Christian church, holding that none
were members thereof, but those that held with Donatus, all other they
accounted no Christians; and therefore, if any were converted, or rather
perverted to their heresy, they christened them again. The former sort of
Anabaptists were accounted only erroneous and schismatic, but not heretical;
but these were stigmatized for heretics also, and that deservedly, for
confining the church of Christ only to Africa, and their sect there: they
consequently denied a main article of the Creed, ( viz.) Credo sanctam
ecclesiam catholicam, I believe the holy catholic church, and the communion of
saints. Yet with these heretics and schismatics, our Iacobites, Brownists,
and Barrowsts, symbolize; for, as the Donatists refused communion with the
catholic church, in regard of some scandalls they observed in it, so do these
separate from the true church of England in regard of some abuses, and, as they
term them, popish corruptions in it. As they excluded all from hope of
salvation, who were not of their pure precise sect, so these go not much behind
them in their uncharitable censures of all those who are not of their
fraternity; and as St. Austine complains of the Donatists, Ep. 50. altaria
lignea fregerunt.
that wheresoever they bore sway, they brake down the communion tables (which
he there metaphorically terms Altars) and defaced the churches: so we have
had but too just cause to complain of the like outrages committed by some of
the Zelots of that strain, though some of them of late have not escaped the
heavy judgment of God for it.

For the third sort of Anabaptists, they have sunk deeper in the former
quag-mire, and are drowned over head and ears in it. For they not only
nullify all baptism, administered either by Romish priests, or orthodox
Protestants, but condemn baptizing of children simply, which neither the first
nor the second sort of Anabaptists did; for both the Novatians and Donatists,
yea, and Pelagians too, though they denied original sin, yet they all allowed
and practiced the baptism of infants. The author of this third and worst sect
of Anabaptists, was, as some say, Pontan. cata^. haearet. and si Anabaptistae
originem trabant a Donalistis, proximo tamen superiori tempore authorfuit
Thomas Mon^tarius, seu Muncerus.
Muncerus; as others, Alstedius compend. Anno, 1525:
Balthazar Pacimontanus, against whom Zuinglius wrote; as others, Carolstadius;
but I subscribe to Melancthou, who lived in those times, and could not but be
very well acquainted with those passages which fell out near the place of his
residence. And he affirms, as I said before, that Nicholas Stock was the
first that broached Anabaptisme in Germany. This Stock affirmed, that God spoke
to him by an Angel, and revealed his will to him in dreams promising him the
place of the Angel Gabriel: in this man's school was Tho. Muncer bred, who kept
such a racket in Alset, a city in the borders of Thuringia, and after him John
Leydan, and Cniperdoling, who in the year 1532. infected and infested also
Munster; wherein, though they consul'd it, Bleidanus com. l. i^. Cavcis s^rreis
^lligantui singul^, and ad su^mam turrem ^rbis exponuntur. See Eudaemon Johan,
Apolog. Garneti.
and king'd it for a time; yet in the end were taken, pinched with fiery
pincers, and after stabbed to the heart with daggers, and their bodies shut up
in iron cages, which were hung upon the highest steeple in Munster, where they
dance in the air. And as Garnet the Jesuit, the great patron and practiser of
equivocation in his life time, is said to have equivocated in some sort after
his death, for two faces of his were showed by Roman catholics; the one upon
an iron pole, the other upon a straw: so these ringleaders of the Anabaptists,
who stickled so much for re-baptizing in their life time, have been a thousand
times rebaptized since their death, by every shower of rain beating through
their iron lettice.

CHAP. II.
Of the errors of the Anabaptists, both common to other sects, and those which
are peculiarly their own.
THose, who have raked into this mud, find several beds of these slippery
Eels, or rather indeed Lampreys; for they have all of them some string or other
of poison in them. Their errors they rank into three kinds.


First, their ecclesiastical errors, such as peculiarly concern the doctrine
or discipline of the church, are,

First, Pantan. catal haret. in verbo Anabapt. dicunt christ^ per Mariam
editum, ut vitrum sol penetrat, vel per canalem pluvia in terrum sertu^.
That Christ took not flesh from the Virgin Mary, but that he past through her
as the Sun beams do through glass, or rain through a spout.

Secondly, I^. nullum esse peccatum ^iginale.
That there is no original sin.

Thirdly, Pueros non esse baptiza^ dos Gastius de Anabapt. exord. p. 129.
dicunt baptismum parvulorum esse c^ diabolo, and papae figmentum.
That children ought not to be baptized.

Fourthly, Pontan. ib. qui in teneris annis baptizati fuerrunt, suni
re-baptizandi.
That such as have been baptized in their infancy, ought to be rebaptized
when they come to years of discretion.

Fifthly, Pont, ab. docendi parts sib sumunt, Sleid. com. l. 10. coena peracta
rex panem singulis parrigit his ver bis, accip te, comedite; regina poculum
porrigens, bibite, inquit, ann^^ciate mortem Domini.
That Lay People may preach and administer the sacraments, Gastius p. 35.
Anabaptistae sumunt sibi omnes praedicandi officium.

Sixthly, Pont. ib. l^berum in spiritualibus esse homints arbitriu^*
That men have free will, not only in natural and moral, but also in
spiritual actions.

Seventhly, Sleid. p. ^56. Lapso p^ccator denegant abs^lutionem.
That absolution and the church-peace ought to be denied to such who are fallen
into any grievous sin; yea, though they repent of it.

Eighthly, Sleid. ib. Lutherum and Pontificem Romanum aiunt esse falsos
prophetas, Lutherum tamen altero deteriorem.
That Luthers doctrine is worse then the Popes.

Secondly, their political errors, or in matter of state, are,

First, Pont. catal. libertatem per principes extinctam armis esse vindicandam.
That the people may depose their magistrates and chief rulers, Sleid. ib.
licere plebets in magistratum arnia sumere.

Secondly, Pont. ib. Christiano non esse licitum gerere magistratum vel tenere
imperium.
That a Christian with a good conscience may not take upon him, or bear the
office of a magistrate, or keep any court of Justice.

Thirdly, Sleid. l. 10. Non licere Christianis in foro contendere, non
jusjurandum dicere.
That none may administer an oath to another.

Fourthly, Pont. ib. sacinorosos a magistratibus ultimo supplicio affic^ non
debere.
That no malefactors ought to be put to death.

Thirdly, their oeconomicall errors are,

First, Pont. ib. oportere facultates esse communes, and Sleid. l. ^0. Non
licere Christiano babere quid proprium.
That no man has a propriety in his goods, but that all things ought to be
held in common.

Secondly, Pont. ib. licitum esse ducere plures uxores.
That it is lawful to have more wives then one at once.

Thirdly, Pont, licere proprias uxores relinquere, si a dormate Anabaptistar i^
abborreant, Sleid^ loc. sup. cit. dicunt matrimonium illorum qui vera fide non
suint illustrati pollutum esse atque impurum.
That a man may put away his wife, if she differ from him in point of religion,
and be not of their sect.

These indeed are the most of their known errors, yet all the Lampreys are not
found in these beds, there be some straglers; and to the end that none of them
escape, we will put them all as it were into two great weels. All the errors of
the Anabaptists are of two sorts.

First, such as they hold in common with other heretics. Secondly, such as are
peculiar to their sect.
First, concerning the common errors, we are to note, that as the wild beasts
in Africa meeting at the rivers to drink, engender one with another, and beget
strange monsters; whence is that proverb, Erasm. Adag.
semper Africa altquid apportat novi: so diverse kinds of heretics and
schismatiks meeting together at unlawful conventicles, and having conference
one with the other, have mingled their opinions, and brought forth mungrell
heresies. Epiphanius instanceth in diverse ancient heretics, but I shall only
at this time in those heretics I am now to deal with, viz. the last and worst
sort of Anabaptists; these join their opinions, and, if I may so speak,
engender

First, Sleid. l. 10. Tradunt inter alia re^num Christi futurum esse ejusmodi
ante supremum judicii diem, ut pii and electi regnent, impiis omnino deletis
etc.
with the Millenaties; and their joint issue is, That Christ before the day of
judgment shall come down from heaven, and reign with the saints upon earth a
thousand years; in which time they shall destroy all the wicked, binding their
Kings in chains, and their Nobles in links of iron.

Secondly, Sleid. com. l. 10. p. 256. Lapso peccatori denegant absolutionem.
with the Catharists or Novatians; and their joint issue is, That they are a
communion of all saints, and that none that has fallen into idolatry, or any
other grievous crime, for which he has been excommunicated, ought to be
restored upon his repentance, to the church.

Thirdly, Compend. Alsted. Hutitae se solos jactitant filios aeternae
felicitatis dicti a Iohanne Huta etc.
with the Donatists; and their joint issue is, That in the true church there
are no scandals, or lewd and vicious livers; that the church of Christ is
confined to their sect; that we ought to separate from all assemblies of
Christians, wherein there are any abuses or scandals, yea, though the church
allows them not, but seeks to reform them; that all such as have been
baptized by any other then those of their sect, ought to be rebaptized.

Fourthly, Alsted, compend. Melchioritae discipu^ Melchioris Hofmanni quem in
die Domini cum El^a praeconem praestolantur: Mariam virginem non Christi
parentem sed velut canalem fuisse docent.
with the Priscillianists; and their joint issue is, That Christ took not flesh
from the Virgin Mary.

Fifthly, Alsted. compend. Octava secta Anabaptistarum est little qui Adamitae
vocantur, qui vestem omnem execrantur; quae data sit in poenam peccati a quo se
credunt immunes.
with the Adamites; and their joint issue is, That clothes were appointed not
so much to cover shame, as to discover sin; and that therefore they being
such as Adam was in his innocence, ought to go naked and not to be ashamed.

Sixthly, Sleid. l. 10, Ad bonorum communicalionem homines adigendos, non enim
licere Christiano aliquid proprium habere, sed omnia omnibus esse debere
communia.
with the Apostolici; that is, a sort of heretics, who perversely and
preposterously imitated the first Christians in the days of the Apostles: and
their joint issue is, That none ought to possess any lands or goods to
himself, but that they ought to have all things in common. This was Mu^^erus
his doctrine at Alset, and it very much took with the common people; who
presently left working, and what they wanted they took by force from them that
had it.

Seventhly, Sleid. l. 10. Post Io. Leidensis ad quiitem se componit and totum
triduum somniat, expergefactus nullum verbum sacit, sed chartam poscit, in
eaque duo decim viros describit and dogmata quaedom proponit concionatoribus,
viz. virum non esse d^vinctum uni un^ri etc.
with the Enthusiasts; and their joint issue is That the Scripture is not our
only rule of faith, and manners, but that God reveals his will to his
children at this day by visions and dreams: and therefore John of Leidan, after
he had set himself to sleep, and had dreamed three days and n^ghts, when he
awaked, fained himself speechless and called by signs with Zachary for a
table book, or pen and ink, and there writes down certain positions as
revealed to him from God, and commanded the preachers to publish them: the
first and principal whereof was, that a man was not tied to one wife, but that
he might have more; and this doctrine he put presently in practice, martying
three wives at once, and fifteen before he left.

Eighthly, See the history of the Anabaptists, printed at London, Sleid. l. 5.
with the Jesuits; and their joint issue is, That it is lawful for the people
to lay hands upon the Lords anointed, and depose and slay heretical and wicked
magistrates: the Jesuits hold this to be lawful, after a declaration and
sentence of deprivation by the Pope; the Anabaptists upon a revelation from one
of their prophets. And this doctrine the Anabaptists practiced in the year
1527. and pulled down all magistrates, where they had any strength.

Ninthly, with the Arminians; and their joint issue is, That there is no
original sin, or at least, that none is damned for it alone; that election
is upon foreseen faith and repentance; that God gives all men sufficient
grace to be saved; that man has free will of himself either to accept or
refuse Gods grace; that Christ dyed indifferently for all; that a true
believer, who is in the state of grace, may fall away totally and finally.

Tenthly, with the Brownists or Barrowists; and their joint issue is, That
there ought to be a paritie in the church; that the government by archbishops
and bishops, etc. is Popish and antichristian; that the service and ceremonies
of the church are idolatrous and superstitious; that in regard of these and
such like abuses and corruptions the church of England is no true church of
Christ, and consequently, that all that have a care of their souls must of
necessity separate from her.

Eleventhly, Author. histor. Anahap. printed 1642. Sleid. l. 10. non licere
Christianis in foro contendere. Alsted. compend. respuunt vindictam publicam,
and aiunt nefas esse ullo modo arma sumere.
with a peculiar sect, called the Separati; and their joint issue is, That no
Christian may go to law, or in any case to right himself by arms or violent
means.

Secondly, such as are peculiar to their sect, and these are six.

First, That none are rightly baptized but those who are dipped.

Secondly, That no children ought to be baptized.

Thirdly, That there ought to be no set form of Liturgy or prayer by the
book, but only by the Spirit.

Fourthly, That there ought to be no distinction by the word of God between the
Clergy and the Laity, but that all who are gifted may preach the word, and
administer the sacraments.

Fifthly, that it is not lawful to take an oath at all, no, not though it be
demanded by the magistrate.

Sixthly, that no Christian may with a good conscience execute the office of a
civil magistrate.

ARTIC. I.
Concerning Dipping.
ANABAPTIST.
None are rightly Baptized but those who are Dipped.

THE REFUTATION.
Though Dipping may be used in Baptism; See Edward Barber his treatise of
Baptism or Dipping, wherein it is clearly showed, that the Lord Christ
ordained dipping, printed London 1641. and a Treatise entitled. The vanity of
childish Baptism, wherein it is proved (so says the title page) that Baptizing
is Dipping, and Dipping Baptizing, printed London 1642. by A. R. idem page 12.
They that have the administration of Baptism without Dipping, have not the
Baptism of the New Testament.
and if the child be strong, and the weather and climate temperate, it is very
fit to be used, and the church of England both allows it, and practices it:
yet it is no way necessary, or essential to Baptism: neither ought they who
have been washed or sprinkled according to the form prescribed by our Savior,
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost by a lawful
Minister, by any means be rebaptized; which I prove.

ARGUMENT I.
That which Christ who is the Author and Ordainer of Baptism requires not,
cannot be necessary or essential to the right administration of that Sacrament.

But Christ no where requires Dipping, but only Baptizing, which word, as
Hesychius, and Stephanus, and Scapula, and Budaeus, the great masters of the
Greek tongue, make good by very many instances, and allegations out of Classick
writers, imports no more then Ablution or Washing ((...), say they in their
Lexicons and Commentaries, (...), id est lavo, (...) lavatio, ablutio) which
may be done without Dipping.

Ergo, Dipping is not necessary to the right administration of Baptism.

ARGUMENT II.
If the words Baptize and Baptism are often used in holy Scripture where the
persons or things said to be Baptized were not Dipped, then certainly Dipping is
not necessary to Baptism, neither will the word Baptize enforce any such thing.

But the words Baptize and Baptism are used in Scriptures, where neither the
persons nor things were Dipped, as appears by these texts of holy Scriptures,
Matthew. 3. 11. be shall baptize you with the holy Ghost, and with fire; which
promise Acts 1. 5. is applied to the sending down of the holy Ghost in the
shape of fiery tongues; and Acts 2. 3 it was fulfilled when the Apostles were
filled with the holy Ghost, and spoke with other tongues: yet were they not
Dipped into that fire that came down from heaven, but, as the text says, the
cloven tongues like fire sat upon each of them. And again, Matthew. 20. 23.
Christ foretelling his disciples that they should partake with him in his
sufferings, and drink deep of the cup of trembling, expresses it by the phrase
of Baptizing, Mark 10. 38.
saying; Ye shall be Baptized with the Baptism that I am Baptized with: yet
neither was Christ, nor any of his disciples, that we read of, dipped into blood,
but only sprinkled, washed, or besmeared therewith; Likewise, Mark 7. 48. we
read of (...), word for word baptismes of cups, pots, tables, or beds: yet
cupts or pots when they are washed or rinsed, (as viz. at a pump) are not
necessarily Dipped into the water, but only water powered into them and upon
them, with rubbing, etc. And for tables and beds, they are not washed by
Dipping; for in men's houses they have no commodity of so great lavers or broad
wells, wherein tables may be Dipped; and the dipping, especially of beds, will do
them more hurt then good. Lastly, we read, 1 Cor. 10. 2. of baptizing in the
cloud, and Heb. 9. 10. of (...), and Heb. 6. 2. The doctrine of Baptismes.
diverse Baptismes, or Washings, and carnal ordinances imposed on the Jews
until the time of Reformation: yet were not the Jews who are said to be
baptized, dipped in the cloud, but they were only washed with it as men are in a
shower of rain; neither did Moses in the ceremonial law prescribe different
kinds of Dippings, though he did several kinds of cleansing, purifying or
washing, nor did the Apostle deliver any doctrine of many Dippings, but
ablutions.

Ergo, Dipping is no way necessary to Baptism.

ARGUMENT III.
If the thing, or spiritual act or grace signified by Baptism may be
sufficiently expressed without Dipping, then is not Dipping necessary in
Baptism: for the whole use of the sign in Baptism, and in all other
Sacraments, is but to represent the thing signified, and inwardly wrought upon
the soul by the means of that ordinance of God.

But the thing signified, to wit, the cleansing of the soul from the guilt and
filth of sin, may be sufficiently expressed by washing or rubbing with water,
and so putting away the filth of the flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 21. without any plunging
or Dipping of the whole body, or any part thereof.

Ergo, Dipping is not necessary in Baptism.

ARGUMENT IIII.
Sprinkling may be done, and is usually without any Dipping at all.

But the outward act of Baptism representing the inward Ablution of the soul
is expressed in holy Scripture by sprinkling, Hebr. 9. 13. The blood of bulls
and goats sprinkling the unclean sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh.
Heb. 10. 22. Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our
bodies washed with pure water. 1 Pet. 1. 2. Through the sanctification of the
spirit, and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.

Ergo, The outward act of Baptism may be rightly performed without any Dipping
at all.

ARGUMENT V.
Baptism is a Sacrament, though not of absolute necessity, yet of very great,
(as all confess) and it falls out often that it ought to be administered to
sick and infirm persons, even sometimes lying upon their death bed, they making
profession of their Faith, and earnestly desiring it.

But in such case these infirm persons cannot after the manner of the
Anabaptists be carried to rivers, or wells, and there be Dipped and plunged in
them, without evident and apparent danger: yet may they safely be Baptized by
sprinkling, or gentle rubbing with water.

Ergo, Sprinkling, or rubbing the flesh with water in the Name of the Trinity,
by those who have authority and commission from Christ, is sufficient without
any Dipping at all.

ARGUMENT VI.
All the Sacraments of the church may and ought to be administered without
giving any just scandal.

But the resort of great multitudes of men and women together in the evening,
and going naked into rivers, there to be plunged and Dipped, cannot be done
without scandal, especially where the State gives no allowance to any such
practice, nor appoints any order to prevent such fowl abuses as are like at
such disorderly meetings to be committed.

Ergo, The Sacrament of Baptism ought not to be administered with such plunging
or Dipping.

The Objections of the Anabaptists answered.
Now let us hear what they can say for their Dipping, and with what weak
bulrushes they fight against the truth.

Fist, they object, Obj. 1. A. R. Trearise of Baptism, P. 9. your translatours
give it to Dip. Matthew. 26. 23. Mark. 4. 20. Luke 16. 24. Sol. 1.
that the word Baptize is derived from (...), signifying to Dip or Die;
therefore, say they, washing or sprinkling with water is not Baptizing, but
plunging the body, or the head at least in water.

But we answer, First, out of Aquinas and the schoolmen, in verbis non tam
spectandum ex quo, quam ad quid sumantur, in words we are not so much to
respect from whence they are derived, as how they are used: as we see the
branches of trees spread much further then the roots, so the derivative words
are often of a larger extent of signification then their primitives; for
instance, (...) is derived from (...), and signifies originally and properly,
Catechizing, or such a kind of Teaching wherein the principles of Religion, or
of any Art or Science are often inculcated, and by continual sounding and
resounding beat into the ears of children or novies: but yet it is taken in
holy Scripture in a larger sense, not only for catchizing of children, but
instructing men of riper years in the doctrine of salvation, as Luke 1. 4. That
thou might know the certainty of those things, (...), Wherein thou have been
instructed, and Acts 1825. (...), This man was instructed in the way of the
Lord: and Acts 21. 24. (...), Whereof they informed concerning thee: and Romans
14. 19. (...), Follow the things wherewith one may edify another: and Gal. 6.
6. (...), Let him that as taught in the word communicate to him that teaches
him. In like manner, The word prophecy is derived from (...) and (...), which
signifies originally and properly to foretell things future: yet it is taken,
in the new Testament especially, in a larger sense, for all such as reveal the
will of God, and declare his promises, as well past and already fulfilled, as to
be fulfilled hereafter, as namely, 1 Cor. 11. 4. every man praying or
prophesying having his head covered, dishonors his head. 1 Cor. 14. 1.
Desire spiritual gifts, but rather that ye may prophecy; and verse 3. He that
prophesies, speaks unto men to edification, to exhortation, to comfort.
verse 31. Ye may all prophes^e one by one: verse 32. The spirit of the prophets
are subject to the prophets. So the word Baptize, though it be derived from
(...), tingo, to Dip or Plunge into the water, and signifies primarily such a
kind of washing as is used in bucks where linen is Plunged and Dipped: yet it
is taken more largely, for any kind of washing, rinsing, or cleansing, even
where there is no Dipping at all, as Matthew. 3. 11. and 20. 22. Mark 7. 4. and
10. 38. Luke 3. 16. Acts 1. 5. and 11. 16. 1 Cor. 10. 2.

Die, Solinus 13. Varro refert in Baeo^ia st^men esse cujus haustu ov^llam
pecus si fuscisit col^^is vertitur in candidum.
as to Dip: and it may be the holy Ghost, in the word Baptize, has some
reference to that signification, because by Baptism we change our hiew; for as
Varro reports of a river in Baeotia, that the water thereof turns sheep of
a dark or dun color into white: so the sheep of Christ which are washed in the
Font of Baptism, by virtue of Christ's promise, though before they were of
never so dark, sad, or dirtie color, yet in their souls become white and pure,
and are as it were new died: therefore admitting that in the word Baptize there
were something of (...) tingo, to Dip or Die; yet it will not follow, That it
necessarily signifies Dipping, for it may as well imply this spiritual Die, to
which no Dipping is necessary.

Secondly, Obj. 2. Matthew. 3. 16. Acts 8. 38.
they argue from the example of Christ, and John, and of Philip, and the
Eunuch: Jesus, say they, and John went both into Jordan, and there John
Baptized Jesus, and likewise Philip and the Eunuch went both down into the
water, and there Philip Baptized the Eunuch; therefore, say they, sprinkling,
or washing with water will not suffice, but the parties that are to be baptized
ought to go into the water, and there be Dipped over head and ears.

But we answer, First, an example of Christ, or his Apostles without a precept
does not necessarily bind the Church, as may be proved by many instances; for
Christ washed his disciples feet before his supper, and he administered it at
night, and to twelve men only, and no women: yet we are not bound so to do. In
the Apostles days widows were maintained to serve the Church at the public
charge, yet we are not bound to have such. Likewise, the first Christians sold
their possessions, and goods, and parted them to all men, and lived together,
and had all things common, Acts 2. 44. yet are not we obliged so to do.

John 3. 23. John Baptized in Aenon near to Salem, because there was much water
there.
besides, the climat of Judea is far better then ours, and men in riper years
that were converted to the Christian Faith were Baptized in great multitudes,
and they might without any danger go into the Rivers, and be Baptized after
such a manner: but now the Gospel having been long planted in these parts, we
have seldom any Baptized but children, who cannot without danger to their
health be Dipped and plunged over head and ears in the Font, or Rivers,
especially if they be infirm children, and the season very cold, and the air
sharp and piercing.

Lastly, Obj. 3.
They urge the custom of many ancient Churches, in which a threefold Dipping
was used: and if they Dipped those that were Baptized three times, it should seem
they thought Dipping very necessary.

But we answer, Sol.
First, that what those Ancients did, they had no precept for it: and if they
follow some of the Ancients in Dipping the Baptized, why do they not follow the
example of all the ancient Churches in Christening children?

trina imme^sio (they speak of) did it for this end, To express the three
Persons, which may as well be done by thrice sprinkling, or washing the
Baptized, as well as thrice Dipping. But the truth is, that neither is
requisite, because the Trinity is sufficiently expressed in the very form of
Baptism, when the Minister says, I Baptize thee in the Name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost.

now we have no such custom, neither the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16.

ARTICLE II.
Concerning the baptizing of children.
ANABAPTIST.
NOne ought to be Baptized but those that profess repentance and faith, Edward
Barber, title page.
and consequently, no children ought to be Christened.

THE REFUTATION.
The children of such parents as profess Christian religion, and are members
of the visible church, since they are comprised within Gods covenant made to the
faithful children of Abraham and their seed, may, and ought to receive the
seal of that covenant, which was Circumcision under the law; but now is
Baptism, which I prove.

ARGUMENT I.
That which extends to all nations, belongs to children as well as men: for
children are a great part, if not the half of all nations.

But Christ's command of Baptizing extends to all nations, Matthew. 28. 19. Go
therefore teach all nations, baptizing them, and Mark 15. 16. Preach the Gospel
to every creature: he that believes and is baptized, shall be saved.

Ergo, Christ's command of Baptizing belongs to children, and they ought to be
baptized as well as men.

ANABAPTISTS ANSWER.
Christ's command extends only to such as are capable of teaching and
instruction, which children in their infancy are not: for Christ says, Teach
all uations, baptizing them.

REPLY.
First, the words of onr Savior are not, (...), teach, but make disciples: and
though children in their nonage cannot be taught, yet they may be made Christ's
disciples by being admitted into his school, their parents giving their names
to Christ, both for themselves and their families. And, in Christ's precept,
teaching does not go before, but follow Baptizing, ver. 20. teaching them to
observe all things, etc. which is punctually observed in the children of the
faithful, who, after they are Baptized, when they come to years of discretion
are taught to observe all things whatsoever Christ has commanded.

Of which see ^ore Argument 4.
pons asinorum, a bridge, which these asses could never pass over; for to this
day they could never, not hereafter will be able to yield a reason why the
children of the faithful under the Gospel are not as capable of Baptism, as
they under the Law of Circumcision. If they allege that these cannot be
taught being but sucklings; neither could they. If they allege, that these
know not what is done unto them, nor have any sense at all of the Sacrament;
neither had they, save that they felt the pain of the knife, as these do the
coldness of the water, and often shed tears at their Christening, as the
others did at their Circumcising. If it be further said, That they were of the
seed of Abraham according to the flesh, it may be truly rejoyned, that these
are of the seed of Abraham according to promise, and his children as he is the
father of the faithful, and so they have the better title of the two.

Augustine, who in that regard was styled durus pater infantum, that children
dying unbaptized, are necessarily damned; yet we must take heed of declining to
the other extreme in denying Baptism to be the ordinary means of salvation for
them, and thereby slighting our Lords precept. It is true, God is not tied to
his own Ordinance, he may, and in charity we believe does save thousands of
the children of the faithful, who are still-born or dye before baptism;
neither will he punish the child for that which it is no way guilty of; yet
Gods ordinance ties us, and the parents and governors are guilty of a heinous
crime before God, who, in contempt of Christ's command or through error of their
judgment take not care for their childrens baptism, and thereby deprive them
of the ordinary remedy of that original malady in which they are conceived
and born.

ARGUMENT II.
None ought to exclude the children of the faithful out of the kingdom of
heaven.

But by denying them baptism (as much as in us lies) we exclude them out of
the kingdom of heaven. Ioh. 3. 5.
For as Christ affirmed to Nicodemus, and confirmed it with a double oath, or
most vehement asseveration, Amen, amen; or verily, verily, (I say unto thee)
except a man beborn of water, and the spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom
of heaven.

Ergo, we ought not to deny them baptism.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The words of our Savior concern m^n in riper years, not children; (he says)
except a man, not except a child be born again.

REPLY.
First, Christ by man there understands the species of mankind, comprehending
all ages and sects; for otherwise they might as well exclude all women as
children from baptism, because it is said, except a man be born, not except a
woman; but the words immediately following make it a clear case, (...) not i^.
the Christ by man understands all singular persons contained under the
species of mankind, whether male or female, young or old; that (says he) which
is born of flesh, is flesh: but certain it is, children are properly born of
flesh, as men; and after they are born of flesh, they are first children before
they are men.

Secondly, this regeneration by water Christ speaks of is to take away the
filth of sin, that so they may be capable of entering into the kingdom of
heaven, Revel. 21. 27.
into which there shall in no wise enter any thing that is defiled; but
children, before their regeneration by water, are defiled as well as men. And
therefore Christ prescribes this remedy to them as well as men. That children
are died as it were in the grain, and stained from their mothers womb, is
clearly proved by many pregnant texts of holy scripture; as namely, Psalm. 51.
5. Behold, I was born in iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me; and
Ioh. 3. 6. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and flesh and blood
cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 15. 50. and Romans 5. 12. By one
man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all
men; (...)
in whom, or for that, all have sinned; 1 Cor. 15. 22. In Adam all dye; and
Ephesi. 2. 3. We were by nature the children of wrath, even as others. All that
are sentenced to death are guilty of sin; but children as well as men in Adam
were sentenced to death, else no children should dye. Again, that which comes
by nature is common to all who partake of that nature; but the Apostle teaches
us, that by nature we are the children of wrath; therefore certainly children
are not free from sin, which alone makes us the object of Gods wrath.

ARGUMENT III.
They whom the Apostles baptized are not to be excluded from baptism. For what
the Apostles did in the performance of their ministerial function, they
undoubtedly did either by Christ's command, or by the direction of the holy
spirit, wherewith they were infallibly assisted.

But the Apostles baptized children, Acts 16. 15. and 33. 1 Cor. 1. 16.
for they baptized whole families, whereof children are a known part.

Ergo, children ought not to be excluded from baptism.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The word household or family is taken in the places alleged for the greater
part of the family; neither is it said, that there were any children at all in
those families.

REPLY.
First, ^. 33.
to refell the first answer, the words of St. Luke are sufficient of themselves;
where it is said that the jailer was baptized, (...), and all that were his, or
all that belonged unto him: therefore not only the major part of his family,
according to the false and corrupt gloss of the Anabaptists, but simply and
absolutely all that lived under his roof.

Secondly, as it is not said in express words, that there were any children in
these families, so neither is it said that there were any women or servants:
yet no man doubts but there were of both sexes and conditions in these
families.

Thirdly, it is to be observed, that it is not said that the Apostle baptized
one family, but many; namely, that of Lydia, that of the Jailer, and of
Stephanas; and it is no way credible that in all these families blessed by God,
and converted to the Christian faith, all the women should be barren, and not
one fruitful.

Lastly, if there were any children in the families, and the Apostle had not
baptized them, he would undoubtedly have excepted them, as he does in the like
case, 1 Cor. 1. 14. I thank God, I baptized none of you but Crispus and Gaius.
I baptized also the household of Stephanas. He, who is so exact and punctual in
reckoning of those whom he baptized, if he had baptized no children, would have
added; I baptized also the household of Stephanas, except the sucklings and
children there. But the Apostle neither there nor elsewhere excepteth children;
therefore, being as essential parts of a family as well as their parents,
they must be comprised under the name of the family or household.

ARGUMENT IV.
Such as were circumcised under the law may and ought to be baptized under the
gospel. For baptism answers to circumcision, and is called by that name,
Colos. 2. 11. 12. the same grace is sealed unto us by the one as by the other;
to wit, mortification of the flesh, remission of sins, and admission into the
visible church; and the children of Christians are as capable of baptism as
the children of the Jews were of circumcision.

But children were circumcised under the la^, Genesis 17. 12. 13.

Ergo, children may and ought to be baptized under the Gospel:

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The argument from the circumcision of children to the baptism of them
follows not, because there is a command for the one and not for the other.

REPLY.
First, in this their answer, either by command they understand an express
command, and in particular; or a general and implicit; if they mean an
express command and in particular; such an one is not requisite, as themselves
(will they, nill they) must needs confess: for, they can produce no express
and particular commandment, either for the baptizing of women, or administering
the Lords Supper to them, or for sanctifying and keeping holy the eight day
from the Creation, or first day of the week, called now the Christian Sabbath;
nor for re-baptizing any that were baptized in their infancy, which yet the
Anabaptists generally practice, and from thence take their names. If they
understand a general and implicit command; such an one we produced before for
the baptism of children in the prosecution of the first argument, and shall
many other in the arguments ensuing.

Secondly, where the reason and equity of law remains, there the law is still
in force, at least for substance, though not for every circumstance. But the
reason and equity of the law of circumcising children still remains: for
nothing can be alleged why children then should be by circumcision admitted to
the church, and not now as well by baptism, hic aqua adversariis semper haeret.

Thirdly, if the children of Christian parents should be excluded from
baptism, they should be in a worse condition then the children of the Jews
were under the law; for they, by receiving the sacrament of circumcision, were
admitted into the visible congregation of Gods people, and accounted partakers
of his promises. But it were absurd, nay, (as Institut. l. 4. ^. 16. par. 6.
Nisi forte arbitramur Christ (...) suo adventu Patris gratiam, imminuisse aut
decurtasse, quod execrabili blasphemia non vacat.
Calvin further enforces this argument) execrable blasphemy to think that
Christ should abridge those privileges to the children of the faithful under
the Gospel, which God granted to children under the law.

ARGUMENT V.
All they who are comprised within the covenant, and are no where prohibited to
receive the seal thereof, may and ought to receive it.

But children are comprised within the covenant of faith, whereof circumcision
was a seal, Rom, 4. 11. and now baptism is.

Ergo, children may and ought to receive baptism.

Of the major or first proposition there can be no doubt; for it is unjust to
deprive a man of the confirmation of that to which he has a true right and
title. And for the minor or assumption it is as clear, for so are the words of
the covenant, Genesis 17. 7. I will establish my covenant between me and thee, and
thy seed after thee.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
That promise there belongs only to the seed of Abraham according to the flesh,
and not to us.

REPLY.
First, this answer is in effect refuted by the Apostle, Romans 4. 13. The
promise that he should be the heir of the world was not given to Abraham or his
seed through the law, Nota.
but through the righteousness of faith, Ita Zachaeus postquam fide
justificatus erat, dicitur filius Abrabae, Luc. 19. 9.
as he was the father of all the faithful; and in that notion we are as well
his children as the believing Jews; and we read expressly, Act. 2. 39. that
the promise is made unto you and to your children, and to all that are afar
off, and even as many as the Lord our God shall call; and Gal. 3. 7. Know ye
therefore that they that are of faith, are of the children of Abraham.

Secondly, the covenant which God made with Abraham and his seed is said to be
eternal; the chief head whereof, was, that he would be their God: but this is
not verified of Abraham's seed according to the flesh; for very few of them for
these many hundred years have been Gods people, being professed enemies to
Christ and his church: this promise therefore must necessarily be understood of
his children according to promise, among which all true believers and their
children are to be reckoned; and if they are comprised within the covenant, why
should they not receive the seal of their initiation and admittance thereunto,
which was circumcision, but now is baptism every way corresponding thereunto?
As is solidly proved, and clearly illustrated by S. Cyprian l. 3. ep. 8.
Lactan. l. 4. divin. justit. c. 15. Augustinus ep. ad Dardonuns 57. and cont.
Iul. Pelag. l. 2.

ARGUMENT VI.
Such, who were typically baptized under the law, are capable of real and true
baptism under the Gospel, for the argument holds good a typo ad veritatem,
from the type to the truth; from the signs in the law to the things signified
in the Gospel.

But children were typically baptized under the law, for they with their
fathers were under the cloud, 1 Cor. 10. 1.
and passed through the red sea; but their washing with rain from the cloud
prefigured our washing in baptism and by the spirit; and the red sea, in which
Pharaoh and his host were drowned, was an emblem of Christ's blood, in which all
our ghostly enemies are drowned and destroyed.

Ergo, children are capable of true and real baptism under the Gospel.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The cloud, and the red sea, and the rock that followed them were not types,
but only metaphors and allegories from which no firm arguments can be drawn in
this kind.

REPLY.
First, this answer whets a knife to cut their own throats. L. 2. De error.
Anabap. p. 129. Opinio Anabaptistarum est sacramenta esse allegorias quasdam
bonorum operum, ut circu^cisionem interpretantur signum fuisse coercendarum
cupiditatum, baptismum signum esse afflictionum.
For, as Gastius affirms, it is the doctrine of the Anabaptists, that all
sacraments are nothing else but allegories; if then the cloud and the red sea
were allegories signifying our spiritual washing, according to their own
tenets they are sacraments: and if children were partakers of sacramental
ablutions under the law, why not under the Gospel?

Secondly, the Apostle says expressly, ver. 6. that all these things were
types or figures, or lively patterns to us; and ver. 2. that all were baptized
in the cloud, and in the sea: the cloud therefore, and the sea were types of
our baptism, and not mere tropes or allegories.

They may happily object, that as we read in the canon law, that a Pastor or
Rector may have a Vicar endowed, sed vicarius non habet vicarium; that a Vicar
cannot have a Vicar endowed under him; and likewise in Philosophy, that the
voice may have an echo by the repercussion of the air, but that the echo has
no echo: so that the promises of God have types or sacraments representing
them, but that the types and sacraments themselves have no types and sacrament
to prefigure them. But the answer is easy, for we may say with Nazianzen, that
either there may be (...)* an obscure type of a clearer, and a rude draught or
imperfect model of a more perfect, such were the legal types of the
Evangelicall sacraments: or to speak more properly, circumcision, and the
Pascall Lamb were not types of our baptism, and of the sacrament of the
Eucharist, but of the things represented by them, viz. of the circumcision of
the heart See more of this in the answer to A. R. infra.
and our spiritual nourishment, by feeding upon the Lamb of God that takes
away the sins of the world.

ARGUMENT VII.
All they who belong to Christ and his kingdom ought to be received into the
church by baptism.

But children belong to Christ and his kingdom, as Christ himself teaches us,
Mar. 10. 14. and Luke 18. 16. suffer little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for of such is the kingdom of God; verily I say unto you,
whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not
enter therein, verse. 15. and he took them up in his arms, and put his hands
upon them and blessed them.

Ergo, children ought to be admitted into the church by baptism.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
This place is put in to be read at the sprinkling of children: Edward Barber.
p. 13.
for the whore has sweet words, as sweet as oil, and with these fair speeches
she makes the nations yield to her, Prove. 7. 21. but the simple only believe
her: for this place makes nothing for the baptism of children: the children
mentioned in the Gospel were not sucklings; for it is said, they came to
Christ, neither did Christ christen any of them, though he took them into his
arms, and blessed them, to show that he was the Savior as well of young as
old.

REPLY.
First, Barber deserves to be trimmed himself for thus reproaching his mother
the church of England, who if she be a whore, what must he needs be but a
bastard, who cannot deny himself to be born of her? If she and other reformed
churches, who have excluded the papacy, and banished the great whore out of
their precincts, be no better then whores, what true spouse has Christ in the
world? or what had he for 1500. years? during which time all churches through
the Christian world baptized infan^s even those who were the forerunners of
these Anabaptists, and bare also the^r name because they practiced rebaptizing
as these do; yet they condemned not simply the baptism of infants, as I noted
before.

Secondly, though it be said that these children came to Christ in a large
sense, that is, had access to him, yet they came not to him upon their own
legs; for S. Luke says, (...) they brought unto him babes (...) who were no
other then such as we term sucklings, or infants, and though it be true that
Christ christened them not, for he christened none himself, but his Disciples
only, as S. John teaches us; yet his receiving them and blessing them, Joh. 4.
^.
and commending humility to all by their example, saying, that of such and none
but such is the kingdom of God, is a sufficient ground and warrant for us to
christen them: for why should not we receive them into the bosom of the church,
whom Christ took into his arms? Why should we not sign them, on whom he laid
his hands? Why should we not baptize and pray for them whom he blessed? If he
be the Savior of young as well as old, and to persuade us of this truth,
expressed such love to infants, why should we exclude them from baptism, an
outward means of salvation, whom Christ (as they confess) excludes not from
salvation it self? See more below in the answer to A. R.

ARGUMENT VIII.
All they who are partakerrs of the grace both signified and exhibited to us in
baptism, may and ought to receive the sign and sacrament thereof: this is the
basis and foundation upon which S. Peter himself builds, Acts 10. 47. Can any
man forbid water, Bullinger adver. Anabap. l. 6. Cum id quod ma^us est infantes
habeant, rem scilicet signatam, gratiam Dei and remissionem peccatorum; quis
illis id quod minus est, signum, aquam videlicet, denegabit?
that these should not be baptized which have received the holy Ghost as well
as we? And it may be further confirmed both by an argument drawn a majore ad
minus, after this manner: if God bestow upon children that which is greater,
the inward grace; why should we deny them the lesser, the outward element? Or
by an argument drawn a relatis, they to whom the land is given ought not to be
denied the sight and keeping of the deeds and evidences thereof, neither ought
we to sever those things which God has joined, to wit, the signs and the
things signified: they divide the sign from the thing signified who deny them
to have grace ordinarily, modo non ponant obicem, who receive the outward sign;
and they again sever the thing signified from the sign who allow unto children
the grace of remission of sins, and regeneration, and yet deny them the sign
and seal thereof, to wit, baptism.

But children receive the grace signified and exhibited in baptism; 1 Cor. 7.
14.
for the Apostle teaches us, they are not unclean but holy; and therefore have
both remission of sins and sanctification.

Ergo, children ought to receive the sign and sacrament thereof, to wit,
baptism.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The Apostles ^eaning is, Edward Barber. p. 17.
that the children of beleevens are not unclean, that is, bastards; but holy,
that is, born in holy wedlack.

REPLY.
First, this answer is no way pertinent to the scope of the Apostle, which is
to persuade the Christian husband not to forsake his unbeleeving wife, nor the
Christian wife to depart from her unbelieving husband; because the unbeliever
is sanctified by the believer, where by sanctification the Apostle cannot
understand legitimation. For faith in the husband does not legitimate the wife,
that is, make her no bastard if she were so born, but sanctifies her to
himself, and makes her a part and member of a holy family dedicated to God.

Secondly, neither is sanctification here nor in any other place of Scripture
taken otherwise then for separating some way from profane, as persons, times
and places, are said to be sanctified. Neither does holy necessarily implie no
bastard. For some holy men have been base-born, nor does not bastard implie
holy; for both the children of damned heretics, yea, and infidells too,
Martyr. loc. Commun. cla^^ quartae c. 8. Si tantum civilem purt^atem prolis
inde susceptae add^x^ris, (...) quam infideles. habeant? illocum enim filit si
^ matrimoni^ procreentur legitimi sunt; and ut justi b^redes admittuntur. Quare
videtur Paulus quiddam aliud indicasse quod liberis infidelium non sit datum,
sed quod ad ecclesiam Dei pertineant, and ad electionem (...)* p. 823. 824.
if they be begotten in wed-look, are no bastards; yet in the state and
condition they are in, are far from holy. See more hereof infra, in the answer
to A. R.

ARGUMENT IX.
All Apostolical traditions (which are truly such) ought to be had in
reverent esteem, and retained in the church. For what the Apostles delivered
they received from Christ himself, either by word of mouth, or the infallible
inspiration of his spirit: such things are part of that sacrum depositum, which
Timothy is charged so deeply, 1. 6. 20.
( O Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thee,) and the Thessalonians
to keep, stand fast and keep, 2. ^. 11*
(...), word for word the traditions which you have been taught, either by word
or by our Epistle.

But the baptism of children is an Apostolical tradition truly so called.

Ergo, it ought to be had in high esteem and retained in the church.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
Though it has been an ancient custom in many churches to christen children,
yet it is no Apostolical tradition, but a humane ordinance, which had its
original from the Pope, the man of sin.

REPLY.
First, there was christening of children in the church before there was any
Pope in the sense they take the word for oecumenicall bishop chalenging unto
himself, and usurping authority over the whole church; for not only L. 1. de
pec. merit, and rem. ^. c. 26. l. 2. de voc, Gent. c. 8. l. ^. con. Pelag.
S. Augustine, and Prosper, and and Jerome, make mention of this custom and
good use of it to condemn the Pelagian heresy which denies original sin, but
also the council of Carthage, in the days of Cyp. ^p. ad Fidunt.
S. Cyprian, who flourished in the year 250, determined, not only that children
might and ought to be baptized, but also even before the eighth day; upon which
some in those days stood strickly, but erroneously: and conformably hereunto
we find a canon in the Milevitan council, in which the synod decreed, Placuit
ut quicunque parvulos recentes ab uteris maru^ baptizandos negat, anathema fit.
that whosoever shall deny baptism to children, even as soon as they come out
of their mothers womb (in case the children be weak, and in apparent danger of
death) let him be accursed; and before either the synod of Carthage, or this
Mile^tan, Salvatur omnes qui r^nascuntur in C^risto, insan^es, ^ueri, juvenes,
senes.
Irenaeus in his second book against heresies, chap. 39. speaks of infants,
children, young* and old saved by their new birth in Christ; namely, by water
and the spirit, Joh. 3. 5.

Secondly, S. Origin and S. Austine affirm in express terms, that the
baptism of children is an Apostolical tradition. Comment. in c. 6. ad Romans
ecclesia ab Apostolis traditionem accepit etiam parvulis dare baptismum.
Origin having alleged the words of the Psalm (51. 5) I was borne in
iniquity, and in sin has my mother conceived me, infers upon it, propter
hoc, for this reason, because we are all conceived and borne in sin the
Church has received a tradition from the Apostles to administer baptism to
little children. And S. Austine, L. 10. degen. ad lit c. 23. Consuctudo inquit
matris ecclesiae in baptizandis parvuas nequaquam sp^rnenda est, nec ullo modo
superflua deputanda, nec omnino credenda nis^ Apostoliaa esset traditio.
The custom of our Mother the Church, in baptizing infants, is no way to be
slightened or rejected, nor otherwise to be thought on or believed then as an
Apostolical tradition.

Thirdly, it may be proved to be an Apostolical tradition by that ground which
S. Austine lays, and every man's reason readily gives assent thereunto,
namely, L. 4. de bapt. infant. Quod universa tenet ecclesia nec conciliis
institutum, sed semper retentum est, non nisi authoritate Apostoll^a traditum
verissime creditur.
that whatsoever is observed uniformly in all churches, and no man can tell
when it began, must needs be thought either to be done by the Decree of some
general Council, or to have descended from the tradition of the Apostles
themselves.

But the baptism of children has been observed, and practiced through the
whole Christian church, L. de pec. mer. c. 26.
as Austine affirms, neither was it first appointed by any Canon of general
Council that can be produced: for though it be mentioned in the Council of
Vienna, and the second Council held at Brachara, and in Synodo Gerundensi, yet
was it far more ancient then any of those Councels, neither can any name the
time when first it began; and therefore we cannot otherwise conceive of it,
then that it had its first original from the Apostles.

ARGUMENT X.
All members of the reformed Protestant churches in Christendom ought to
conform their judgments to the harmony of the Protestants confessions set
forth by the consent of all orthodox churches, and firmly grounded upon
deductions at least of holy scripture, if not evident texts.

But the judgment of all the reformed churches delivered in the harmony of
their confessions is professedly for the baptism of children, and expressly
against this renet of the Ans. baptist's.

Ergo, let the Anabaptist either disclaim the (...) of Protestants and
children of the reformed churches, (...) renounce this their heresy, for, t^^s
p^rs qu^^ n^m congruit ^ot^.

Now for the Protestant confessions concerning this point, I shall rehearse
them in order, beginning with the English Articles of Religion, Artic. II.

First, the infants of Christian parents are not to be kept from baptism,
because they care borne in sin, and belong to the people of God.

Secondly, Harm: conf. sect. 13. c. 20. Iamnamus Anabaptistas qui rigant
baptizandos esse infantulas recens natos a fidelibus: nam juxta doctrinam
evangelicam (...) ^^regnum Dei, and sunt in foedere Dei, cur itaque non doretur
iis signum foederis Dei? cui non per sanctum baptisma initiarontur qui sunt
peculium, and in ecclesia Dei?
the Helvetion confession, We condemn the Anabaptists; who deem that children
newly born ought on be baptized: for, according to the doctrine of the Gospel,
of such is the kingdom of God; and they are within the covenant of God; why
therefore should not the soul of that covenant be given unto them?

Thirdly, the Bohemian confession, Har. conf. sect. 13. c. 12. Datur baptismus
etium infantibus qui and ipsi (...) Christo consecrentur socundum mandatum
ejus, sinite prevulos etc.
Though baptism for the most part in the primitive church were administered to
men of riper years, yet children ought to be dedicated and consecrated to
Christ, according to his command, Suffer little children to (...) unto me.

Fourthly, the French, Article zy. Confess. Gal. Art. 35. Affirmamus insantes
sanctis parentitus natos esse ex Christ's authoritate baptizandos.
Although baptis^^ be a sacrament of says and repentance, yet in as much as
children are reckoned with their parents in tho church of God, we affirm, that
infants that are born of holy parents ought to be baptized by Christ's
authority.

Fifthly, the Belgic confession, Artic. 34. Nos. infantes eadem ratione
baptizandos and signo (...) esse credimus, qua ollm in Israele parvuli
circumcidebantur; nimirum proper ejusidam (...) infantibus nostris factas.
We beleave that children ought to be baptized, and signed with the sign of the
covenant, for the same reason for which the children in Israel were
circumcised, namely, for that the same promises are made to them and to us.

Sixthly, the Augustane confession, they Artic. 9. Damnan^ Anabaptistas qui
imp^^^^ (...),
condemn the Anabaptists, who dislike the baptism of children, and affirm,
that infants without baptism, and dying without the church, may be saved.

Seventhly, the Saxon confession, Art. 13. Retinemus and infantium baptismum
quia certissimum est promissionem gratiae etiam ad infantes pertinere.
We retain the baptism of infants, because it (...) must certain, that the
promise of grace belongs also to infants: and because of them it is said,
Suffer little children to come unto me, for of such is the kingdom of seven.

To drive this nayl to the head, I shall need to add nothing save the capital
punishments inflicted upon such as taught and practiced Anabaptisme: those
Christian States accounted it no light error upon which they laid so heavy a
load of punishment; in some places the broachers of this heresy, and
practisers of rebaptizing, have been punished with beheading, in some with
drowning, and in some with burning. There is a law against this sect in the
Code of L. 1. (...). 7. Si quis rebaptizare quempiam de ministris. Catholicae
secta fuorie r^t^ctus u^a cum eo qui piacub^ra criman commisit, and hic ^i
perfuasum (...) ultimo supplicio percellatur.
Justinian, written with blood rather then ink, If any man be convicted to
re-baptize any of the ministers of the Catholic sect, let him who has
committed this heinous crime, together with him whom he has seduced to be
rebaptized, suffer the stroke of death. At Gastius de Anabap. error. l. 1. p.
178. Viennae uno die multi ob catabaptismum sub^er^ sunt. funibus enim ita
ligati erant, ut alier al^^um post se traberet donec omnes pracipites ruerene
suffocaren^urque*
Vienna the Anabaptists are tied together with ropes, and one draws the other
into the river to be drowned: as it should seem, the wife magistrates of that
place had an eye to that old maxim of justice, quo quis peccat eo puniatur,
let the punishment bear upon it the print of the sin: for as these sectaries
drew one another into their error, so also into the gulf; and as they drowned
men spiritually by re-baptizing, and so prophaming the holy sacrament, so also
they were drowned corporally. How his Chronicle, p. 456. and 579.
In the year of our Lord 1539, two Anabaptists were burned beyond Southwark, in
the way to Newington; and a little before them, five Dutch Anabaptists were
burned in Smithfield.

If I have been somewhat the more prolix in the prosecution of the arguments
which make for the baptism of infants, S. Austine shall plead for this my
large plea for them, Ad Hill. ep. 89. tanto magis pro infantibus loqui debemus,
quanto minus ipsi pro se loqui possunt.
We are in conscience bound to speak the more for poor infants, because they
are not able to speak for themselves.

Now there remains nothing, but that we stop the mouths of their
adversaries, by reselling such objections as they usually make, and
unchristianly urge against christening them at our fonts.

The objections of the Anabaptists answered.
First, Obj. 1.
they argue from the Scripture negatively, thus: the baptism of children has
no warrant in Gods Word; for we find there no command for it, no example of it,
no promise to it: therefore it is to be rejected as an humane invention, and
condemned also as an addition to the Scripture.

But we answer, Sol. 1.
that by the like argument they might prove that no woman ought to be admitted
to the sacrament of the Lords Supper; for there is no command for women's
participation of the sacrament, nor example of it, nor promise to it in
Scripture. If they allege that (...) is a name common to women as well asmen;
it is true, when the article ^ is joined to it, but the Apostle uses the
masculine (...), v. 28. and v. 29. ^.
If they answer, that women are comprised under the name of believers, so are
children under the name of whole households and families, which are reported in
holy Scripture to have been baptized: if they say further, that by a like
reason women are to be admitted to the sacrament, as men, because Christ dyed
as well for them as men, and they are as well incorporated into Christ's
mystical body as men: we rejoin in like manner for the same reason that
children were circumcised under the law, they ought to be baptized under the
Gospel. For since they are comprised in the covenant, why should not they as
well receive the seal thereof set to it in the new law, as well as the children
of the Jews received the seal set thereunto by the old?

Argument 1. and example of it, Argument 3. and promise also unto it, Argument
5. The command of baptizing all Nations, Mat. 28. 29. the examples of baptizing
whole families, Act. 16. 15. 33. 1 Cor. 1. 16. and the promise made to us and
our seed, Act. 2. 39. evidently extend to children.

They argue from Scripture affirmatively; Obj. 2.
our Lord Jesus Christ in that great charter Mat. 28. 18. 19. 20. says, Go
teach all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, Son, and holy
Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you: and
Mark 16. 15. Go ye into all the world, and preach the Gospel to every
creature; he that shall believe and be baptized shall be saved; but he that
will not believe shall be damned. From these texts they would infer that none
ought to be baptized but such who are first taught, and instructed in the
principles of Christian faith; and consequently, that no children ought to be
baptized, because they are not capable of teaching.

That the placing the word teaching before baptizing in that text Sol. 1.
does no more conclude that teaching must always precede baptism, then the
setting repentance before faith in those words, Repent ye, and believe the
Gospel, Mark 1. 15. and setting water before the spirit, Ioh. 3. 5. ( except a
man be born of water and the spirit) necessarily infer that repentance goes
before faith, which yet is but a fruit of faith: or that the outward baptism
with water goes before the inward baptism of the spirit; whereas the
contrary is clearly proved out of that speech of Peter to Cornelius, Act. 10.
47. Can any man forbid water that these should not be baptized, which have
received the holy Ghost as well as we?

Secondly, if there be any force in this argument drawn from the wound them
with their dudgeon-dagger, (Christ says) baptize them in the name of the
Father, teaching them to observe all things: baptizing therefore must go before
teaching, especially in children, who may be baptized before they can be taught.

Thirdly, they mis-translate the words; for Christ says, not, go and teaching
them to observe all things; neither is there a tautologie in our blessed
Saviors words; for his words are, (...) etc. go make disciples among all
nations, baptizing them, and teaching them. Now though children cannot be
taught before they are baptized, yet they may be after a ^or^ made Christ's
disciples by their parents or godfathers offering them unto God, and
undertaking for them that they shall be brought up in the Christian religion.

Fourthly, Christ speaks here of the plantation of the Christi Turkey, or the
East and West- Indies, to convert Pagans, or Mahumetans, or unbeleeving Jews to
the Gospel. They are to baptize none before they have taught them the
principles of Christian religion; but after the Gospel is planted, and the
parents are beleever^, and received into the church by baptism, their children
are first to be baptized, and afterward taught so soon as they are capable of
teaching.

They argue from examples after this manner; Obj. 3.
such are to be baptized, who with the Jews in Jerusalem Mat. 3. 6. confess
their sins; who with the Proselytes Act. 2. 41. gladly receive the word; who
with the Samaritans Act. 8. 6. give heed to the word preached; who with those
of Cornelius family Act. 10. 44. receive the holy Ghost by the hearing of the
word; who, with Lydia, have their hearts opened to attend the things that are
spoken by the Apostles, Act. 16. 14. who with the Jailer, hear the word
preached, and seek after the means of salvation, Act. 16. 30. But children can
neither confess their sins, nor attend to the word preached, nor actually
believe nor desire baptism: they therefore ought not to be baptized.

But we answer, Sol. 1.
all that can solidly be concluded from these examples, is but this in the
affirmative; all such who were so qualified as these were, viz. hearers of the
Gospel, penitent sinners, and true believers, unfainedly desiring the means of
their salvation, ought to be admitted into the church by baptism, which we
freely grant; but they cannot conclude from these examples negatively, that
none other ought to be Christened. No more, then it will follow, that those of
Cornelius his family received the gift of the holy Ghost, and spoke with diverse
tongues before they were baptized with water; therefore none but such who have
received such gifts of the holy Ghost may and ought to be baptized. To confess
sins, and actually profess faith, makes a man more capable of baptism: yet
dumb men* who can do neither, if they have a good testmonie of their life and
conversation, and by signs make it appear they unfainedly desire the
sacraments, may receive them.

capable of instruction ought to hear the word, to give their assent thereunto,
and enter into a strict covenant with God, to lead a new life before they have
access to the Font. Therefore the like duties are required of children, who
have not yet the use of reason, nor knowledge of good or evil. By this reason
they might starve children, because the law is, he that will not labor let him
not eat. It holds in men, but no way in children, who are not able to labor in
any calling by reason of the infirmity of their joints, and want of reason and
understanding.

Baptism is a seal of the righteousness of faith, Obj. 4.
therefore it ought to be administered only to believers; else we set a seal to
a blank. But children are no believers, nor can be while they are such, because
they cannot understand the word nor give assent thereunto. Ergo, children ought
not to be baptized.

But we answer, that unbeleevers or not believers may be either taken for, Sol.
1.
first, such as when they hear the word of God, reject it, or secondly, such
who neither have means to hear it, nor desire it; such unbeleevers are to be
excluded from baptism. For to give baptism to such, were worse then to set a
seal to a blank, it were to give holy things to dogs, and cast pearl before
swine. Or thirdly, for such who are born within the precincts of the church,
and care is taken that they shall be taught the principles of faith, as soon as
they are capable thereof. These, though they cannot give yet an actual consent
to the mysteries of faith, are not to be rearmed infidels, or unbeleevers
positively, but negatively only; and we ought in charity to believe, that they
will actually believe as soon as they shall have use of reason, and God by his
spirit shall open their hearts to attend to the word preached: to unbeleevers
in this latter sense, as circumcision, the seal of the righteousness of faith
under the law was given, so may baptism though not in token of their present,
yet of their future faith.

Secondly, the children of the faithful parents whom the Apostle John Baptist,
he shall be filled with the holy Ghost from his mothers womb, Luke 1. 15. 41.
as Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the babe sprang in her womb. Upon
which words, Adhuc in utero positus spiritus accepti gratiam designavit, habuit
intelligendi sensum qui exultandi habebat affectum.
S. Ambrose commenting, says; John Baptist, while he was yet in his mothers
womb, received the grace of the holy Ghost, and his leaping with joy argued
some sense and apprehension of that joyful message.

Now, Call. l. 4. instie. ^. 16. Quos ^pl^no lucis suae fulgore illustratu^ us
est dominus, cur non iis quoque in praesens, si ita libueritexigua scintilla
irradiaret?
since children that dye shortly after baptism have the full sight of Gods face
in heaven, why may they not have some glimpse of it even whilst their soul is
in their body? L. 1. de pec. mer. and remis. c. 9. Dat sui spiritus
occultissimam gratiam, quam etiam latenter infundit and parvulis.
S. Austine is confident; that God after a most hidden manner infuseth his
grace into children; and in his 57. epistle ad Dardanum, it is a wonderful
thing, yet true, that God dwells not in some who know him, as the philosophers,
To. 1. and he dwells in some who know him not, as in infants baptized. We may
safely therefore conclude with Syntag. disp. par. 2. c. de bapt. utraque ipsis
inest actu primo non secundo, in semente non in mess, in radice non in fructu;
interna spiritus virtute, non externa operis demonstratione.
Tilenus, children have faith as they have reason; in the seed, though not in
the fruit; in the root, though not in the leaf; in some inward operation,
though not in any outward expression.

They argue also, Obj. 5.
ab absurdo, indeed absurdly after this manner; signum frustra datur non
intelligenti, it is a vain and absurd thing to administer the sacrament to such
as know not what it means; as it is to no purpose to present a beautiful
picture to a blind man, or sound a silver trumpet in a deaf man's ear, or
minister physic to a dead body. But children know not what the sacrament
means; when the cold water is powered on them they are offended with it, and
express their dislike with crying and tears; therefore it is vain to christen
children.

But we answer; Sol. 1.
in this objection the Anabaptists Gyant-like fight with God. For if there be
any force in this argument at all, it will be as available to overthrow the
circumcising of children instituted in the old law by God himself, as their
baptism in the new. For the children among the Jews under the law, who were
circumcised the eighth day, knew no more what circumcision meant, then ours do
what baptism; only they felt the pain of the knife, as these do the coldness
of the water, yet were they circumcised by Gods express command. Will they say
that Christ uttered many parables, and wrought many signs and wonders before
his disciples and other of the Jews in vain, because at the present they
understood them not, though afterward they understood them, and made singular
use of them? In like manner dare they affirm that Christ did in vain lay his
hands upon children and blessed them, because children knew not what it meant?
or that ministers in vain baptize them, because at that time they know not what
it signifies, or why it is done?

Secondly, it is not in vain to offer to any that which may do

Thirdly, though children for the present understand not why

They argue from the effects of baptism; Obj. 6.
baptism is the laver of regeneration, the burying of the old man, the putting
on of Christ, the putting away the filth of the flesh, with a confident
demanding of a good conscience. But children are not regenerated nor renewed in
their mind, nor have buried the old man, nor have put on the new, nor can
confidently demand with a good conscience out of a certain persuasion of faith:
therefore they ought not to be baptized.

But we answer, Sol.
the texts of scripture upon which they ground their argument, namely, Coloss.
2. 11, 12. Tit. 3. 5. Heb. 10. 22. 1 Pet. 3. 21. contain in them high
commendations of baptism, but no prohibitions of administering it to children:
for all these effects the Spirit of God produces in all the elect that are
baptized, but not all at an instant, but by degrees, as we grow in faith and in
the knowledge of our Lord and Savior: they are begun at our baptism, but
perfected afterward, unless the party immediately die after baptism, when
no doubt God supplyeth that by the extraordinary work of his Spirit; which
riper years with the ordinary means of faith would have brought forth, if God
had spared them life. Children are regenerated by the impression of Gods image
in their soul, which in process of time shines most bright in them by
supernatural light in the understanding, and purity in the heart, and
conformity in their lives to the law of God: they are also purged from the
guilt of their sins, and Christ's righteousness is imputed unto them, though
they have no sense or feeling thereof till God works powerfully upon their
hearts by the preaching of the word, and they apprehend Christ's merits by an
actual faith. As a flower in the winter lies hid under ground in the root,
which at the spring shoots forth the leaves thereof; so in children that are
baptized there remains that root of sanctifying grace in their hearts, which
in riper years puts forth the leaves thereof by a holy profession, and
brings forth fruit by a godly conversation.

They argue a pari; Object. 7.
if the sacrament of baptism be to be administered to children, then also the
sacrament of the Lords supper, for both are seals of the same covenant. But
the supper is not to be administered unto infants, therefore neither is baptism.

But we answer, Sol.
that the inference is not good: for though both are seals of the covenant of
grace, yet there is a threefold disparitie in them, which looseneth the
sinews of the argument.



(...). 11. 26.
As often as ye eat of this bread, and drink of this cup, says the Apostle, ye
shall declare the Lords death till he come. But children neither can apprehend
nor show forth Christ's death; therefore that sacrament is not ordained for them.

baptism there is no such examination required. Though if any in riper years
be converted to the Christian faith, it is most requisite that he be examined
by the minister who baptiseth him, and that he be able to give a good account
of his faith: but every one who is fit to be baptized is not presently to be
addmitted to the Lords Table without precedent preparation, and a more strict
examination of himself, both concerning his growth in faith, and sincerity of
repentance, and unfeigned charity, with an earnest desire of that heavenly
repast.

They argue from Christ's example, Obj. 8.
who was not baptized till he was thirty years of age.

But we answer, Sol. 1.
that Christ's example alone without a precept does not bind us. For Christ
neither instituted nor administered the holy Supper till the day before his
death, and then he both administered and received it after Supper, and that with
his Apostles only: yet we are not bound, either to defer our receiving to the
day before our death, or to administer the Eucharist after Supper, or to
participate only with such a number, and those Priests or Ministers of the
Gospel.

Secondly, Christ in his infancy was circumcised, circumcision

Thirdly, though Christ were not baptized in his infancy for the the infancy
of baptism it self. For, as soon as John began to baptize, Christ came unto
him, and required baptism of him. When the fullness of time was come, in which
God had appointed to manifest him to the world, and appoint him our teacher by
a voice from heaven, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased, hear
him. According to whose example we ought not to defer our baptism; but, upon
the first opportunity offered unto us, receive that seal of our new birth in
Christ and admission into his church.

I conclude the answer to this argument with an observation of L. de exord.
Anabapt. p. 340 Christus simul circumcisus and baptizatus est, nempe dominus
amborum populorum, ideo and sacramenta amborum assumpsit.
Gastius; that Christ, because he was Lord both of the people in the old
testament and of them in the new, therefore he would receive the sacraments of
both, and was both circumcised in his infancy, and baptized also as soon as
baptism was in force.

Since the examination and confutation of this second Article of the
Anabaptists, there came to my hands a small pamphlet, dedicated to the house of
Commons, entitled, The vindicath^u of the royal commission of king Jesus:
wherein the author Francis Cornwell master of Arts, and sometimes student of
Emanuell College in Cambridge, frames many arguments against the ordinance of
the church in baptizing infants. Of which I may truly say, as Martial does of
Caecilius, who made disverse dishes of one and the self same kind of course
root.

Atreus Caecilius cucurbitarum
Sic illas quasi filias Thyestae
In parts lacerat secatque mill:
Gustu protinus has edes in ipso,
Has prima feret, alterave mensa,
Has coenae tibi tertia reponit:
Huicseras Epidipnidas parabit;
Hoc lautum vocat, hoc putat venustum
Unum po^ere ferculis tot assem.
Thou cheatest my stomach with variety of dishes, in all which there is but
one sorry root dressed after a diverse manner, and in all of them not a
half-pennie worth of good and solid meat. So this new Anabaptisticall Proselyte
endeavors to cheat the judgment of the reader with variety of syllogismes
and enthymems, in which there is but one or two arguments at most, propounded
in diverse forms, and in all of them not the weight of one solid reason; the
sum and effect of his whole book is contained in the title page, wherein he
affirms, that the christening of children does universally oppose the
commission granted by king Jesus, Mat. 28. 19. 20. Mark 16. 15. 16. and that
paedobaptisme is a popish tradition, brought into the church by Innocentius the
third; upon these two notes he runs in division through his whole book. The
first has no color of probability, and the latter is a gross and ignorant
untruth; if the baptism of infants oppose the commission granted by Christ,
Mat. 28. either it opposes it in words or in sense: not in words, for there is
no mention at all of children in either of those texts, much less any
prohibition of baptizing them, neither does it oppose it in sense. For the
meaning of our Savior there apparently is; that his Apostles and their
Successors should go and convert all Nations, and plant Christian churches in
them: first, teaching them the Gospel and principles of Christian Religion, and
after administering the sacraments unto them; which they have done accordingly:
first, teaching the parents and baptizing them, and after their children into
their faith. But the objection from these texts is fully answered, and retorted
in the end of the conference and in the solution of the first argument brought
by the Anabaptists in this section. And therefore I come briefly to examine his
second assertion or rather aspersion of the whole Christian world in these
words in the frontis-peece of his book, Against the antichristian faction of
pope Innocentius the third and all his favorites, that enacted by a decree,
that the baptism of the infants of believers should su^ceed circumcision.
These words vertually contain this proposition, that the christening children
is the practice of an Antichristian faction, which was brought first into the
church by the decree of Pope Innocentius the third. Of which enunciation, I may
say as Tertullian does of the Chameleon, quot colores, tot dolores; or rather,
quot dicta, tot maledicta; so many words as there are, so many gross errors
and scandalous reproaches. For the baptizing infants is not the practice of a
faction, nor a part, but of the whole, not Antichristian, but truly Christian
church. Neither was it introduced by Innocentius the third, but is of far more
ancient date, and was derived even from the times of the Apostles themselves.

First, it is well known that the Greek and Latin churches, or the Eastern or
Western were the membra dividentia of the whole church; and that the
christening of infants was approved of and practiced by the Greek church is
evident by the testimonies of Gregory Nazianzen, orat. 40. in bap. Origin hom.
8. upon Leviticus, and 14. of Luke: and that it was likewise approved and
practiced in the Latin church is clearly collected from Ambrose, lib. de
Abrahamo Patriarcha, Ieron. cont. Pelag. l. 3. Augustine. l. 10. de Genesis ad lit.
c. 23. Cyp. ep. 59. ad Fidum. Now if the Greek and Latin churches were
Antichristian, where were there any Christians in the world?

Secondly. Pope Innocentius the third, as it is well known to all the learned,
lived in the twelfth age of the Church, and flourished about the year 1215, in
which year he called the great Council at Lateran. Before him Gregory the
great (whom M. Cornwell himself alleges, page 11. out of M. Fox in his book
of Martyrs) about the year of our Lord 599. above six hundred years before
Innocentius the third resolved Austine the Monk that in case of necessity
infants might be baptized as soon as they were born: and two hundred years
before Gregory, S. Austine wrote a treatise de baptismo parvulorum, and for
the lawfulness thereof, in his 28 epistle, and in his third book de pec. mer.
and remiss. and by occasion elsewhere also alleges a testimony out of S.
Cyprian to that purpose, who wrote in the year of our Lord 250. nay, which is
most considerable, Origin in his Comment upon the epistle to the Romans, c. 6.
l. 5. (quoted by M. Cornwell himself, p. 10.) affirms in express terms,
that the church from the Apostles received a tradition to baptize children:
whence I thus frame my argument.

All Christians ought to hold the traditions which have been taught them by the
Apostles, either by word or epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 15.

But the baptizing of children is a tradition received from the Apostles, as
Origin affirms, loc. sup. cit. and Austine, l. 10. de Genesis ad lit. c. 23. and
de bap. cont. Donatis. l. 4.

Ergo, the baptizing of children ought to be retained in the Christian church.

Thus M. Cornwell has spun a fair thread, of which a strong cord may be made to
strangle his own assertion.

Yea, but M. Cornwell charge all ministers deeply to answer this his negative
demonstration, saying, O that the learned English ministry would inform me,
lest my blood like Abels cry aloud from heaven for vengeance, for not
satisfying a troubled conscience: how shall I admit or consent to the
admittance of the infant of a believer to be made a visible member of a
particular congregation of Christ's body, and baptized, before it be able to
make confession of its faith and repentance, lest I consent to separate what
God has joined together?

That which God has joined together, no man ought to separate.

But faith and baptism God has joined together, Mar. 16. 16. Acts 8. 37, 38.
and 16. 33, 34. Gal. 3. 27. Ephesians. 4. 5. Ergo, faith and baptism no man ought
to separate.

ANSWER.
This argument is so far from a demonstration, that it is not so much as a
topicall syllogism, but merely sophistical; therein any who has ever saluted
the University, and has bin initiated in Logic, may observe a double fallacy.

The first is fallacia homonymiae in the premises.

The second is ignoratio elenchi in the conclusion.

First, the homonymia or ambiguity is in the term ( joined together) for the
meaning may be either that faith and baptism are joined together in praecepto,
in Christ's precept, and that no man denies: all that are commanded to be
baptized, are required to believe, and all that believe, to be baptized, or
joined together in subjecto, that is to say, all who are baptized have true
faith, and that none have true faith but such as are baptized; in this sense it
is apparently false, and none of the texts alleged prove it, for the thief on
the cross had faith, yet not the baptism we speak of; as also the Emperor
whom S. Ambrose so highly extolleth in his funeral, and many thousands
besides; again, Julian the Apostata, and all other, who after they came to
years renounced their baptism and Christian profession, had baptism, yet no
true faith; which, as M. Cornwell himself will confess, cannot be lost totally
or finally.

Secondly, in the former syllogism there is ignorantio elenchi, he concludes
not the point in question, they who most stand for the baptizing of children
will not have faith and baptism severed: for they baptize children into their
fathers faith, and take sureties that when they come to years of discretion
they shall make good the profession of the Christian faith which was made by
others at the font in their name, and for them: nay, so far are they from
excluding faith from infants that are baptized, that they believe that all the
children of the faithful, who are comprised in the covenant with their fathers
and are ordained to eternal life, at the very time of their baptism receive
some hidden grace of the Spirit, and the seeds of faith and holiness, which
afterward bear fruit in some sooner, in some later. Neither is this any
paradox or new opinion: for S. Jerome advers. Lucifer. and Austin ep. 57. ad
Dard. and Zanchius de tribus Elohim affirm, that the holy Spirit moves upon
the waters of baptism, and that as the Spirit in Genesis 1. 2. rested upon the
waters, incubabat aquis, that he might cherish and prepare them for the
producing of living creatures; so the holy Ghost rests upon the waters of
baptism, and sits as is were abroad upon them, and blesses them, and thereby
does cherish the regenerate and animate the elect. S. Leo speaks most
elegantly and fully to this point in his sermons of the birth of Christ, omni
rena^ce^i aqua baptismatis instar est uteri virginalis, Ser. 4.
^adem (...) qui replevit and virginem; and peccatum quod ihi (...) conceptio,
hic mystica to^^it abl^tio. Ser. 5.
And (...). 5. factu^ est homo nostri generis ut nos divinae naturae poss^imus
esse consortes: originem quam sumpsit in utero virginis, posuit in (...): dedit
(...) quod dedit matri: obumbratio Spiritus qu^^ facit ut Maria pareret
salvatorem, facit ut regeneret undae credontem: to every regenerate Christian
the water of baptism is in stead of the Virgins womb, the same Spirit
replenishing the font which filled the Virgin; and the sin which there his
holy conception prevented or evacuated, here the mystical ablution takes away.
And again, Christ was made a man of our nature, that we might be made partakers
of his divine nature; the birth or original which he took in the Virgins womb
he has put in the font of baptism; he has given that to the water which he
gave to his mother; by the like over shadowing of the Spirit the water
regenerates a believer, whereby Mary brought forth a Savior.

As for the rest of his arguments, they are like rotten wire, they will not
endure the streining, and they are alread^e broken in pieces by another. See
the declaration against the Anabaptists printed at London for R. W. 1644.

A confutation of A. R. his TRACTATE, entitled, The Vanity of childrens
baptism.
THe press now adays is like Africa, Eras. Adag.
^emper aliquid apportat novi monstri, it brings forth every day some new
monster; among which one of the most ugly and misshapen is a Treatise printed by
A. R. of The Vanity of childish baptism: quis furor o cives! quae tanta
licentia praeli! O the impiety of the men of these times, the more to be
condemned by all after-ages, by how much they condemn the piety and devotion
of the former! An ordinance of God, and most holy sacrament instituted by
Christ, and from the days of the Apostles even to this present age administered
by the whole church to the children of believers is termed by the vain author
of this Treatise, upon weak and childish reasons, vain and childish. Is every
action childish whereof children are the subject? Then was circumcision
childish, and the protection of Angels is childish, and the imposition of
hands, and benediction of our blessed Savior (I tremble to speak it in the
language of this black-mouthed Treatiser) will be concluded to be vain and
childish. For the sacrament of circumcision by Gods commandment was
administered to children, Mat. 18. 10. Mat. 7. 10.
the Angels of heaven are childrens guardians, and our Redeemer himself took
children in his arms, laid his hands upon them and blessed them. And if he
commanded children to be brought unto him, shall not we bring them to the
church? If he embraced them, shall not we receive them into his family? If he
laid his hands on them, shall not we wash them in his sacred font? If he
blessed them, shall not we pray for them? and after a religious manner
consecrate them unto him, and make them free of the city of God according to
Abraham's copy, Genesis 17. 7.
I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed? Herod the Ascalonite, and Richard
the third, King of England, were branded with anote of infamy and barbarous
cruelty to allages; the one for ^^isling the young princes of the blood and
heirs of the crown of England, the other for massaging the infants in
Bethlehem and the confines thereof; yet those bloody tyrants deprived those
sweet babes only of their temporal life; of how much deeper dye is their sin,
who by their soul-murthering doctrine and practice endeavor to deprive the
heirs apparent, not of an earthly but of a celestial crown, and all the
children of the faithful throughout the whole Christian world of the ordinary
means of eternal life? Whatsoever fair varnish has been of late put upon this
heresy, it seemed so horrid and abominable in the eyes of our predecessors and
other reformed churches, they inflicted the severest punishments upon the
obstinate maintainers thereof that they could devise.

At Zurick, after many disputations between Gastius de Anabaptis. exord. l. 1.
8. Post decimam collationem decrevit Senatus.
Zuinglius and the Anabaptists, the Senate made an act, that if any presumed to
rebaptise those that were baptized before they should be drowned.

In the year of our Lord, 1539. Tigutinus aquis mergere eum qui merserit
baptismo eum, qui prius emerserat.
five Dutch Anabaptists were burnt in Smithfield, and two beyond Southwark in
the way to Newington.

At Vienna, many How Chron. f. 456. and 579. Gast. p. 178. l. 1. uno die multi
ob Catabaptismum submersi sunt; funibus enim ita legati erant, ut alter alterum
post se traberet donec omnes praecipitesruerent suffocarenturque.
Anabaptists were so tied together in chains, that one drew the other after him
into the river, wherein they were all suffocated. vid. supr^.

Here you may see the hand of God in punishing these sectaries some way
answerable to their sin according to the observation of the wise man, Gast. p.
310. Domini in Ropolzsteine decreverunt Anabaptistas cauterio natore,
stigmataque dominorum in qu^rum terra peccassent been expressa gerere.
quo quis peccat co punietur, they who drew others into the whirl-pool of
error, by constraint draw one another into the river to be drowned; and they
who profaned baptism by a second dipping, rue it a third immersion. But the
punishment of these Catabaptists we leave to them that have the legislative
power in their hands, who though by present connivence they may seem to give
them line: yet no doubt it is, that they may more entangle themselves and more
easily be caught. For my part, I seek not the confusion of their persons, but
the confutation of their errors, two whereof A. R. undertaketh strenuously to
defend.

The first is the necessity of dipping in baptism: dipping (says he) in his
title page is baptizing; and baptizing dipping: and p. 8. the institution of
Christ requires that the whole man be dipped all over in water. This he
endeavors to prove out of Mark 1. 8. and Ioh. 1. 26. and Plutarch l. de
superstitione, (...), and Act. 11. 16. c. 8. 38. 39. Philip and the Eunuch went
down both into the water, and Mat. 3. 16. Christ went with John into the water,
p. 11. and Col. 2. 12. buried with him in baptism, and Romans 6. 4. 5. were
buried with him by baptism into his death. Now let any man (says he) that is
not quite fallen out of his reason judge whether washing or sprinkling the face
with water, or dipping the whole man into water, does answer all these texts of
scripture.

I answer, this is a weak and childish fallacy. For, ex particulari non est
syllogizari, no man in his right wits will conclude a general from a
particular, as he does here. Some men that were baptized went into the river,
therefore all that be baptized must do so! The word baptizo sometimes
signifies to dip, (...)
therefore it always signifies so! Although in the places alleged the
preposition (...) signifies not in, but with; as the words immediately
following, (...) make it plain, and therefore both the Geneva and the last
translation render the words, not, I have baptized you in water, but he will
baptize you in the holy Ghost; but, I have baptized you with water, and he will
baptize you with the holy Ghost. And in the 19. of the Rev. 21. ver. it is in
the original (...), that is word for word, they were slain in the sword, yet
must it be translated they were slain with the sword, not in the sword.
Notwithstanding I grant, that Christ and the Eunuch were baptized in the river,
and that such baptism of men, especially in the hotter climates, has been,
is, and may lawfully be used: yet there is no proof at all of dipping or
plunging, but only washing in the river. But the question is, whether no other
baptizing is lawful; or whether dipping in rivers be so necessary to
baptism, that none are accounted baptized but those who are dipped after such a
manner; this we say is false, neither do any of the texts alleged prove it. It
is true, dipping is a kind of baptizing, but all baptizing is not dipping. Mar.
3. 111 Act. 1. 5. Act. 2. 3. Mar. 7. 1. 1 Cor. 10. Mar. ^0. 38.
The Apostles were baptized with fire, yet were they not dipped into it: tables
and beds are said in the original to be baptized; that is, washed, yet not
dipped. The Israelites in the wilderness were baptized with the cloud, yet not
dipped into it: the children of Zebedee were to be baptized with the baptism of
blood wherewith our Savior was baptized, yet neither he nor they were dipped
into blood. Lastly, all the fathers speak of the baptism of tears wherewith
all penitents are washed, yet there is no dipping in such a baptism. As for
the representation of the death and resurrection, that is not properly the
inward grace signified by baptism, but the washing the soul in the laver of
regeneration, and cleansing us from our sins. However, in the manner of
baptism, as it is administered in the church of England, there is a resemblance
of death and the resurrection. For, though the child he not always dipped into
the water (as the rubric prescribes, save only in case of necessity) which
would be dangerous in cold weather, especially if the child be weak and sickly:
yet the Minister dippeth his hand into the water, and plucketh it out when he
baptizeth the infant.

The second error of the Anabaptists, which A. R. strenuously propugneth, is
their decrying down paedo baptism, and withholding Christ's lambs from being
bathed in the sacred Font. This foul error, or rather heresy (for it is
condemned for such both by the primitive and the reformed churches) he
endeavors to blanch in part, if not to quite clear from all aspersion, and
justify by four arguments which I will propound in his own words, that he may
not say, I shoot his arrows without their heads: the first I find p. 27.

PART I.
The administration of baptism which has no express command in Scripture,
and which overthrows or prevents that administration of baptism which is
expressly commanded in Scripture, is a mere device of man's brain, and no
baptism of Christ.

But the administration of baptism upon infants has no express command in
Scripture, and it overthrows or prevents the administration of baptism upon
disciples (or believers) which is expressly commanded in Scripture, Mat. 28.
19. Mar. 16. 16. Ioh. 4. 1. 2. Act. 2. 38. and 8. 37.

Therefore the administration of baptism upon infants is a mere device of man's
brain, and no baptism of Christ.

This argument stands as it were upon two legs, and both of them are lame; the
one is, that nothing may be done in the worship of God without express command
in Scripture. This is an ignorant and erroneous assertion. For first, there is
no express precept in Scripture for believing and acknowledging in terminis
three Persons in the unity of the deity; and yet Athanasius faith in his
Creed, that whosoever believes not, and worshipeth not the Trinity in unity
and unity in Trinity, shall; perish everlastingly. Secondly, there is no
express command in Scripture to confess the holy Ghost, to proceed from the
Father and the Son, tanquam distinctis personis: yet it is not only an article
of religion in the church of England, but also set down in the confession of
the Anabaptists lately printed. Thirdly, there is no express precept for the
abrogating of the Jewish sabbath, and religious observing the Christian: yet no
Anabaptists hold themselves bound to keep holy the Saturday or Jewish sabbath;
neither have they yet (to my knowledge) oppugned the observation of the Lords
day. Fourthly, there is no express precept in Scripture for women's receiving
the sacrament of the Lords Supper. For though the word (...) used by the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 11. 28.
(Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of this bread and drink of this
cup,) is a common name to both sexes: yet the Apostle uses the masculine
article (...) not (...), and (...) not (...), and so there is no express
command but for men; yet no sectaries upon record, no not the Anabaptists
themselves exclude women from the holy Communion. Fifthly, there is no express
precept for re-baptizing those who in their infancy were baptized by a lawful
minister, according to the form prescribed by our Savior, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son; and of the holy Ghost; nay rather, there is an express
prohibition in the words of the Apostle, one faith, one baptism; Ephesians. 4. 5^^
and in that clause of the Nicen Creed, I believe one baptism for the
remission of sins: yet re-baptizing is a prime article of the faith of this
sect, from whence they take their very name of Anabaptists, that is,
re-baptizers. If A. R. here will stretch express precept to any thing that is
commanded in Scripture, either immediately or mediatly, either in particular or
in general, either in plain or direct terms, or in the true sense of the
text: so, I grant, all the four former orthodox tenets may be proved by
Scripture. And so also I have before proved the lawfulness of baptizing
children, though there be no express Scripture for it intormini^.

The other leg also upon which his argument stands is as lame as the former.
For the baptism of infants no way over-throws or prevents the baptizing of any
disciples or believers instructed in the mysteries of salvation, of whom the
texts alleged are meant; but there-baptizing of such who were before baptized
in their infancy (which re-baptizing is no where commanded in Scriptures:) and
as, if all nations were converted to the Christian faith, there needed no more
conversion, so, if all were admitted to the church by baptism in their
infancy, they should need no other admission by re-baptizing them; but there
will be always some to be converted till the fullness of the Jews and Gentiles
also is come in, and till then there will be use of that precept of our Savior
Mat. 28. Go teach all nations, baptizing them; the second Argument of his
against paedo-baptisme.

PART 2.
The second I find p. 20. If they ground the baptizing children from the
institution of circumcision, then they ought to observe it in every thing, and
baptize males only, and that precisely on the eighth day.

ANSWER.
This argument is fallacious and childish, called in the schools fallacia
accidentis, as when a Sophister argues on this wise, If thou did eat that
which thou boughtest in the market, thou did eat raw flesh; but thou
confessest thou did eat what thou bought'st, therefore by thine own
confession thou did eat raw flesh. The argument is captious and fallacious,
wherein the Sophister subtily argues from the subject to the accident, from
the substance to the circumstance: it is true, he ate what he bought in
substance or kind, were it flesh or fish, but not in what quality or condition
he bought it; for he bought it raw, he are it roast or boiled: in like manner M.
Bradbourn fallaciously argued before the High Commission for the observation of
the Saturday or Jewish sabbath. What the Jews were commanded in the ^ourth
commandment, that we Christians are bound to perform. But the Jews were
commanded to keep holy the seventh day from the Creation; therefore we
Christians are bound to keep that day. In this syllogism, as the former, there
is fallacia accidentis. For the Sophister (as I noted before) argues from the
substance to the circumstance, from the same day specie, to the same day numero
in the week. It is true, we Christians are bound by virtue of that command to
appoint a certain day for the public service of God, and no less then one in
seven, or a seventh day every week: yet are we not bound precisely to keep that
seventh day, viz. from the Creation; which they did. The Quartodecimani used a
like Sophisme; if our Easter succeed the Jewish passe-over, then we ought to
keep the fourteenth day precisely as the Jews do. But our Christian Easter does
succeed the Jewish passe-over, therefore Christians ought to keep their feast
of Easter precisely on the fourth day of the month, whether it fell on the
first day of the week or not. In like manner A. R. argues, If baptism succeed
circumcision, then all children ought to be baptized on the eighth day: this
will not follow, no more then that children ought to be baptized in the same
part where they were circumcised. The answer is very easy, the one sacrament
is to succeed the other in substance, but not in each circumstance; their
circumcision was expressly confined to the males and to the eighth day, so is
not baptism. Only it will follow, that because circumcision was administered to
the infant as soon as it was capable thereof, or could receive the sacrament
without danger; therefore children ought to be baptized as soon as conveniently
they may. And this is agreeable to the resolution of S. Cypr. 1400. years ago
in his Epistle to Fidus, and of a Council held at Africa in his days.

The third argument I find p. 25. None may be warrantably baptized until they
do manifest and declare their faith by profession thereof; this is apparent by
the doctrine and practice. First of John, Mat. 3. 6. 89. Mar. 1. 4. Secondly,
of Christ and his Apostles, Ioh. 3. 22. compared with the 4. 1. 2. Act. 2. 20.
41. and 8. 36. 37. and thirdly by the tenor of the commission, Mat. 28. 29.
Mar. 16. 15. 16.

ANSWER.
Though the sinews of this Argument have been cut before, and the texts
alleged answered, yet for the further satisfaction of the reader I further
add.

First, that none are required to manifest and declare their faith before
baptism but such who have been taught, and have use both of reason and speech.
For the rule of the schools, nemo tenetur ad impossible, holds in all
sacramental acts as well as others: neither can they hence infer, that
children therefore ought not to be baptized, because they can make no
declaration of their faith; no more then it will follow, that children ought
not to eat because they cannot labor for their living. For though the Apostles
rule be general, 2 Thessalonians. 3. 10.
Let him not eat that will not labor: yet all agree it must be understood of
such as are able to labor; so likewise all the texts of Scripture which
require confession of faith must be understood of such who have the use of
reason, and of the tongue wherewith they may confess.

Secondly, children make profession of their faith and repentance both at their
baptism by their sureties; and if they live to years of discretion in their
own persons.

PART 2.
The last argument I find p. 30. The administration of baptism which
over-throws the vese nature of the covenant of grace, and whole Gospel of
Christ, is Antichristian and abominable. But the administration of baptism
upon infants does so, because it stands upon the ground and interest which they
have in the covenat (by natural generation only, or by the mere profession of
faith in the parents or sureties) without faith in their own persons, whereby
faith is made void and the promise (which is the Gospel and object of faith)
is also made of none effect, and so the preaching thereof becomes useless and
vain also, Romans 4. 14.

Therefore the administration of baptism upon infants is Antichristian and
abominable.

ANSWER.
Here is thunder without lightning, thundering in the conclusion; the baptism
of infants is antichristian and abominable: but no lightning in the premises,
no proof at all that the christening children overthrows the nature of the
covenant of grace and the whole Gospel of Christ. For that which is built upon
the covenant of grace, to wit, I will be thy God, and the God of thy seed, and
is nothing else but the settling to the seal of the covenant of grace upon
pre-supposition of faith present or future in the person of him that is
baptized, can be no over-throwing of that covenant, but a confirmation and
establishing it rather. If we taught that children were heirs of the covenant
by the law, then, as the Apostle teaches us, we should make faith void, and
the promise of none effect. But now, since we teach, that Abraham, the father of
the faithful, and all his seed are heirs of the kingdom of heaven, not through
the law, but through the righteousness of faith: we confirm the covenant of
faith, and in the christening of children accomplish the promise, Act. 2. 39.
The promise is to you and your children, and to those that are afar off, and to
as many as the Lord shall call by the ministry of the Gospel into his
church. Yea, (but says he) the administration of baptism upon infants stands
upon the ground and interest which they have in the covenant by natural
generation only, or by the mere profession of faith in their parents, and
sureties without faith in their persons. This is a false charge, we teach no
such thing, but that children have interest in the covenant by virtue of Gods
promise above mentioned, and not without faith in their own persons as
[without] may signify the exclusion of faith, though without actual
profession of faith in their own persons, which at the present they cannot do,
but as soon as they come to the use of reason and years of discretion they
actually do it, and thereby make the promise made for them by their sureties
effectual.

Thus have I crushed this adder, yet because after the manner of serpents,
capite eliso cauda minatur, though his head be bruised he wags still his tail,
and in the end of his Tractate thrusts out his sting to wound their reputation
who had any dealing with him and other Sectaries in this argument: I hold it
fit to spend a twig or two more upon him, till he be quite dead.

First, when the advocates for paedobaptisme argue thus out of the tenth of
Mark 13, 14. None of those whom Christ bids to come unto him, as to whom
belongs the kingdom of God, may or ought to be debarred from the entrance
into it by baptism. But children of believing parents, who tender them to
Christ, are bid to come unto him, and to them belongs the kingdom of God:
Ergo the children of believing parents ought not to be debarred from the
entrance of the kingdom of God by baptism.

This schismatic Anabaptist endeavors to dull the edge of the argument by
this answer.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
That though Christ took these children into his arms, yet he christened them
not; neither does he say, that to them, but to such belongs the kingdom of
God, that is, innocent, meek, and humble men, in these virtues resembling
children.

But the edge of the argument may be sharpened by this reply.

REPLY.
First, Ioh. 4. 2.
Christ christened none, neither men nor children, as Saint John teaches us,
but his disciples only. If therefore an argument drawn from his example
negatively were of any force, it would conclude as well against baptizing men
in riper years as children; for certain it is, Christ baptized neither the one
nor the other.

Secondly, these children were not brought to Christ that he should baptize
them, but that he should touch them, and that he did; for he laid his hands
upon them, and blessed them, and his blessing them was as effectual to their
salvation as if he had christened them: for Christ's grace depends not upon
the virtue of the sacrament, but contrarily, the virtue of the sacrament upon
his grace.

Thirdly, when Christ said, to such belongs the kingdom of God, he
necessarily included children, whom he propounds as patterns to men; and his
meaning is, to children, and to such as are so qualified as children, belongs
the kingdom of God. If he meant otherwise, his reason had been of no force,
suffer children to come unto me, and forbid them not, because to men in riper
years (that are humble and innocent like infants) belongs the kingdom of
God. What is the innocence or humility of men in riper years that can make
profession of their faith to children? Or what are they advantaged thereby,
that for this qualification in them infants and sucklings should be brought to
Christ? The coherent sense therefore must needs be this, Bring little children
to me, for to them, and such as are like them, belongs the kingdom of God.

Fourthly, they who have their agents in heaven, certainly belong to that
kingdom; but the children of the elect have their agents in heaven: Man. 18.
10.
for Christ says, their Angels continually behold the face of my father which
is in heaven. The children of the godly must either belong to the kingdom of
God or the kingdom of Satan; and when they die, either go to life eternal,
or into everlasting torments: there is no third place after this life; either
to heaven they must, or hell: if to heaven as belonging to the kingdom of God,
why is the gate of entrance into it locked up against them here? if to hell,
then all the children of the faithful that die before they can make actual
profession of their faith, even those sweet babes which suffered in Christ's
quarrel, and were butchered by Herod, whose feast the Church has celebrated
for 1300 years at least, are to be deemed in the state of damnation, which is
a most uncharitable and damnable opinion. Supra artic. 2. arg. 7.
See more of this argument, and the vindication thereof.

Secondly, whereas they who stand for the baptizing of children, plead for them
after this manner: Omnes foederati signandi, All that are comprised within the
Covenant have a right to the seal thereof: But the children of believers are
comprised within the Covenant, both as it was first drawn, Genesis 17. 7. and
after exemplified, Esaias 59. 21. and Acts 2. 39. Therefore the children of the
faithful have a right to the seal, to wit, baptism.

This refractorie Separatist endeavors to wring this weapon out of our hands
by a double answer.

ANSWER.
First, that by seed in those promises is meant the posterity of the
faithful, not sucklings or infants.

Secondly, that the promise spoken of in the Acts is not of admission into the
church, or remission of sins by baptism, but of extraordinary gifts there
mentioned; namely, the gift of healing, and of tongues, and revelations both by
visions and dreams.

But they may take false hold of this weapon by this reply.

REPLY.
First, that the word used in the Acts, (...), signifies offspring or those
that are begotten of us, and is as appliable to children as to men in years.

Secondly, in the word seed used in Genesis and Esaias children are necessarily
employed; not only because all the posterity of the faithful that live in
riper years were children, but because millions of them dye in their infancy
before they come to man's estate; and dare any exclude them all out of the
covenant?

Thirdly, by seed in Genesis it may be demonstrated that infants and sucklings
were necessarily understood as well as men in riper years; for infants by Gods
command received the seal of the covenant, to wit, circumcision; and the
children of the faithful under the Gospel are as capable of baptism, as the
children of the Iew^ were under the law of circumcision: neither did Christ by
his coming contract the bounds of the church, but very much enlarged them.

Fourthly, though in the second of the Acts there is mention made of the
extraordinare gifts of the spirit, v. 4. 17. Yet the promise we insist upon v.
39. is not meant of those extraordinary gifts; for, not all of the seed of
Abraham, much less all that were called of the Gentiles, received those
extraordinary gifts, but very few in comparison, and that in the plantation
of the Gospel, and for a few years or at most ages after, whereas the promise
which the Prophet here speaks of was to be accomplished in all. To you (says
S. Peter) is the promise made, and to your children, and to all that are afar
off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call: but all that God called to
the knowledge of the Gospel could not speak with strange tongues, nor
miraculously cure diseases, neither had they the gift of prophecy; what then?
Was the promise there spoken of made to the Jews and their children, and all
the Gentiles whom God had vouchsafed to call? namely, the promise of salvation.
v. 21. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the Lord, shall be saved; and the
gift of repentance, and remission of sins by baptism mentioned. v. 38. Repent,
and be baptized every one of you in the name of the Lord Jesus, for remission
of sins.

Thirdly, whereas they who are well-affected to childrens baptism draw an
evidence thereof even from the cloud, mentioned 1 Cor. 10. 2. after this manner:

This truth answers the type, but children were baptized in the type when
they were baptized in the cloud and in the sea, as Israel passed out of Egypt
into the wilderness.

Ergo, children ought now to be baptized in the truth.

This sworn enemy of childrens Christendom goes about to blot and deface this
evidence by scribbling upon it, that the baptizing in the sea, and the cloud the
Apostle speaks of, was an allegory and an allusion, not any type or figure
from whence any substantial argument might be drawn for childrens baptism.

But if we scrape away his scribbling, we may read a clear evidence for the
lawfulness of childrens baptism.

REPLY.
For first, it is confessed on all hands, and may be collected from the sacred
story, that the Israelites took all their children with them out of Egypt,
and that they together with their parents passed through the red sed, (which
was an emblem of Christ's blood, in which the spiritual Pharaoh and all our
ghostly enemies are destroyed) and that they were washed and sprinkled as well
as their parents with the water of the sea, and that which dropped from the
cloud: and S. Paul adds, v. 6. that all those things were types, (...), and
that as the Apostle says, They and we ate the same spiritual bread, v. 4. and
drank of the same spiritual rock* and the rock was Christ: so he might have
said, that they were all baptized in the water of the cloud, and in the sea,
and that water spiritually was Christ's blood; for so the ancient Fathers teach
us to speak. Omnes sub nube fuerunt and Christo, aquam petra praebente potati
sunt.
S. Hilarie in Psalm. 67. They were all under the cloud, and were drenched with
Christ, the rock giving them water. Leo de not. dom. sermon. 3. Mysteria pro
temporum ratione variata sunt, cum fides qua vivimus nulla fuerit aetate
diversa.
And Leo, likewise the sacraments were altered according to the diversity of
the times, but the faith whereby we live in all ages, was ever one. Aug. in
Ioha^ tract 26. Sacramenta illa fuerunt in signis diversa, in rebus quae
signicabanturparia. Aug. con. Faust. l. 19. c. 14. Illa ^uerunt promissiones
rerum complendarum, haec sunt indicia completarum.
And S. Austine yet more fully, these things were sacraments in outward tokens
diverse, but in the things tokened all one with ours. And the sacraments of the
old law were promises of such things as should afterward be accomplished: our
sacraments of the new law are tokens that the same promises already are
accomplished.

Fourthly, among many other arguments brought for the justification of the
practice of the Christian church in the baptizing infants, that passage of the
Apostle 1 Cor. 7. 14. is much insisted upon, ( For the unbeleeving husband is
sanctified by the wife, and the unbeleeving wife is sanctified by her husband;
else were you children unclean, but now are they holy) and that for very good
reason. For the Apostles argument concludes, that some holiness redounds to
the children by the unbeleeving wives cohabition with her husband, being a
believer; or of the unbeleeving husband with a wife that is a Christian. Now
the question is, whether inward holiness or outward, that which some call
federall holiness, the Apostle cannot mean inward holiness; for the belief
of the father or mother cannot infuse or produce such holiness in the infant:
and if the Apostle speak of this outward or federall holiness, and his meaning
is, that the unbeleeving wife is so far sanctified to her husband, as to
bring forth a holy seed to him, that is, children belonging to the
commonwealth of Israel, and having a title to the covenant of grace; then
undoubtedly the children of believers ought to receive the seal of that
covenant, to wit, baptism.

To avoid this inference, and defeat the whole argument, this Anabaptist, with
his fellow Barbar coyneth a new holiness never heard of in scripture, and
withal corrupts the Apostles text with this absurd gloss.

ANSWER.
Because the unbeleeving wife is sanctified to her believing husband, therefore
her children are holy, that is, lawfully begotten, not spurious, not bastards.

REPLY.
A bastard exposition, repugnant both to the text and the scope of the Apostle,
as I have declared before in-part Article 2. Argument 8. whereunto may be added
these important considerations.

First, holiness in Scripture is no where taken for legitimation; they may be
holy whose birth was yet not legitimate, and their birth legitmate who are far
from holiness.

Bastardie, though it be a fruit of uncleanesse in the parents, and a blemish
to their children in their reputation, yet it makes not them unclean, nor
federally unholy: that is, such as belong not to the covenant of God, for
Pharez, Zarah, Iephthah, and other baseborn among the Jews were circumcised,
and reckoned among the people of God.

Secondly, if the Apostle meant no more by holiness but legitimation, he had
no way resolved the Corinthiant scruple, which was, whether according to the
law of God, and the example of the Israelites in the days of Ezra, they were
not to put away their unbeleeving wives and children: the Apostle answers no,
because their children begotten and born by them should be no bastards, Such
marriages were then forbidden, yet were they marriages and not nullities*
as they expound the word holy. This answer could give them no satisfaction at
all, for the children that were born or begotten by the Jews, who had married
strange wives in the days of Ezra were not bastards, being born in wedlock, yet
they were commanded to put them away and their mothers.

Thirdly, that cannot be the meaning of the Apostle which implies untruth, for
the Apostle wrote inspired by the Spirit of truth; but it is not true, that all
those children are unclean, that is, as they interpret, bastards, that come of
unbeleeving parents: for though either or both the parents were infidels, yet,
if the children were begotten and born in lawful wedlock, they were no
bastards; and noman doubts but there may be lawful wedlock between infidels.
For marriage is de jure naturae, and adultery among the heathen was a crime;
but if the heathen marriages were no marriages, then there could be no
adultery among them, for adultery is the defiling of the marriage bed.

Lastly, the main scope of the Apostle in this place was to persuade the
believers among the Corinthians to cohabit with their wives that were willing
to live with them, though they were yet unbleevers: not only because they might
conceive good hope of their conversion by their loving and Christian
conversation with them, but because thereby their children should acquire some
holiness. But if the children of believing parents should not be admitted to
the communion of Saints, and congregation of the faithful by baptism, their
children should gain nothing by their fathers or mothers faith, but rather
lose. For if they remained still in their Judaisme, not believing in Christ:
yet their children were to receive the outward seal of the covenant, to wit,
circumcision, whereby they were reckoned among Gods people, and had such
outward federall holiness as that sacrament might give them. Since therefore
this gloss of the Anabaptists no way agrees with the scope and intention of
the Apostle, nor with the truth it self: it remains that we admit of that
interpretation which the best of the ancient and latter Expositors give of the
text; to wit, (the unbeleeving husband is so far sanctified by the faith of the
wife, and the unbeleeving wife by the faith of her husband) that their children
thereby are entitled to the covenant of grace; and therefore the Ministers of
God have a good ground and warrant to administer baptism unto them, which is
the seal of their entrance into that covenant.

ARTIC. 3.
Concerning set forms of prayer.
ANABAPTIST.
NO set or stinted forms of prayer ought to be used in public on private; but
all that pray ought to pray by the spirit in a conceived form, variable
according to several occasions.

THE REFUTATION.
Though we condemn not all conceived, or ex tempore prayer, especially in
private, when we lay open our wants to our Father in secret, and rip up our
consciences before him: yet set or stinted forms of prayer in public are not
only warrantable by Gods Word, and very profitable, but in some case
necessary.

ARGUMENT I.
What God appointed in the old testament, as appertaining to his substantial
worship, it being no part of the abrogated rites of the ceremonial law, may
and ought to be observed by us under the Gospel.

But set forms of blessing, thanksgiving, and prayer, were appointed by God in
the old testament, and are no types and figures of Christ, nor parts of the
ceremonial law.

Ergo, they may and ought to be observed by us under the Gospel.

Of the major or first proposition there can be no doubt, for that cannot be
evil whereof God is the author; and though the rites and ceremonies are
different, yet the substance of Gods worship is the same, both under the law
and under the Gospel. The assumption or minor proposition is confirmed by the
express letter of these texts, Numb. 6. 23. 24. 25. 26. Speak unto Aaron and
his sons, saying, on this wise ye shall bless the children of Israel; saying
unto them, the Lord bless thee, and keep thee, the Lord make his face shine
upon thee, and be gracious unto thee, the Lord lift up his countenance upon
thee, and give thee peace. And Deuteronomy. 26. 5. And thou shall speak, and say
before the Lord thy God, a Syrian ready to perish was my father, and he went
down into Egypt, and sojourned there with a few, and became there a nation,
great, mighty, and populous, etc. And Hosea 14. 2. Take with you words, and
turn to the Lord, and say unto him, take away all iniquity, and receive us
graciously, so will we render the calves of our lips. And Joel 2. 17. Let the
Priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and the Altar, and
let them say, spare thy people, O Lord, and give not thine heritage to
reproach, that the heathen should rule over them, wherefore should they say
among the people, where is their God?

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The forms mentioned in holy Scripture were composed by those that were
prophets, and immediately inspired by the holy Ghost, such are not the composers
of our liturgies; and therefore the argument will not follow from the one to
the other.

REPLY.
First, the question is not now, whether we ought to use no form but such as is
immediately inspired by the holy Ghost, but whether set or stinted forms,
either inspired or not inspired, may or ought to be used in the church: that
they may, we prove by Gods own command, which must not be restrained to prayers
immediately inspired, and dictated by the holy Ghost; for then none should pray
but Prophets: and by that reason as none that are not immediately inspired
might use set forms of prayers, so neither conceived or extempore prayers.

Secondly, though none now pray by immediate inspiration, yet we have now the
spirit of supplication, and we pray by the assistance of the holy Spirit; and
if our prayers in matter and form are agreeable to Gods word, they are
acceptable unto him: and they cannot be unacceptable unto him hoc nomine, for
that they are delivered in set forms, because God himself was the first author
of them, and has left them in scripture for our direction and imitation.

Thirdly, in our Liturgies a great part of the forms of prayer and
thanksgiving used by us are forms composed by prophets immediately inspired by
the holy Ghost, as namely, the Lords Prayer, the Psalms of David, the
Magnificat, the Benedictus, Nunc dimittis; and the close of all our prayers,
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. Why then do they not at the least
join with us in rehearsing these set forms? If these may be rehearsed without
quenching or restraining the Spirit, why may not others also framed according
to these patterns?

ARGUMENT II.
Whatsoever the prophets and saints of God practiced in the substantial
worship of God under the law, may and ought to be a president for us.

But they used set or stinted forms of prayer and thanksgiving:

Ergo, their practice may and ought to be a president for us.

The major or first proposition needs no proof, because the substance of Gods
worship is the same under the Law and under the Gospel, and what the prophets
and holy men of old did or spoke, they did or spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost, 2 Pet. 1. 21. The assumption or minor is abundantly proved by
manifold allegations out of the old Testament, as namely, Numb. 10. 35, 36. And
it came to pass, when the Ark set forwards, that Moses said, rise up, Lord,
and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before
thee; and when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of
Israel: and 1 Chronicles. 25. 6, 7. All these were under the hands of their father
for song in the house of the Lord, with Cymbals, Psalterie, and Harps for the
service of the house of God, according to the Kings order to Asaph, Ieduthun,
and Heman: so the number of them with their brethren that were instructed in
the songs of the Lord was 288. And 2 Chronicles. 29. 30. Moreover, Hezekiah the king
and the princes commanded the Levites to sing praises to the Lord with the
words of David and of Asa the Seer, From the 1. Psalm. to the 72. where we read,
the prayers of David the son of Iesse are ended, v. 20.
and they sang praises with gladness. The words of David are those which are
extant in the book of Psalms under the name of David; the words of Asa are
comprehended in those Psalms which bear this title, A Psalm of Asaph, as
namely, Psalm. 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83. and Ezra 9. 5, 6. I
fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands unto my Lord, my God, and said, O
my God, I am ashamed and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God, for our
iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up unto the
heavens, etc. usque ad finem capitis. And Psalm. 92. the title is, A Psalm or
song for the Sabbath day: and Psalm. 102. the title is, A prayer for the
afflicted when he is overwhelmed and pours out his complaint before the Lord.
From Psalm 119. to 134. all the Psalms are entitled Songs of degrees: they
are fifteen in number, answerable to the fifteen steps between the peoples
court and the priests; and they were so called, See Thorndike of the service of
God in religious assemblies, chap. 7. p. 226.
as the Jewish Rabbines observe, because these fifteen Psalms were sung in
order as the priests went up those fifteen steps. Hereunto we may add a
passage out of the Samaritan Chronicle; Postea mortuus est Adrianus, cujus Deus
non misereatur etc. The high Priest living in that time in the year of the
world 4713. by their account took away that most excellent book that was in
their hands, even since the calm and peaceable times of the Israelites, which
contained those songs and prayers which were ever used with their sacrifices,
for before every of their several sacrifices they had their several songs
still used in those times of peace; all which accurately written were
transmitted to the subsequent generations from the time of the Legate MOSES
until this day by the ministry of the high Priest. Long after Moses, in the
days of Ezra, set forms of prayer were prescribed and used in the Synagogue of
the Jews, whereof Maimonides yields this reason; Ut preces indisertorum non
minus perfectae forent quam preces viri utcunque linguae disertae. Vid. Seldom
Comment. in Eutychium Patriarcham.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
It cannot be denied, that in the time of the old Testament set and stinted
forms were used, but the case is different with us; for under the Gospel we
have more light of knowledge and many special gifts of the Spirit which they
had not: they were in their nonage, and as children used these forms like
festra's, which they that can read perfectly cast away; or as those that learn
to swim make use of bladders, which they put from under them after they can
swim of themselves securely.

REPLY.
First, though it must be confessed on all hands, that we have under the Gospel
more clearer light of knowledge then the Jews under the Law: for as S. Ambrose
says excellently, Umbra in lege, imago in evangelio, veritas in coelo; and
though we excel them in other gifts of the Spirit, yet they wanted not the
Spirit of supplication mentioned Zach. 12. 10. I will pour upon the house of
David and the inhabitants of Jerusalem the Spirit of grace and supplication: it
was not therefore for want of the Spirit, that they used set forms.

Secondly, let it be noted, that Moses and David, and other prophets both
prescribed and used set forms, who no doubt could and did pray by the Spirit in
a more excellent manner then any now adays can, yet they commended and used
set forms.

Thirdly, if this had been an error in the Jewish Liturgy, or public
Service, that they used stinted forms, undoubtedly Christ or his Apostles would
have somewhere reproved this, as they do other errors that crept into that
Church: but they are so far from reproving this practice, that they rather
confirm and establish it, as you shall see in the next argument.

ARGUMENT III.
Whatsoever Christ commanded, and the Apostles practiced, ought to be retained
among Christians.

But we have Christ's command and the Apostles practice for set and stinted
forms of prayer.

Ergo, they ought to be retained in the Christian church.

Of the major or first proposition it is impiety to doubt; for there was a
Voice heard from heaven, saying, hear him: he cannot mis-lead us, for he is
the Way; nor deceive us, for he is the Truth: and if Pythagoras scholars bare
such a reverent respect to their master, that his (...), ipse dixit sealed up
their lips, and stopped their mouths from contradicting what his bare word had
ratified; how much more reverence owe we to the words of our Lord and Master,
Ioh. 6. 68.
who has not only the words of eternal life, but is himself the word of God,
or rather God the word? The assumption is proved out of Math. 6. 9. After this
manner therefore pray ye. Luke 11. 2. When ye pray, say, etc. Luke 15. 18, 19.
I will rise and go to my father, and say, Father I have sinned against heaven
and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son. Math. 26. 39. O
my father, if it be possible, let this cup pass from me: and v. 44. and he
left them and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying the same
words. And Io. 17. 11. 21. that they all may be one as thou father art in me,
and I in thee. And Romans 16. 24. 1 Cor. 16. 23. 2 Cor. 13, 14. Gal. 6. 18. Ephesians.
6. 24. Phil. 4. 23. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 28. 2 Thessalonians. 3. 18. Heb. 13. 25. Revel. 22. 21.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. Apoc. 4. 11. Thou art
worthy, O Lord, to receive glory and honor: and c. 5. 12. worthy is the Lamb
to receive power, etc. c. 15. 3. they sang the song of Moses the servant of
God, viz. the song set down Exodus 15. 1. In these passages of the new Testament
we have set forms of prayer somewhere commanded, somewhere commended, somewhere
used, somewhere reiterated, and all inspired by the holy Ghost; and therefore
certainly the use of them can be no quenching of that holy Spirit, whom we feel
to inflame our hearts in the rehearsing these sacred forms.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The Lords prayer is expounded in Scripture, tanquam norma, non tanquam forma
orationis; as a pattern of all prayer, not as a prayer; it is scripture, and
therefore not to be used as a prayer: in prayer we are to express our wants in
particular, and the graces which we desire in this prayer are only propounded
in general.

REPLY.
First, Christ delivered the Lords Prayer at two several times, and upon
special occasions; in the former he commands it as a pattern and rule of all
prayer, saying, pray after this manner: but in the latter, he enjoyneth it to
be used a a prayer: in the former he says pray thus; in the latter, pray this,
or, when ye pray, say our Father; and surely not only all the ancient fathers
who have commented upon this prayer, as L. de orat.
Tertullian, In sermon. 6.
Cyprian, Catec. 5. Mystagogica.
Cyrill of Jerusalem, L. 5. de sacram. c. 4.
Ambrose, In 5. orationibus de orat. Dom.
Gregory Nyssen, In comm. ad c. 6. Math. Johan.
Jerome, In comment. ejusdem capitis, and in homil. l. de orat. dom.
Chrysostom, In epist. 121. ad Probum. c. 11. in Enchir. c. 151. l. 2. de
sermon. dom. mon^. e. 8.
Augustine, Collat. 9. c. 18. and sequentibus.
Cassian, Sermon. 67. and sequent.
Petrus Crysologus, Sermon. 6. de quadrages.
Bernard, L. 5. de Mist. missae, c. 17.
Innocentius, Com. i^e. 6. Mat. and Lu. 11.
Theophylact, Idem.
Euthymius, Idem.
Bid, etc. but also all the the reformed churches, who conclude their prayers
before their Sermon or after with this prayer, conceive that it ought not only
to beset before us as a pattern when we pray, but also to be used as a prayer.
Neither are the reasons to the contrary of any weight: for though it be
Scripture, that does not conclude it to be no prayer. For the prayers of Moses,
Hannah, Deborah, Solomon, David, and Paul, are set down in holy Scriptures, and
are part of the inspired oracles of God, yet they cease not to be prayers; and
though in the Lords Prayer all the particular wants of Gods children are not
expressed, See William Perk. upon the Lords Prayer, page 34^.
yet the main wants and principal graces are expressed, to which the other may
be with great facility added by our selves, and referred to the proper heads in
the Lords Prayer.

Secondly, hos suo jugulamus gladio, we may give them a wound with their own
dudgeon dagger, for if they grant it to be the pattern of all Prayers, it
follows that it, is the perfectest of all prayers; and certainly if we may
use prayers of our own, which are more imperfect, much more may we use this
which is a most absolute and perfect one. If a Scrivener set a most perfect
copy, and therein comprise in certain sentences not only all the letters of
the Alphabet, but all the combinations and conjunctions of them, none doubts
but that the scholars may both write other sentences according to that
pattern, and in the first place write those very sentences in the copy, and
endeavor to come as near as they can to the original. Such is the Lords
Prayer, a perfect copy to write by, comprising in it all things needful for a
Christian to pray for: first therefore we are to write it, and then to write
after it, and correct our writing by it; and though we speak with the tongue of
men and Angels, yet certainly our prayers cannot be so acceptable to God as
when we tender them unto him in his Sons own words. For this end says that
blessed Martyr S. Cyprian, De orat. dom. qui fecit vivere, docuit and orare,
ut, dum prece and oratione quam filius docuit apud patrem loquimur, facilius
audiamur: agnoscit filii sui verba, cum precem facimus.
Christ vouchsafed to leave us this incomparable form of prayer, that whilst
in prayer to the Father we read or say by heart what his Son taught us, we may
the sooner and easier be heard.

ARGUMENT IV.
What the Christian church has generally practiced in all ages and places in
the worship of God, ought not to be thought as erroneous or swerving from the
rule of Gods word.

But the Christian church generally in all ages, and in all places has made
use of public, set, and sanctified forms of prayer, as appears by the
Liturgies yet extant, whereof some bear the names of the Apostles, as S. James
and S. Peter; some of the Greek fathers, as that of Chrysostom, and S. Basil;
some of the Latin fathers, as Ambrose, Gregory, and Isidore, etc.

Ergo, set forms of prayers are not erroneous, or swerving from the rule of
Gods word.

ANABAP. ANSWERS.
First, that this is no better then a popish argument drawn from antiquity and
universalitie.

Secondly, that these Liturgies are Apochryphall: and though in latter times
the use of Liturgies came in, yet the purer and more ancient times used no such
crutches to support their lame devotion; for Justine Martyr in his second
apology affirms, that the chief minister sent up prayers to God, (...),
which is interpreted, according to his ability, or gift of ex tempore prayers;
C. 30. Sine monitore, quia de pectore oramus pro imperatoribus.
and Tertullian in his apology says, that the Christians needed no monitor in
their prayers (as it were) to chalk the way before them in a set form, because
they prayed by heart.

REPLY.
First, As I have showed elsewhere, lib. cui titulus, Romes Ruin.
the Papists pretend to antiquity, and make their brags of universalitie; but
in truth they have neither. An argument drawn from a shadow of truth vanishes
like a shadow, but an argument drawn from a true body is substantial.

Secondly, the strength of the argument lies not in bare antiquity, and the
universalitie of this practice, (for we know many errors are ancient, and some
abuses very far spreading,) but in the nature and condition of the Catholic
Christian church, to whom Christ has promised his perpetual presence, Mat.
28. 20.
and the guidance of his Spirit into all truth; in which regard the Apostle
styles it the pillar and ground of truth. Joh. 13. 16. 1 Timothy 3. 15.
For howsoever particular churches may err in faith and manners, and the
representative Catholic church in the most general. Counsels has sometimes
grossly mistaken error for truth, and Idolatry for true religion; yet the
universal church, taken formally for the whole company of believers, Mat. 16.
18.
has ever been kept by virtue of Christ's promise from falling into any
dangerous error, especially for any long time.

Thirdly, Because they except against the Liturgies found in the writings of
the ancient fathers; in which, though I grant there are some prints of
noveltie, yet there are footsteps also of true antiquity: I will wave them
for the present, and by other good testimonies prove the constant and
perpetual use of Service, or Common-Prayer-Books.

To begin with the first age, from the ascension of our Lord to a hundred
years, Pres. Liturg. Latini and Graeci pontifices multa deinceps in suis
liturgiis quas jam inde ab Apostolis acceperunt pro re nata vel immutarunt vel
addiderunt.
Victorius Sciaticus Maronita, in his preface to those three Liturgies he put
forth, says, that the Bishops, both of the Eastern and Western churches made
some alteration upon good ground in those Liturgies which they received from
the Apostlei. If this man's credit cannot carry so great a cause; yet certainly
Hegesippus his testimony, a most ancient writer, bordering upon the Apostles
time, ought not to be slighted, who writes of S. James, chosen Bishop of
Jerusalem by the Apostles themselves, that in regard of a form of Service, or
Common Prayer Book made by him for the use of the church of Jerusalem, he was
styled Iacobus Liturgus.

In the second age, Iustine Martyr, in his second apology, which he wrote to
Antoninus the Emperor, acquainteth us with the practice of the Christians in
his time, which was to meet every Sunday, and in their Assemblies to read
select places of Scripture, hear Sermons, and sing Psalms, and after the
(...), Priest or chief Minister had made an end of his conceived prayer, to
offer up, Justin. Apol. 2. (...).
make, or say Common Prayers unto God. It is true, as it is alleged, that he
prayed by himself (...), with all his might, that is, in the best manner he
could, or with all fervencie of devotion, as the Rabbis say, that he that
pronounces Amen with all his might opens the gates of Eden. This expression
in the Greek will not conclude that the chief Minister in those days prayed ex
tempore: for it may truly be said of them, who in the Universitie and at Court
pen their prayers most accurately, that they pray (...), with all their
strength of wit, memory and affection. Yet if it were granted, that the
Preacher (in Iustine Martyrs time) might make a short prayer before his Sermon
ex tempore, yet certainly he read other set forms of Prayer, which are called
(...), Common Prayers, and distinguished from that which he delivered alone by
himself by way of preface to his Sermon or Homily.

In the third age, Orig. l. 6. cont. Cel.
we meet with (...), prescribed prayers; and Tertullian in his apologetick
gives us the moulds or heads of the public prayer then constantly used;
saying, Tert. apol. c. 30. Precantes sumus pro imperatoribus vitam prolixam,
imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, sena tum fidelem, populum
probum orbem quietu^*
our prayer for all our Emperors is, that God would vouchsafe to grant them a
long life, a happy reign, a safe Court, valiant armies, faithful counselors,
a good people, and a quiet world. Yea, but say the Anabaptists, they said this
prayer de pectore, out of their breasts; and sine monitore, without any guide or
remembrancer, or prompter, and therefore by an ex tempore faculty. This will
not follow, they mistake much the matter, for this monitor Tertullian speaks of
was a kind of Nomen-clator who kept a Catalogue of their numerous heathen
deities, to whom those Paynims prayed upon special occasions, and directed
them to whom and for what to pray, left they should commit any absurdity in
their prayers, in praying to Ceres for wine, and to Bacchus for corn. Such
monitors or prompters the Christians needed not who prayed to one God only, and
not a prayer suggested by others, but premeditated by themselves, and first
spoken in their heart before it was uttered by the mouth, according to that of
the Psalmist, 45. 1.
My heart is enditing a good matter, my tongue is the pen of a ready writer.
To pray then de pectore in Tertullians sense is no more then (...), to say
without book, or pray by heart, or from the heart, whose feat is in the breast.

S. Cyprian flourished in this age, Hieron. cat. viro^. illust.
about the year 250. in whose writings (which S. Jerome affirms to have been
sole clamora, as illustrious and well known in the Christian church as the
beams of the sun; or, as he speaks hyperbolically, brighter then they.) We
find some short forms of prayer at this day in use, both in the Roman Missall,
and our book of Common Prayer; as namely sursum corda, and habemus ad Dominum,
lift up your hearts, and we lift them up unto to the Lord, etc. Magdeburg.
Cent. Formulas quasdam precationum sine dubio habuerunt.
Upon which passages and the like, the Centurle writers, who have gathered all
the harvest of antiquity, and have scarce left gleanings for any other, truly
infer, that in this blessed Martyrs days out of all peradventure they had
certain set forms of short prayers and responds.

In the fourth age Eusebius writes, Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 19. (...).
that the most religious Emperor Constantine the great commanded all his
subjects to keep holy the Lords day, and on it to send up to God with hearty
and unanimous devotion an elaborate or studied form of prayer, penned as it
seems for the purpose, as to give God thanks for the great and miraculous
victories he gave him over all the tyrants that persecuted the church; so to
pray to God to perfect the great work he had begun by him, to propagate the
Gospel through the whole world, and reduce all that were subject to the Roman
state to the obedience of faith. Eusebius. ib. Formulam precandi ipse omnibus
militibus praescripsit.
Besides this prayer penned by some Bishop, the same Historian writes, that
the Emperor himself made a special prayer, which he commanded the Soldiers
to say every day in the Roman tongue.

In this age also the famous Council at Laodicea was held, Council. Lead. 1.
Can. 18. (...) Can. 59. 8, (...).
which has left us diverse Canons like so many golden rules both to regulate
our devotion, and rectify our lives; and among these for one, that every
morning and evening the same service or form of prayer should be used: and
because some even in this very age adventured to make use of their ex tempore
gift of prayer, at least read or said some private prayer conceived by
themselves in stead of the public form, Con Mil. c. 12. Placuit ut preces vel
ora^iones quae^^robatae suc^int in concili^s ab omnibus cleb^^ntur, ^ec aliae
omnino ^icantur in ecclesia, nist quae a prudentioribus tractatae, and
compositae in synodo fuerint, ne forte liquid contra fidem, vel per ignorantium
vel per minus studium fit compositum. Balsamon Annoc. ^n council. (...).
the Milevitan Council provideth against this abuse by a special Canon, which
carries this tenor: it seemed good to the reverend fathers met in this Synod,
to appoint, that those prayers or orizons which were devised, or at least
allowed by that Council, should be used by all men, and no other, lest
peradventure something through ignorance or want of care might be uttered in
the church, that might not well agree with the Catholic faith. The occasion of
this Canon was the over-wee^ing conceit that some Bishops had of some prayers
devised by themselves, which they obtruded to the church in stead of the public
prescript form; whereby it appears, that in those days that liberty was not
permitted to any reverend or ancient Bishop which now every punie minister
takes to himself, to add or leave out, or change what he thinks good in the
Book of Common Prayer established by the church, and ratified by Act of
Parliament.

About the end of this age, or the beginning of the next, Basil, Ambrose, and
Chrysostom framed Liturgies to be used in their Diocesses, yet extant in their
works and bibliotheca patrum, though with some interpolation. And S. Augustine
in his seventh Tome consisting of many excellent treatises against the
Pelagians, produces diverse passages out of the Common Prayer then used by the
church to convince those heretics of the noveltie, as well as falsehood of
their tenets. For notwithstanding that the Pelagians were furnished with many
testimonies of the ancient Doctors, especially of the Greek church, qui ante
exortum Pelagium securius locuti sunt, who, before that heresy sprang up,
spoke more freely of the freedom of man's free will by nature (in opposition to
the Manichees, who taught a fatal necessity of sinning) then could well stand
with the free grace of Christ accurately defended by S. Austine and his
scholars; yet this learned and zealous father, being most expert in the prayers
appointed to be read in the ancientest Christian churches, out of them
exceedingly confounded these upstart heretics, and proved a full consent of
antiquity for those Orthodox tenets he propugned against all the enemies of
Christ's free and saving grace: and truly at this day a man may more certainly
gather out of the Book of Common Prayer, and specially the Collects used in our
Liturgy, what is the judgment of the church of England in those points
anciently questioned by the Pelagians, and now by the Arminians, then out of
the Book of Articles or Homilies.

In the sixth age Gregory the great and S. Isidore set forth offices or forms
of church Service; and partly out of them, partly out of the Liturgies above
mentioned, of S. Basil, Ambrose, and Chrysostom, partly some more ancient,
attributed to the Apostles and Evangelists themselves, all the famous and known
churches of the Christian world have their (...), and (...), misses, and
officia, services or Books of Common Prayer compiled, which they use at this
day; and as most of the reformed churches have, so the most learned and
judicious Calvin wishes all might have; Calv. ep. quod ad formam precum and
ri^uum ecclesiae, valde probo ut certa illa extet a qua pastoribus in sua
sunctione discedere non l^ceat.
Concerning a form of prayer and ecclesiastical rites, I very well like that
it be a certain and constant one, from which the Pastors of the Church may in
no wise depart or vary.

ARGUMENT V.
Those prayers which all in the kingdom are perpetually bound to use ought to
be approved by the whole church or kingdom: for such prayers especially ought
to be made in faith, and care taken that nothing be in them repugnant to sound
doctrine.

But such prayers cannot be ex tempore ejaculations, or sudden conceptions of
every private Pastors brain, opinion, or fancy.

Ergo, they must be penned forms examined by Gods word, and publicly printed,
that all may know what they are, and may confidently go along with the
Minister, and without any scruple of conscience say Amen to the prayers; which
they cannot do to such unwarranted immethodicall, inconsequent, nay,
heretical, schismatic, and seditious prayers, as many of our ex tempore
Enthusiasts deliver, especially on fast-dayes, with infinity of tautologies
and vain repetitions, to the great scorn and scandal of our religion.

ARGUMENT VI.
There ought to be public prayers not only on the Lords day, but on the
week-dayes also, upon special occasion, in every church or congregation of the
saints: for prayer is the Christians daily sacrifice, from which those houses
of God ought to take their denomination, domus mea domus orationis vocabitur,
my house shall be called the house of prayer; domus orationis, non orationum;
Mat. 13. 21.
not a house of sermons, though such there to be made; nor a house of
sacraments, though there to be administered; nor a house of Psalms, though
there to be sung; but a house of prayer, as the principal and chief and most
necessary duty there to be performed: prayer may be without the other, the
other cannot be without it.

But such prayers can be no other in most churches then set forms devised by
the learned of the Clergy, and approved by the State: for there is not one
Minister or Curate of a hundred, especially in country villages, or parochial
churches, who has any tolerable gift of conceived, as they term them, or ex
tempore prayers.

Ergo, there ought to be set forms of prayer used in public congregations.

ARGUMENT VII.
No man prays as he ought, who pours not out his whole soul before God,
praying as well with an entire intention as affection.

But this a man cannot do who makes a prolix ex tempore prayer in a public
congregation, by reason that he must at the same time both think upon what he
speaks, and invent also what he is to speak, in order and with good coherence
unless he will pray absurdly and inconsequently.

Ergo, no man prays as he ought who comes not with a set or premeditated form
of prayer into a public congregation.

ARGUMENT VIII.
Not to speak of sudden ejaculations, which necessity forces or excuses; nor
of prayers in ecstasies and raptures, in which an elevated soul is rather
passive then active. In all ordinary prayers which we are to offer to God in
the usual and constant course of our Ministry we must be careful to shun
all temeritie and rashness, Eccles. 5. ^.
and watch in prayer with all diligence. Be not rash with thy mouth, nor let
thy heart be hasty to utter a thing before God. Mal. 1. 8.
The pure oil Olive of the Sanctuary was to be beaten by Gods appointment,
Exodus 27. 20. and the Virgins were to trim their lights, Mat. 25. 7. before
they went out to meet the Bridegroom, and God himself rejected the blind and
the lame for sacrifices. None presumes to put up a petition to the king, which
is not carefully perused before; and shall we less reverence the King of
heaven then an earthly prince?

But temeritie and rashness cannot be avoided by such who speak to God
quicquid in buccam venerit, and presume to deliver that in a public assembly
which they never thought on before.

Ergo, all such ex tempore prayers ought to be forborne in public, and the set
forms of the Church retained; or some in stead of them composed with public
approbation.

Anabaptists Objections.
In excepting against all set or stinted ^orms of prayer, aspis a vipera sumit
venenum, according to the Latin proverb, the asp borrows poison from the
viper, that is, the Anabaptists from the Brownists, Vipera sic dicta a
vipariend^.
who may rightly be termed a generation of vipers, because they after the
manner of vipers make way to their separation, or going out from the Body of
their Mother the Church of England, by eating and rearing her bowels. Out of
their own store the Anabaptists furnish themselves with arguments against all
set forms of prayer in general, but they are beholding to the Brownists for
all such objections as they make against the public forms of prayer used in
the Church of England in particular.

For the more distinct handling of the objections, being somewhat of a
different nature, and for the ease of the reader, that he may more readily find
a particular and punctual solution to any such special objections as most
stick with him, I will first propound their main arguments against set forms in
general, and both answer them and retort them, and then particularly scan what
they seem materially to object against the Service Book established by law in
the Church of England.

OBJECTIONS against set forms of Prayer in general. OBJECT. 1.
No worship devised by man is acceptable to God: Set forms of prayer are a
worship devised by man; Ergo, set forms of prayer are not acceptable to God.
ANSWER.
First, a worship of God devised by man may be taken in a double sense, either
for a worship wholly devised by man, without any precept or president in
scripture; and such a worship is not agreeable unto God, but condemned in his
word, under the name of will worship: or for a worship in substance, prescribed
by God, but in some circumstance, manner, or help thereunto devised or composed
by man; and such may be and is acceptable unto God: as for example, reading
scripture is a religious act prescribed by God, yet the translation of the
original into the mother tongue, divisions of the text into chapters and
verses, diverse readings, interlinearie glosses, together with the contents,
and fitting them to the times and seasons, are from man. Preaching is a worship
of God, yet the choice of such a text, dividing it into parts, and handling the
parts in such a method, raising doctrines, and applying Uses from them, are
from man, or acts wherein the Preacher makes use of his invention, art, and
judgment. Catechizing is a duty enjoined by God; yet to use such a form of
words or method in Catechizing by questions and answers, as also the dividing
the Catechism into 52. Sections, answerable to the Sundays in the year, as we
see in Calvin's and other Catechismes, is a device and invention of man. In like
manner, prayer is a duty enjoined by God, and a part of his substantial
worship, but the set forms are devised by man, yet according to general rules
prescribed in scripture.

Secondly, not only prayer it self, but even set forms of prayer have both
precept and example in Gods word, as I proved heretofore; and therefore are not
to be accounted a mere humane invention, although therein man's wit and
invention be made use of.

Thirdly, this argument may be retorted upon the Anabaptists. Forms of prayers
upon premeditation, which Preachers use before their sermons, are as well a
worship of man's devising, as the set forms devised and framed by the governors
of the church. But premeditated or studied prayers made by way of preface
before sermons, are acceptable to God, and allowed by the Anabaptists
themselves; Ergo set forms of prayer cannot be disallowed.

OBJECT. II.
None who uses a set form of prayer prays by the Spirit. Every good
Christian ought to pray by the Spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 15. Ergo, no good Christian
may use set forms of prayer.

ANSWER.
First, the Apostle in the place alleged speaks of an extraordinary gift of
the Spirit, as appears by the verse immediately going before: If I pray in a
strange tongue, my spirit prays but my understanding is without fruit. Now,
since those extraordinary gifts of the Spirit are ceased, Christians are not
now bound to prophecy, or pray by the Spirit, in the Apostles sense. This text
therefore is impertinently alleged, and makes nothing against set forms of
prayers now in use in the church.

Secondly, the phrase to pray by the Spirit, as it is used by Divines, may
admit of a double meaning; either to pray by the immediate inspiration of the
Spirit, as the Prophets and Apostles, and all the penmen of the holy Ghost
spoke and wrote; and in this sense, they who use set forms of prayer devised by
men, pray not by the Spirit, as neither do they who pray ex tempore; for then
they could not be out, which they are often, nor commit any error in their
prayers, which they do very many; nay, then their prayers should be of equal
authority with the Psalms, and other prayers set down in scripture given by
divine inspiration: or by this phrase they mean to pray by the assistance of
the Spirit; and in this sense, they who use premeditated and penned prayers
more pray by the Spirit then they who use ex tempore prayers, conceived and
brought forth at the same instant; for the Spirit assisteth the former both in
their premeditation and their present deliverie, but the latter only in their
sudden expressions: and I would fain know of them, why they who preach studied
and penned sermons preach by the Spirit, and that far more accurately,
learnedly, judiciously, and powerfully then others; and yet, in their
judgments, they who utter studied and penned prayers pray not by the Spirit.

Thirdly, this objection may also be retorted by the Apostles example; we are
as well to sing by the Spirit as to pray by the Spirit, for so are his express
words; I will pray with the Spirit, I will pray with understanding also; I will
sing with the Spirit, I will sing with understanding also. But a man may sing
by the Spirit, and yet sing prick-song and a written or printed dittie in
meeter; for such are the Psalms of David, which they themselves sing:
therefore a man may pray by the Spirit, and yet use a set form, and rehearse a
penned or printed prayer.

OBJECT. III.
It is not lawful to confine the spirit, for that is a kind of quenching it,
forbidden by the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 19.

But the prescribing and using set forms of prayers is a confining or stinting
the spirit.

Ergo, the prescribing or using set forms of prayer is unlawful.

First, if the governors of the Church should simply and absolutely forbid
all suddenly conceived, or ex tempore prayers in public or private, they
should offend in some degree, and be guilty of the breach of that precept of
the Apostle. For to stifle all sudden motions of the Spirit, and prohibit all
piou^ ejaculations is in some sense to quench the Spirit. But albeit they
command a set form of Liturgy to be read in the church, yet they condemn not
the use of conceived or premeditated prayers by preachers in their Sermons, nor
by private Christians in their closets, but leave them to their Christian
liberty.

Secondly, I demand of them, when they object against the use of set forms of
prayer, that they confine the spirit, what Spirit they mean? the Spirit of God,
or their own spirit, the spirit of man? If the Spirit of God, their objection
contains in it blasphemy; for the Spirit of God cannot be confined by us,
whether we pray with premeditation or without, use a set form or not: the
Spirit of God works in both as he pleases, both by enlightening the
understanding and warming our affections, and powerfully assisting both in the
conceiving and deliverie of prayer. If they mean their own spirit, or the
spirit of him that prays in the congregation, namely, the minister or
preacher. I answer, this is most necessary that his spirit for the time be
confined, and his intention tied to that prayer he reads or says by heart;
neither is this forbidden by the Apostle, nor is it any quenching of the
spirit; but rather a kindling it. For in uttering zealous prayers with a fixed
intention and devout affection we feel our hearts burn within us.

Thirdly, this objection may also be retorted; if a preacher may not use a set
form of prayer, because the spirit in him is thereby confined; neither may he
deliver a conceived or ex tempore prayer in the audience of the people, because
by it the spirit in them is confined, though the prayer of the preacher be no
set form to him, but mere voluntary and extemporarie yet is it a set form to
the hearers: and their spirit, if they will not suffer their mind to wander, is
tied and confined to it so long as it lasts, being an home or two according
to the length of our late fast prayers; in which regard none more confine the
spirit in men then these our upstart Enhusiasts.

OBJECT. IV.
Prayers of the Pastor or Minister ought to be fitted to the several occasions
of the faithful.

Set forms of prayer cannot be so fitted.

Ergo, they ought not to be used in churches.

First, this is ignorantly objected by such, who never read either our books of
Common Prayers or other helps to private devotion; for in them there are not
only general prayers, fit for all men to use at all times, but also special,
applied to several estates and conditions of men, for men in sickness and in
health, in time of war or in peace, and the like.

Secondly, these several occasions they speak of are either such as concern
more in the congregation, or some one only in partilar; if they concern more,
and the preacher be acquainted therewith, he may either choose a penned prayer
fitting for them, or himself upon premeditation make one; if they concern one
only, such are not fit to be mentioned in public prayers, but the Pastor is to
repair to them, and apply a salve in private to their peculiar sore.

Thirdly, this objection may also be retorted: if all things which we need to
pray for upon any occasion whatsoever be contained in one short set form of
prayer, much more may they be in many of greater length. But all things we need
to pray for are comprised Ang. ep. 121. c. 11. Quamlibet alia verba dicimas,
nihil aliud decimus quam quod in ista Dominita aratione positum est, recte and
congruenter eramus.
in a short set form of prayer, to wit, our Lords prayer, (as S. Austine says
in express words) although (says he) we vaire never so much in our prayers,
and say other words then those which Christ has sanctified in his holy form of
prayer: yet if we pray as we ought, we say no other thing then that which is
set down in the Lords prayer.

Ergo, all things we need to pray for may be comprised in set forms, which may
be thus easily demonstrated; there is no ex tempore prayer which may not be
taken by characters, and then either read, or said by heart, and so made a set
form of prayer for all men in the like case.

OBJECT. V.
Reading a prayer is no more praying then reading a prophecy is prophesying,
or reading a Sermon is preaching.

But where a set form of Liturgy is used, the minister only reads certain
prayers and collects.

Ergo, he prays not, nor is his ministry therein Divine Service.

ANSWER.
First, bare reading a prayer simply, without any more then liplabour, is not
praying; but reading a religious prayer with understanding, intention, and
affection, is praying and godly devotion. For what is prayer but a lifting up
of the heart to God, with a lively faith and fervant affection, out of a quick
sense of our wants, The definition of prayer.
and calling upon him for such things as are agreeable to his will? This,
whether it be done within book or without book, with our own words, or borrowed
from another, it matter not at all.

Secondly, the reason holds not from praying to prophesying and preaching;
for prophecy is an extraordinary gift of the holy Ghost, and preaching a
special faculty acquired by many years study, now especially since the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit are ceased; but prayer is a common duty of
all Christians: and therefore though it will not follow; such a man reads a
prophecy, Ergo, he is a prophet; or reads written or printed Sermons, Ergo,
he is a preacher. Yet we may rightly conclude, such a one reads godly prayers
constantly, after a religious manner, therefore he is an humble orator, and
petitioner to his heavenly Majesty; for Christ said to his Apostles, when you
pray, say, Our Father, etc. Saying therefore, or rehearsing a set form is
praying.

Thirdly, this objection may be thus retorted; if reading the law in the
synagogue be preaching it in the language of the holy Ghost, then reading holy
and heavenly prayers of the church is praying: but the text says expressly,
that reading the law is preaching, Act. 15. 21. Moses of old has in every
City them that preach him, seeing he is read in the synagogue every Sabbath
day. Ergo, reading prayers is praying.

The Anabaptists having thus disgorged their poison against set forms of prayer
in general; the Brownists, who engender with them, thus spit their venom
against the Liturgy of the Church of England in particular.

EXCEPT. I.
First, they except against it, that it is a mere humane invention, and has no
warrant from Gods word.

ANSWER.
But this exception is weak and false: First, weak; for if all things in the
service of God, wherein man's invention, skill and art is exercised, are to be
rejected and abandoned, what will become of the partition of the Bible into
chapters and verses, the translating it into the mother tongue, putting Psalms
into meeter, and setting tunes to them, Catechismes, confessions of faith,
forms of administering sacraments, nay, conceived as well as read prayers, and
all commentaries, homilies, and sermons; for all these have something of Art,
and are the issue of our meditation, invention, and contemplation? We must
therefore of necessity distinguish between the doctrine and the method of a
sermon, the matter and the form of a prayer, the substance and circumstance of
Gods worship: in the former there is no place for man's art, wit, or invention;
in the latter there has been always, and must be. Secondly, it is false; for
the book of Common Prayer consists of, first, confessions of sins, and of
faith; secondly, lessons out of the old and new Testament; thirdly,
thanksgivings or blessings general and special; fourthly, Psalms read and
sung; fifthly, prayers for our selves and for others: but for all these we have
precept and president in scripture, namely, for confession of sins, Psalm. 32.
5. I said I will confess my transgrlssions to the Lord. Prove. 28. 13. He that
covers his sins shall not prosper, but who so confesses them and forsakes
them shall have mercy. Dan. 9. 20. While I was praying and confessing my sin
and the sins of my people. Ezra 10. 1. 11. Now when Ezra had prayed and
confessed, weeping and casting himself down before God. 11. Now therefore make
confession unto the Lord God of your fathers. Math. 3. 6. And were baptized of
him in Jordan, confessing their sins. For confession of faith, Math. 10. 32.
whosoever shall confess me before men, him will I confess before my father
which is in heaven. Romans 10. 10. With the heart man believes unto
righteousness, and with the mouth confession is made to salvation. 1 Pet. 3.
15. Be ready always to give an answer to every man that asks you a reason
of the hope that is in you. For lessons to be read out of the old and new
Testament, Deuteronomy. 31. 11. Thou shall read this law before all Israel in their
hearing. Esaias 34. 16. Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read. Luke 4.
16. He went into the synagogue on the Sabbath day, and stood up for to read.
Acts 13. 15. After the reading of the Law and the Prophets. Acts 15. 21. Moses
being read in the synagogue every Sabbath day. 1 Timothy 4. 13. Give attendance to
reading, to exhortation, to doctrine. For thanksgivings, Neh. 11. 17. And
Mattaniah the son of Asaph was the principal to begin the thanksgiving in
prayer. Psalm. 26. 7. That I may publish with the voice of thanksgiving, and
tell of all thy woundrous works. Psalm. 50. 14. Offer unto God thanksgiving.
Phil. 4. 6. In every thing by prayer and supplication, with thanksgiving, let
your request be made known unto God. Ephesians. 5. 20. Give thanks always. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 18. In every thing give thanks. For Psalms read and sung, Psalm. 95.
1. O come let us sing unto the Lord. 1 Chronicles. 16. 9. Sing Psalms unto him.
Ephesians. 5. 19. Speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns and spiritual
songs. Iam. 5. 13. Is any merry? let him sing Psalms. Rev. 15. 3. And they
sang the song of Moses, the servant of the Lord. For prayers for our selves and
others, 1 Kings 8. 28, 29, 30, 38. Have respect unto the prayer of thy servant.
Math. 21. 13. My house shall be called the house of prayer. Luke 18. 10. Two
men went up into the Temple to pray. Acts 3. 1. Peter and John went up together
into the Temple at the hour of prayer. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. Pray without ceasing. 1 Timothy 2. 1. Let prayers, intercessions, and supplications be made for all men. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2. making mention of you in our prayers. 2 Timothy 1. 3. remembrance of
thee in my prayers.

EXCEPT. II.
Secondly, they except against the Service Book: that either all of it, or the
greater part, is taken out of the Roman Missall: and therefore is to be kicked
out of the church with that superstitious piece of Romish devotion.

ANSWER.
But this exception is first insufficient, secondly ignorant. For if the
prayers in our Service Book are holy and pithie, if agreeable to the pattern of
all prayer, and favor of true piety and devotion, (which they cannot deny
they do) what skils it out of what book they were culled? The Jews borrowed
jewels of the Egyptians to adorn the Sanctuary, Solomon sent for timber and
other materials for the Temple to Hyram king of Tire, S. Paul transcribed
verses out of hea^then Poets, Virgil raked gold out of Enuius hic muck,
Christian Apothecaries gather simples to make sovereigne electuaries out of the
gardens of Jews and Mahumetans, the Lapidaries take out a precious stone called
Bufomtes out of the head of a Toad. Christ indeed forbids us to cast pearl
before swine, but no where to take a pearl out of a ring in a swines snowt, if
there be found any there.

Secondly, this exception is guilty of as much ignorance as weakness; they
who make it are (...), such as cannot see afar off: 2 Pet. 1. 9.
of if they could, they might have discerned the prayers in our Church-book to
be far more ancient then the Roman Missall. The Bishops and learned Doctors,
who in the days of Edward the sixth compiled the Service Book at Windsor, had
far more ancient Liturgies in their eye then the Roman Missall or Breviarie;
they drew not water out of that impure channel, but out of a clearer fountain.
There are the same Epistles and Gospels in our book and theirs, but they were
not taken out of theirs, but out of the Canonical books of the old and new
Testament: there are the same Psalms and Hymns, but they were not taken out
of their Psalter, but out of David's and Saint Luke: there are many of the same
Collects and Orisons, but they are not taken out of their Breviarie, but out of
the Liturgies of Saint Basil, Saint Ambrose, Saint Chrysostom, and other more
ancient, attributed to the Apostles themselves.

Lastly, if in regard of that little which may seem to be translated out of the
Missall into our English Service Book, it might be termed, as Spalatensis
(when he was present at the Service in Canterbury church, called it (
Breviarium optime reformatum, a reformed Breviarie. I cannot apprehend, how
that should be any derogation to it; for what says Solomon? take away the
dross from the silver, Prove. 25. 4.
and there shall come forth a vessel for the refiner.

This was the noble work of the learned Doctors and Martyrs who reformed
Religion in England: they took away the dross, not only from the Missals, but
from all other Offices and Service-books then extant; all superstitious Rites
either heathenish or Jewish, all Legendarie fables, all invocation of saints,
prayers for the dead, all Dirige's and Trentals, and whatsoever was not
warrantable by holy scripture; and, retaining the rest, supplied what was
wanting thereunto: and hence came forth this Vessel for the refiner, this
Liturgy of our church, more complete then any now extant in other reformed
churches.

EXCEPT. III.
Thirdly, they except at three Popish absolutious, as they term them; the
first, in the beginning of the Service after the public confession; the
second, before the Communion; the third, in the visitation of the sick.

But this exception has in it more strength of passion then reason: for none
of these absolutions are absolute, but conditional; nor in the name, or by the
authority of the Minister, but of Christ.

The first is nothing but a declaration of Gods mercy, who freely pardons
the penitent; and of the Ministers duty to declare and pronounce this
absolution and remission to the people.

The second is a prayer of the Minister to God to have mercy upon the
Communicants, to pardon and deliver them from all their sins, and to confirm
and strengthen them in all goodness.

The third is the execution of that Ministerial power wherewith Christ
invested the Apostles and their successors, John 20. 23. As my father sent me,
so I send you; whose sins ye remit they are remitted, whose sins ye retain
they are retained.

Here is our express warrant and commission from Christ for what we do in
this kind, to revive the spirit of the humble, and cheat up the droo^ing
conscience rea^lie to languish in a featefull conflict with despair.

EXCEPT. IV.
Fourthly, they except against the reading of the Psalms, Epistles and Gospels
in a corrupt translation, in which there are many gross errors: as Psalm, 105.
28. And they were not obedient to his word, whereas it should be translated,
and they rebelled not against his word: and Luke the first, 36. This is the
sixth month which was called barren, for, this is the sixth month with her
who was called barren. And Romans 12. 11. Fervent in Spirit serving the time,
for, serving the Lord. And Galat. 4. 25. Agar is mount Sinai in Arabia, and
bordereth upon the city which is now called Jerusalem, for, and answers to
Jerusalem. And Phil. 2. 8. He was found in his apparel as a man, for, being
found in fashion as a man. And Ephesians. 3. 15. Which is the father of all that is
called father in heaven and earth, for, of whom the whole family in heaven and
earth is named.

But this exception is of little importance, and may soon be philipp't away.

For first, if no translation way be read in the church but that which is free
from all error, then none at all ought to be read, for there is none in which
there are not some mistakes, more or less: with this ferula therefore they rap
themselves over the thumbs.

Secondly, those sores on which they fasten their nail have their salves; they
may see them, if they please, in Hooker, Fisher, and many others, who have
cleared those very passages.

Lastly, neither is the Minister, nor are the people tied to that translation
in the common prayer book; but they may, if they please, in stead thereof read
the Psalms, Epistles and Gospels, according to the last and best translation:
neither were they to blame who in the first setting forth of the
common prayer book appointed the scriptures to be read in that ancient
translation, for that was the best then extant; neither is there any error at
all in it, which concerns faith or manners; and other slips must be born
withal in translations, or else we must read none at all till we have a
translation given by divine inspiration, as the originals are.

EXCEPT. V.
Fifthly, they except that there are vain repetitions in the Service Book.

But this exception is vain, not the repetitions: for,

First, that is not vain which serves to a holy end and purpose, the more to
stir up our affections, or imprint such prayers deeper in our memories; as
the reflecting of the sunne-beams is not in vain which increases the heat
thereof, and the striking again and again upon the same nail is not in vain,
because it drives it in deeper, and more fasteneth it.

Secondly, the holy scripture warranteth such repetitions: for in the 136.
Psalm these words, for his mercy endures for ever, are 27. times repeated in
the old translation, but 26. according to the new: and in Psalm 119. the word
of God, or some synonymon thereunto is repeated 175. Christ himself repeated
that prayer, Father, let this cup pass from me, Mat. 26. 44.
three times.

Thirdly, there is no prayer appointed to be often repeated save the Lords
prayer, which Christ himself twice delivered upon several occasions; and not
only the church of England, but all churches in their Liturgies have thought
fit to rehearse often: for, it is as the salt which seasoneth all our
spiritual sacrifices, as the amber which sweeteneth all our dishes, as the
Elixar which turns all our leaden conceptions into pure gold. In the
confession of our sins we are defective, as also in the profession of our
faith, and in our prayers for our selves and others, and in our forms of
consecration of the sacrament: and therefore in all these places of the
Service Book the Lords prayer is added to supply the defects thereof.

EXCEPT. VI.
Sixthly, they except against the shortness of our prayers; they say, they are
rather snips of prayers then prayers; and that in them there may be some sparks
of piety, but no flame of devotion.

But this exception is neither true nor just.

First, not true; for the prayers appointed by the church to be read at solemn
fasts, as likewise the prayers for the whole estate of Christ's church, and the
Morning and Evening prayers for private Families, and for sundry other
purposes printed after the Psames; are of as large a size as any used in any
reformed churches.

Secondly, it is not just; our prayers are thereby no way disparaged, for the
shortest of them come nearer to the pattern of perfect prayer drawn by our
Savior, then their longest. In all the Bible there is no example of any very
long prayer: on the contrary, Eccles. 5. 2.
Solomon commands us when we petition the Almighty to use few words; Mat. 6.
7.
and Christ himself more then once taxes the vanity and hypocrisy of such
as mete out their devotion by the ell: when you pray, use not vain repetitions
as the heathen do, for they think that they shall be heard for their much
speaking. And Mat. 23. 14. Woe be unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites,
for ye devour widows houses, and for a pretense make long prayers.

In direct opposition to such he framed a prayer to himself, a very short one,
but most pithie and perfect: and it is after this fair copy that the learned
Scribes who penned our English devotions wrote, well knowing that God is not
wooed with variety of of phrases, but rather with sighs and groans; not with
enlarged thoughts, Ep. 121. H^c negotium plus gemitibus quam sermonibus agitur:
plus fletu quam afflatu,
but with enflamed affections, as Saint Austine teaches us. The hotest spring
sends forth their waters by ebullitions, oration brevis penetrat coelum. In a
long prayer the affection slaketh, cools, and dies before he that prays is
speechless; and the vulgar sort of people are very little benefited by these
prolix and long-winded, rather discourses or expostulations, or exaggerations
then prayers; neither can they for so great a space of time hold their
attention to the Preacher; neither can their memory carry away a quarter of
what is powered out before them: whereas short prayers often repeated in their
ears leave an impression behind them, and they get them (with many most
profitable texts of Scripture often rehearsed in the Book of Common Prayer) by
heart: and if you take away from them these short cuts and shreddings of
devotion (as they please to nickname them) such as can neither read nor write
will have nothing left to mend their wedding garment.

Howsoever, Aug. ep. 121. c. 10. Dicuntur fratres in Aegypto crebras quidem
habere orationes, sed eas tamen brevissimas, and raptim quodammado ejaculatas;
ne illa vigilanter erecta, quae eranti plurimum necessaria est, per
productiores moras evanescat atque hebebetur intentio.
we want not the approbation herein of the ancient churches, especially the
famous churches of Egypt, who had many prayers, but very short, as if they
were darts thrown with a sudden quickness, lest that vigilant and erect
attention of the mind, which in prayer in most necessary, should be wasted or
dulled through the continuance of overlong prayers.

EXCEPT. VII.
Seventhly, they except against the interchangeable variety of our
Service Book, whereas they continue a long prayer themselves without any
interruption, the people only sealing all in the end with their Amen.

But according to the Rubric, and practice of the church in most congregations
in reading the Psalms, and other parts of the Service, the Minister and people
answer one another by course and turns; sometimes he darts out^a short
ejaculation, as sursum corda, lift up your hearts; they answer him with,
habemus ad Dominum, we lift them up unto the Lord; when he sings one verse in
a Psalm, they chant out another; when he prays for them, the Lord be with
you, Gal. 6. 18. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit.
they require him with a like prayer, and with thy spirit. And what hurt or
incongruitie is in this? it is a religious seconding one the other in their
devotion, and stirring up the intention of the people. It is as it were the
laying gloing coals one upon another, which presently kindle one the other, and
make the flame the greater.

And though now this be an eyesore to some in our Common Prayer Book: yet the
ancients esteemed it no blemish, but a beauty in their Liturgies. For Saint
Ambrose makes mention of such a custom in Millain, Platina in Rome, Basil
throughout all Greece, Plin. ep. ad Trajan.
and Pliny the younger among the first Christians in Trajans time within a
hundred years after Christ's death; These Christians (says he) before day sing
Hymns alteratim, by turns or catches, to one Christ, whom they esteem a God.
And yet we may fetch this practice higher, even from a quire of Angels in
heaven; for so we read Esaias the 6. 3. And the Seraphims cried one to another
holy, holy, holy.

EXCEPT. VIII.
Their last exception and greatest spleen is at the Letanie, one of the
choicest pieces in all the Service Book, wherein we offer up the sweetest
incense of most fervent prayers and fragrant meditations to God.

And the Brownists their taking, offense at it shows them to be of the nature
of the Vultures, who, as Aristotle writes, are killed with the oil of Roses;
Aristot. de mira^il. auscult.
or rather like swine, who, as Pliny informs us, cannot live in some parts
of Arbia by reason the sweet sent of aromaticall trees there growing in every
wood. Against this therefore they thunder out a volley of objections; in the
Letanie, (say they) there is a prayer for the dead, Remember not, Lord, the
offenses of our forefathers; prayer against sudden death, which may be a
blessing: prayer for all that travel by land, or by water, and so for thieves
and Pirates: for all women laboring of child, and consequently, for all queans
and harlots: there is rapping out of oaths, and no better then exorcisms and
conjurations, by thy nativitie and circumcision, by thy cross and passion,
etc. And therefore many who are in charity with other prayers are frighted
with the Letanie, and as soon as the Minister begins it they run swifter out
of the church then he over it.

But I may truly say with the prophet, timuerunt ubi non erat timor, they
feared where there was no cause of fear, like silly ducklings they were scared
at the sight of the shadow of a Kite in the water. For, not to answer all their
objections en passant (they are not worth the stay or insisting upon any of
them) those words they first stumble at, Remember not the offenses of our
forefathers, are not a prayer for the dead, but for the living, that God would
not so remember of offenses of our forefathers as to visit them upon us,
according to that dreadful menacie in the second commandment, I am a jealous
God, and visit the sins of the fathers upon the children to the third and
fourth generation of them that hate me.

The sudden death we pray against is not a quick riddance out of pain, or a
speedy taking us away from the evil that is to come, for that indeed were to
pray against our own good: but by mors repentina, or sudden death, there is
meant unexpected or unprepared death, when we are summoned by death as by Gods
messenger to bring in our bills and books to be examined at the great Audit
before our accounts be ready: it is true, we should be always ready; but
who of a thousand is so? And if any be tardie, as thou and I are, shall any
blame us for desiring a day at least to make even reckonings and perfect our
account?

As for those passionate strains, Zanch. in exposit. praecept. 2. Tit. de
invocatione. In veteri Romana ecclesia semper mihi placuciunt hec du^: unu^,
quod precescon cludant per Dominum nostrum Iesum Christum: alterum, quod
exprimant parts mediatoris and actusofficii addentes, per crusem and vnlnera,
etc.
By thine agony and bloody sweat; they are no forms of oaths, much less
conjuration (as these ignorant Sectaries blaspheme them) but a compendious and
very useful recapitulation of the story of the Gospel, and an acknowledgment
of the chief means of our salvation, and a vehement obtestation by the
meritorious actions and passions of Christ, like to that 1 Thessalonians. 1. I beseech
you brethren by the Lord Jesus Christ. Neither are such kind of earnest
obtestations unusual in our petitions to men: per dextram tuam, Caie Caesar,
says Cicero; and per connubianostra, says Dido. If they are true Christians,
they believe that God has and does deliver us from all punishment due to our
sin, and from eternal death by these very actions and passions of Christ
recounted in the Letanie; and if these be undoubted means of our salvation,
ought we not to pray to God to save us by these means from wrath, and bring us
to his everlasting kingdom?

The preposition By has many significations; sometimes it is the note and sign
of an oath; sometimes, and that most usually, it signifies the isntrumental
cause, and so it is taken in the Letanie; wherein we do not affirm or swear
any thing to be so or so by Christ's nativitie or circumcision, or death, or
passion; but we pray to God to deliver us from all the evils both of sin and
punishment before specified by these meritorious actions and passions of our
Redeemer, as by the only effectual means to procure us such a deliverance.

And for the extent of our charity, and generality of our prayers, as we are
commanded by the Apostle, while we have time to do good unto all men, Gal. 6.
10.
but especially to those of the household of faith; so we are likewise to pray
for all men, because there is no man so wicked and in so damnable a condition
to whom God (for ought we know) may not give repentance unto life; and we are
indebted unto Gods mercy and restraining grace, that we run not into the like
excess of not as they, nor are as wide from the way of salvation as the
farthest wandering sheep. And though we pray indefinitely for all that travel
by land or by water, yet those all in the churches account are no other then
such as travel in the way of a lawful calling.

And as for women laboring with child, we pray nothing for them, but that they
may be safely delivered; nor for any that are in present danger, but that God
would preserve them: and have we not express warrant for such a prayer both in
the words of Job, O thou preserver of all men? and of the Apostle, 7. 22.
1 Timothy 4. 10. God is the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe?
Upon which ground the Apostle himself infers a necessary duty of all
Christians to pray for all men, 1 Timothy 2. 3, 4. I exhort you therefore, that
first of all supplications, prayers, and intercessions be made for all men; for
this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Savior, who will have all
men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the Truth.

ARTIC. 4.
Concerning the calling of Pastors.
ANABAPTIST.
THat there ought to be no distinction by the Word of God, Gustius l. de
Anabap. exord. p 35. Catabaptistae sumunt sibi omnes praedicandi officium. See
the confession of the Anap. art. 41, 45.
between the Clergy and the Laity; but that all who are gifted may preach the
Word, and administer the Sacraments.

THE REFUTATION.
This prodigious error, which may be easily convinced not only by the clear
light of Scripture, and the practice of the Christian Church from the beginning
to this day: but also by the glimmering light of Reason and Custom of all
Nations, a mungrill sect of late between Brownists and Anabaptists have set
abroach, and thereby after a sort justified the scandal laid upon some in the
Reformed Churches, by Card: Bellarmine, that Protestants have no order at all
among them, but confusion; that among them all sorts of Tradesmen and
Artificers handle the Word and Sacraments with foul and unwashed hands, to the
great dishonor of God, and profanation of his holy Ordinances. But let the
Cardinal and all Papists know, that we own none of these russet Rabbis, or
Apron Levites, but detest and abominate them as much as we do that great
Patriarch of the Anabaptists Cuiperdolin, Sleid. com. l. 10 Cuiperdolingus
manibus pedibusque reptans per homines confertim stantes in sublimi discurrit,
and ino sillis inhalans, Pater (inquit ad singulos) te sanctificavit, accipe
Spiritum sanct.
who in Munster at the Coronation of their Tailor King, creeps upon all four,
and passing through a great throng of people, breathed into all their mouths,
saying to every one in particular, The Father has sanctified thee, receive the
holy Ghost. This Heresy may be felled down at three blows of the axe (Saint
John Baptist speaks of) laid to the root of the tree, after this manner:

ARGUMENT I.
No man may conjoyne or confound them whom God has severad and distinguished:

But God in his Word has severed the Clergy from the Laity; and distinguished
the Priests from the people, Nem. 18, 20. Hos. 4. 4, 9. Mal. 2. 7.

Ergo, None ought to confound them.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
By the Leviticall Law the Priests were distinguished from the people, but that
distinction is now taken away, and by the Gospel any who has the gift of
Prayer, and Interpretation of Scripture, may both expound, and dip and do all
such things as the Clergy of late have appropriated to themselves.

REPLY.
1. The distinction of Priest and People is more ancient then the Leviticall
Law, and founded in the very Law of nature; for the Indians have their
Brackmans, the Turks their Mufie^s, the Heathen Romans had their Flamines and
Arch-Flamines, the Britains and Galls their Druides. Before the Law given, we
read of Priests in Egypt, and in Canaan, and in Midian. Melchizedech was a
Priest to the most high God, Genesis 14. 18. The Priests in Egypt had a portion by
themselves, Genesis 47. 22. Only the land of the Priests, Pharaoh bought not, for
the Priests had a portion assigned them, and they did eat their portion which
he gave them. And Exodus 2. 16. there is mention of a Priest of Midian which had
seven daughters.

2. In the New Testament, though the Leviticall Priesthood be taken away, yet
there still remains a distinction between the Clergy and Laity; for Christ
Mat. 28. 19. gives commission to his Apostles, and their successors, to teach
all nations, and baptize them, and John 20. 22. to remit and retain sins; and
the Apostle evidently distinguishes the Flock from their Pastors, Act. 20.
28. Take heed to your selves, and all the flock over which the holy Ghost has
made you overseers. And Gal. 66. Let him that is taught in the word,
communicate to him that teaches in all good things. And Heb. 13. 17. Obey them
that have the rule over you, and submit your selves, for they watch over your
souls, as they that must give account, that they may do it with joy, and not
with grief.

ARGUMENT II.
That for which God inflicted most severe punishments in the Law, ought not to
be attempted by any that fear God:

But God inflicted severe punishments upon Lay persons for usurping upon, and
intermedling with the Priests function* as namely, upon Corah, Da^han, and
Abiram, Number. 16. 31. and upon Vzza, 2 Samuel 6. 7. and upon Vzziah, 2 Chronicles 26.
21.

Ergo, None that fear God, ought to attempt any such thing.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
These plagues and judgments fell upon the persons above named for other
crimes, namely upon Corah and his accomplices for their conspiracy against Moses
and Aaron; Uzza for his presumption; and Uzziah for his pride; not simply for
those acts done by them, which seemed to trench upon the Priests and Levites
office.

REPLY.
1. It is true, that the former delinquents were guilty of other crimes. For as
Angels often appear single, but Devils by legions; so eminent virtues are for
the most part single and rare in men, but enourmous vices are seldom alone.
Yet this no way dulleth the point of the argument: For the Text is express,
that the particular punishments above mentioned were laid upon them for those
illegal acts done by them, to the wrong and prejudice of the Sacerdotall
function. For what says the Text? Corah and his company said to Moses and
Aaron, You take too much upon you, seeing all the congregation are holy, every
one of them. Ver. 18. They took very man his censer, and put fire on them: and
that hereby they encroached upon the Priests office, it is evident by Moses
reproof, ver. 9, 10. Is it a small thing that God has appointed you to stand
before the congregation to minister unto them, and he has brought thee near
unto him, and seek ye the Priesthood also? Likewise it is said of Vzza, that he
put his hand to the Ark of God, and that therefore the Lord was wroth with him,
and smote him in the same place. And for Vzziah, the case is yet clearer, for
the Priests withstood him, and said unto him, 2 Chronicles. 26. 18, 19. It
pertains not unto thee, Vzziah, to burn incense to the Lord, but to the
Priests, the sons of Aaron: yet Vzziah will be meddling with the censer, and
be burning incense contrary to the Law, and thereby he incensed the wrath of
God against himself, and immediately the leprosy rose up in his forehead
before the Priests in the house of the Lord, besides the Incense Altar.

2. I grant Corah and his accomplices couspired against Moses and Aaron, but the
cause was, Moses and Aaron withstood his ambition, and would not suffer him to
arrogate to himself the Priests f^^^tion. Vzza was presumptuous, but for ought
appears in the Text, he showed it in nothing but this, that he without any
calling from God presumed to touch his Arc, and do the office of a Priest.
Vzziah was proud, and it was the height of his pride which moved him to burn
incense, and not content with his Scepter, to meddle with the Censer. I shall
add no more to enforce this Reason then the Application of the words of the
Orator to Mark Anthony; I wonder Anthony that thou art not frighted at their
ends, Cic. Phil. sec. Miror te Antoni quorum facta imitaris, little exitus non
per^orrescere.
whose courses thou followest: So I very much marvel that they who do such
things as Corah, Vzza, and Vzziah smarted for, fear not that they shall suffer
in the like kind, or a worse, without repentance. For although the earth open
not her mouth and swallow them up as she did Dathan, and his fellow
Conspiratours; yet Hell will open her mouth, and swallow them body and soul:
And though God smite them not with temporal death, as he did Vzza, yet he will
with eternal: And though their flesh be not infected with leprosy, as
Vzziah's was, yet their consciences are most foul and leprous in the sight of
God.

ARGUMENT III.
All that take upon them to execute the office of a Priest or Minister of the
Gospel, ought to have a calling thereunto, Heb. 5. 4. 1 Timothy 4. 14.

But Lay persons, whether Merchants, or Artizans, or Husbandmen, or any the
like, have no calling to execute the office of a Priest, or Minister of the
Gospel.

Ergo, they may not assume, or arrogate it to themselves.

ANABAP: ANSWER.
Gods conferring gifts upon any man, is a sufficient calling; as for the
imposition of Episcopal hands, it is an Antichristian rite, and gives the
party ordained no power at all.

REPLY.
There is a double calling necessary to a dispenser of the mysteries of
salvation; Inward, and Outward: The Inward enableth them, the Outward
authorizeth them to discharge their sacred function. Where there is are gifts, if
God incline the heart of the party to enter into the Ministry, there is an
inward calling: yet this alone suffices not without Helvetica posterior c. 18.
Nemo honorem ministerii Ecclesiastici usurpari sibi, id est, arbitrio propri
rapere, debeat: vocentur and eligantur electione Eccle^siastica and legitima
ministri Ecclessiae. Et post, Nu^ cupant Apostoli omnes in Christum credentes
sacerda^tes, sed non ratioone ministerii, etc. Bohemica confess. c. 9. Nulli
apud nos permittitur ministerii muner f^ngi, aut ullum sacrum Domini munus
administrare nisi hic primae Ecclesiae more atque divinitus constitu^to o^dine
ad eam functionem, pervenerit, vacatusque (...) and constitutus. Anglica
confess. art 6. Ministrum d^ cemus legitime voca i oportere, and recte atque
ordin praefici Ecclesiae Dei^quo major nobis ab istis fit inj^^ ria, quibus
nihil saepius in ore est, quam apud nos omne esse sacerdotes, omnes doctores,
omnes interpretes Belgica confess. art. 31. Credimus ministros debere a
functiones illas suas vocari and promoveri legitim^ Ecclesiae electione.
Augustana confess. art. 14. De ordine Ecclesiastico docent, quod nemo debet in
Ecclesia public docere, aut sacramenta administrare, nirite vocatus, sicut and
Paulus praecipit Tito ut in (...) vitatibus presbyteros constituat. Wittenberg.
confess. art. 20. Nec permittendum est cuivis, quamv^^ spirituali sacerdoti, ut
sine legitima vocatione usurp^ publicum ministerium in Ecclesia.
an outward calling, either ordinary or extraordinary; Extraordinary callings
(since Miracles are ceased) we are not now to expect; nor if any pretend, easily
believe, or give way thereunto: and therefore we must stick to the ordinary
calling, by the imposition of the hands of the Presbytery; for none may
prophecy or preach except he be sent. Ier. 14. 14. The Prophets prophecy in
my name, and I sent them not. Jer. 27. 15. I have not sent them, yet they
prophecy. Romans 10. 15. How shall they preach, except they be sent? And the
Christian Church now knows no other sending, then by laying on of hands by
the successors of the Apostles, and commending them to particular charges; And
if such Episcopal Ordination be an Antichristian Rite, we desire to learn
from them what is the Christian form or manner of admitting men into holy
Orders; for no other Ordination was heard of for 1500. years, or at least
approved of, and more: during which time, if there were no lawful Calling,
there were no Pastors feeding, and governing the flocks; if no lawful Pastors,
no visible Churches.

2. As the Anabaptists have no outward Calling, so neither inward; for
whatsoever overweaning conceit they may have of themselves, yet certain it is,
they who take upon them to be their leaders and teachers, are such as S. Jerome
complains of in his 8. Epistle, Who become Masters of the unlearned, before
they were scholars of the learned. And S. Bern. Nimium multi imperitorum
magistri fiunt, priu^ quam fuerint doctorum discipuli. In Cant. Canales multos
hodie habemus in Ecclesia, conchas paucas; tantae charitatis sunt, per qu^
nobis fluenta coelestia dimanant, ut prius effunde^ quam infundi velint, loqui
quam audire parati^ res, prompti docere quod nunquam didicerunt.
We have many cocks in the Church, but few cesterns; they who derive to us the
heavenly waters, are so charitable, that they pour out rather then stay to
have any thing poured into them; more ready to speak then to hear; and apt to
teach that they never learned. Though they can very phrases, and out of broken
notes hold out a discourse upon some passages of Scripture for an hour or
more; yet they are no ways furnished with gifts requisite to a faithful
Shepherd, and able Minister of the Gospel: for they understand not the
Scripture in the Original Languages, they cannot expound without Grammar, nor
persuade without Rhetoric, nor divide without Logic, nor sound the depth of
any Controversy without Philosophy, and School Divinity. Neither may they
fly to immediate Inspirations of the holy Ghost, and the miraculous gifts of
Tongues, and Prophecy, for such have ceased in the Church for these many
hundred years.

The Anabaptists Objections answered.
You have heard how strong our Arguments are for the truth: now ye shall hear
in brief how weak the Adversaries Objections are against it.

First, Obj. 1.
they allege out of Joel 2. 28. I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh, and
your sons and daughters shall prophecy, your young men shall see visions,
and your old men shall dream dreams: That though under the Law the people
were ordinarily to hear the interpretation of the Law of God from the Priests;
yet that under the Gospel God so plentifully powers his Spirit upon all
congregations, that all Believers are enabled to Prophecy, and to speak to
instruction, to edification and comfort.

But we answer, Sol. 1.
That the Prophet there speaks not of any ghostly power to open the Kingdom
of Heaven, and remit and retain sins given by Christ to his Apostles and their
successors, but of an extraordinary measure of enlightening graces, as also of
extraordinary gifts of Tongues and Miracles, as the Apostle Saint Peter
himself expounds the Text, Act. 2. 15, 16, 17.

to whom more is given, more shall be required. This Text therefore proves not
that all Sheep should be Pastors, and all Scholars, Teachers; but that both
Teachers and Disciples should have a greater measure of knowledge then before
they had under the Law.

Secondly, Obj. 2.
they allege out of Colos. 3. 16. and the 1 Pet. 4. 10. that all Christians
ought to communicate their knowledge and other gifts of the Spirit one to
another, and thereby to teach and instruct, and edify one another. Therefore
all Lay persons who have the gift of Supplication and Interpretation of
Scripture, ought to make use of them for the benefit of others, as the
Ministers of the Gospel do.

But we answer, Sol. 1.
that as the clouds when they are full, drop, and the ears shed, and the
fountains flow; so all who abound in knowledge, ought in such way as they are
able, according to their calling, derive it to others: but hence it will not
follow, that all men have ghostly power to dispense the mysteries of ^alvation,
and administer the Sacraments, and remit and retain sins, which peculiarly
appertain to the Pastoral calling.

There is a double teaching and admonishing, Public and Private; Admonishing
one another in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in
your hearts to the Lord.

Thirdly, Obj. 3.
they allege, that Eldad, and Medad, Numb. 11. 27. and Saul, 1 Samuel 10. 11.
and Philips daughters, Act. 21. 9. prophesied, that the Prophet Amos was a
Herds-man, Peter, and other of the twelve, Fishermen, and S. Paul a Tent-maker:
Why then may not Tradesmen, and the like, if God bestows gifts upon them,
preach the Word, and administer the Sacraments?

But we answer, Sol. 1.
that extraordinary instances ought not to be taken for presidents, or drawn
into ordinary practice; else false Prophets might now expect to be admonished
of their errors by brute beasts, because once God opened the mouth of the
Ass, and by it reproved the madness of the Prophet Balaam; and all Soldiers
that fight the Lords battle, blow rams horns in stead of trumpets, because
once with them the walls of Jericho were blown down; or arm themselves with
lamps and broken pitchers, because Gideons soldiers with such weapons
discomfited and routed the Midianites.

All these had a calling from God, and proved this their calling by miraculous
cures, or the like. Let our new Enthusiasts and Brownists prove their
extraordinary calling in like manner, and we will not deny them the exercise of
the Ministerial function.

hoc nomine, because they have been before of other professions, or trades,
(though it were to be wished that there were no necessity of admitting such
into the Ministry, whose education or former course of life has not been
corresponding to so holy a Calling) but that we blame them for, is, that they
take upon them the honor and office of the Priesthood, not being called
thereunto, as was Aaron; that they despise the Churches Ordination, by
Imposition of hands; that they handle the holy Scripture and Sacraments with
black, foul, and unwashed hands; that they presume that they have those gifts
and graces of the Spirit, which indeed they have not; that they usurp upon the
place and function of the Ministers of the Gospel, and too much undervalue the
cure of souls, which as Saint Gregory rightly defines it, is Ars artium, the
Art of all arts; And S. Paul, by the question he propounds, resolves as
much, saying, ^ ^reg. de cura ^astorali, l. 1. 1. Ab imperi^s pastorale
agisterium ^ta temeritate ^scipitur, ^ando ars ar^^um est regi^en animarum. 2
Cor. 2 16.
Who is sufficient for these things? But now, as the practice is, and the
common estimation of the vulgar, we may cross S. Paul's question, with a
contrary Interrogatorie, Who is not sufficient for these things? since
Coach-men, Weavers, Felt-makers, and other base Mechanics, are now (by some)
thought able Ministers, and profound Doctors of the Church, and Exercise, as
they term it, not only in private Conventicles, but also per famam and
populum in great Churches, and public Assemblies, to the great dishonor of
God, profanation of his Ordinances, and scandal of the Reformed Churches.

ARTIC. 5.
Concerning taking an oath, especially ex officio.
ANABAPTIST.
NO Christian may lawfully take an Oath, Pontan. Catal Inter errores Politicos
Anabaptistarum recenset hos duos, non licere exercere judicia vel in f^ro
contendere, non licitum esse dare juramentum. Sleid. com. l. 10. dicunt non
licere Christianis in foro contendere, non jusj urandum dicere.
no not though it be required by a Magistrate, especially such an Oath, whereby
they may hazard their life, liberty, or estate.

THE REFUTATION.
Though this assertion of the Anabaptists as they maintain it, has a gloss
and varnish put upon it of piety, prudence and justice; of piety, in preventing
all occasion both of false and vain oaths; of prudence, in not insnaring our
selves; of justice, in not concurring actively to our own prejudice or wrong:
yet upon due examination it will appear to be repugnant to all three; to piety,
by robbing God of a part of his substantial worship, to wit, a holy kind of
invocation; to prudence, by unfurnishing our selves sometimes of our best
defense, which is to clear our innocence by oath; to justice, by depriving all
Courts of justice of this sovereign evidence of truth, and all humane society
both of the surest tie of fidelity, and the readiest means to end all strife
and controversy. For the farther manifestation whereof I am to clear three
points, 1. That oaths may lawfully be taken by Christians, 2. That some oaths
may be lawfully exacted of them, and imposed upon them. 3. That oaths may be
lawfully urged and exacted not only in civil, but in criminal causes, such as
are commonly termed oaths ex officio, when a man is required to answer upon
oath concerning some crime or fault objected to him, or articled against him.
Some deny it to be lawful to take any oath, others allow of oaths freely
taken, but not imposed: a third sort dislike not all oaths imposed, but only
except against oaths ex officio. These three questions hang as it were upon
one string. For if no oath may be lawfully taken, certainly none may be
lawfully imposed, and if oaths may not be imposed, least of all the oath ex
officio, whereby we hazard and endanger our lives, liberties, limbs or estate
if we confess, but our souls if we deny upon oath, what is truly laid to our
charge. Again on the contrary, if the oath ex officio in some cases may be
lawfully imposed, then other oaths may be imposed with much less difficulty;
and if oaths may be lawfully imposed, certainly they may be lawfully taken.
Yet must these questions of necessity be handled apart, for the satisfaction of
scrupulous consciences, who first must be persuaded of the lawfulness of
taking an oath in general, before they will suffer an oath to be imposed upon
them: and secondly, that the Magistrate has a lawful power to exact oaths,
before they will take such and such a kind of oath required of them.

To lay the foundation therefore firm, before we build any thing thereupon.
First I prove the lawfulness of taking oaths, the conditions prescribed by
the prophet being observed, ^er. 4. 2.
namely that we swear in judgment, righteousness and truth: in truth, not
falsely; in judgment, not rashly; in righteousness, not wickedly, to the
prejudice of equity, or breach of Christian charity.

ARGUMENT I.
Whatsoever God commands is lawful, for Gods command is the rule of good,
his command makes that good which otherwise were evil, as Abraham's offer to
kill his son, and the Jews robbing the Egyptians of jewels of gold, and
silver: and in like manner his prohibition makes that evil, which otherwise in
it self were good, as working in a man's calling on the Sabbath, the sparing
the fattest of the cattle for sacrifice by Saul; If every sin be a
transgression of the law: it cannot be sin to fulfill it.

But God commands taking of oaths, as part of his worship, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Thou
shall fear the Lord thy God and serve him, and swear by his name. Deuteronomy. 10.
20. To the Lord thou shall cleave, and swear by his name, he is thy praise,
and he is thy God. And Ier. 4. 2. Thou shall swear, The Lord lives, in truth,
judgment, and justice. And to such as swear in such a holy and religious
manner God promises a blessing both outward, and inward; outward, Ier. 12. 16.
If they will diligently learn the ways of my people to swear by my name,
then shall they be built in the midst of my people; inward, Psalm. 63. 11. The
King shall rejoice in God, and every one that swears by him, shall rejoice or
glory in him.

Ergo, to swear is lawful for Christians,

ANABAP. ANSWER.
It was lawful to swear when God commanded it under the law, but it is not
now lawful for Christians, since Christ has forbidden it in the Gospel.

REPLY.
1. The same God is Lawgiver both to the Jews, and Christians, and the same
truth shines in the law, and in the Gospel, only with this difference: in the
law it shined through a tiffany or veil of rites, and ceremonies: but in the
Gospel as it were with open face. The veil is now taken away, whereof
religious swearing by the name of God was no part. For an oath contains not a
resemblance of Christ, but a worship of God. It is no type or sign of grace,
but seal of truth, the sense whereof is mere moral, the law of it natural,
the use perpetual, the worship performed in it to God is essential. When we
call God to witness a hidden truth, in the sincerity of our intentions, we
agnize his Sovereign greatness. For every oath is by a greater, Heb. 6. 16.
we profess his all-seeing wisdom, we invocate his revenging justice, which
are not rituall, but substantial parts of worship. In which regard in the
texts of the Prophet Jeremy above alleged, swearing is joined with the fear
of God, and cleaving to him; both duties of the first table, required by the
eternal and moral law of God.

2. As we have warrant for swearing in the old Testament, so also in the new;
for Christ himself was made our Priest by oath. Heb. 7. 21. Those Priests were
made without an oath, but this with an oath, by him that said unto him, The
Lord swear and will not repent, thou art a Priest etc. By so much was Jesus
made a surety of a better Testament. God his using an oath for confirmation of
Christ his Priesthood warranteth the custom of giving, and taking an oath at
the Inauguration of Emperors, Coronation of Kings, Consecration of Bishops,
Ordination of Ministers, and generally the admission of any person of quality
into any place of trust, or command, or weighty charge, in Church or
Commonwealth. God himself using this kind of confirmation, confirms this
kind and use of an oath. Neither are promissary oaths only approved by the
Gospel, to bind our faith, and assure loyalty and fidelity, but also
assertory, to clear doubtful truth, and end litigious suites; Heb. 6. 16. For
men verily swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is to them an
end of all strife, even Christ himself who is AMEN, the faithful witness,
and in whom all the promises of God are yea and AMEN, often corroborateth his
divine Essays and heavenly promises, with that sacred ingemination AMEN, AMEN;
which is virtually, if not formally, an oath according to the strict definition
of an oath, ^ic. ter. offic.
which is, affirmatio religiosa, or as the Schools define it more fully,
affirmatio vel negatio interposita religione, a religious asseveration, or the
affirming and denying any thing with a divine attestation.

Matthew forbids not all kind of swearing, but the ordinary and accustomary
swearing then in use among the Jews, and allowed by the Scribes and Pharisees,
who erroneously conceived, that swearing by heaven and earth, or Jerusalem, or
any creature, was no taking Gods name in vain, because in such oaths Gods name
was not used. This practice of theirs our Savior condemns, and refutes their
error, Mat. 5. 34. Swear not at all, neither by the heaven, for it is Gods
Throne, nor by the earth, for it is his Footstool, nor by Jerusalem, for it is
the City of the great King, etc. But of this more in the solution of the
adversaries objections.

ARGUMENT II.
That which has been practiced by God himself, the elect Angels and Saints
speaking by divine inspiration, cannot be sinful or unlawful; else we should
make God himself the Author of sin, and lay impiety or iniquity to the
charge of holiness and justice it self.

But the Scripture brings in, first, God swearing, Genesis 50. 24. Exodus 13. 5.
11. Exodus 33. 1. Numb. 14. 16. 23. 30. Number. 32. 10. 11. Deuteronomy. 1. 8. and 8. 35.
Ios. 5. 6. Psalm. 95. 11. and 110. 4. Heb. 6. 17. and 7. 21. 22. Secondly,
Angels, Dan. 12. 7. I heard the man clothed in linen, when he held up his
right hand and his left to heaven, and swear by him that lives. Rev. 10. 5. 6.
And the Angel which I saw stand upon the Sea, and upon the earth, lifted up
his hand to heaven, and swear by him that lives for ever, that there should be
time no longer. Thirdly the Saints Abraham, Genesis 21. 24. Jacob. 31. 53. Joseph,
Genesis 47. 35. Moses. Ios. 14. 9. David. 1. Sam. 20. 3. and 24. 22. Jonathan, 1.
Sam. 20. 16. Eliah, 1. Kings 17. 1. Gedallah, 2. Kings 25. 24. Asa. 2. Chron.
15. 14. Obadiaah, 1. Kings 18. 10. Elisha. 2. Kings 2. 6. Ergo, swearing is not
unlawful.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
God gives the law to us not to himself, and for the examples alleged out
of the old Testament, they are no good Precedents for us to follow, because the
people of God were not forbidden to swear by God in the law, but we are by
Christ in the Gospel.

REPLY.
Though God be under no law, yet he is a law to himself, his He is all light,
and there is no darkness; all truth, and there is no falsehood; all justice,
and there is no iniquity in him.

Neither is it true that the Saints under the Gospel lie under a greater
restraint in respect of oaths, then those under the law: for as Romans 1. 9. God
is my witness whom I serve with my spirit in the Gospel of his Son, that
without ceasing I make mention always of you in my prayers, Romans 9. 1. I say
the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience also bearing witness in the Holy
Ghost, that I have great heaviness and continual sorrow in my heart, 2. Cor.
1. 23. I call God for a Record upon my soul, that to spare you I came not as
yet to Corinth, Gal. 1. 20. Now the things which I write unto you, behold,
before God I lie not. Phil. 1. 8. For God is my Record, how greatly I long
after you all in the bowels of Jesus Christ, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 10. Ye are
witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justly, and unblameably we behaved our
selves among you that believed.

ARGUMENT III.
No part of Gods true and substantial worship can be sinful; else virtue
should be vice, and godliness it self wickedness, light should be
darkness, and good, evil. But swearing with such cautions and provisoes as
are set down by the Prophet Jeremy, is a part of Gods true and substantial
worship, for it is a religious invocation of his name, with an acknowledgement
of his omniscient wisdom, and omnipotent justice: omniscient wisdom, whereby he
knows all hidden things, and the very thoughts and intentions of the heart of
man; and omnipotent justice, whereby he is able and will punish those sins,
which come not within the walk of man's justice.

Ergo, swearing after a religious manner cannot be sinful.

ARGUMENT IV.
Whatsoever is necessary for the detecting and punishing of wickedness and
vice, and the acquitting of innocence, and preservation of all humane
commerce, and society, cannot be sinful and unlawful. For where God
appoints the ends, he appoints also the means; and as the powers that are,
are ordained by God, so the estates that are to continue among men, are
established by him.

But the giving and taking of oaths, is necessary for all these ends, as the
experience of all Societies demonstrate, and the practice of all Courts both
Ecclesiastical and civil, and the custom of all nations, wherein there is
any use at all of distributive or commutative justice.

Ergo, taking and giving oaths cannot be unlawful.

To these two latter arguments, because the Anabaptists have shaped as yet no
answers, I forbear to add any thing for the confirmation or illustration of
them, and now I come to refell their objections, and break in pieces those
bulrushes, wherewith they fight against the lawful use of oaths, as well
public as private.

If all oaths are forbidden simply, Obj. 1.
then no Salves, or Provisoes, or limitations above mentioned will help the
matter.

But all oaths are forbidden simply, Mat. 5. 34. But I say unto you swear not
at all, and James 5. 12. But above all things my brethren swear not.

Ergo, no religious Christian must or may swear upon any terms. To oppose as
it were the prohibition of the Son to the command of the Father, Sol. 1.
and to affirm that, what the Father commands in the Law, the Son
forbids in the Gospel, is to blaspheme with Marcion, and make the precepts
of the holy Ghost to clash one against another. I answer therefore as before,
that our Savior forbids not all kind of oaths, or manner of swearing, but
such as was then in use, and allowed by the Scribes and Pharisees, who fondly
and absurdly conceived, that to swear by heaven or by earth, or any other
creature was no breach of the third Commandment, Calv. instruct. adv. Anabap.
Populus male instructus a suis doctoribus put abat non jurari cum obliquae
sumebatur nomen Dei. Comment. in Matthew. non prohibet, ae juremus, sed ne
ju^emus per creaturas.
because in such oaths they took not Gods name in vain; and this is Saint
Ieromes interpretation: Christ, says he, forbids us not simply to swear by
the creatures, viz. either by the heaven, and earth, as the Scribes and
Pharisees used to swear, nor by the light, as the Manichees, nor by the Stars,
as Jupiter in the poet, per sidera juro, nor by the life of their Princes, as
the Egyptians and Romans, per genium Caesaris, or, per patrios cineres, by
their parents ashes, as most of the heathen. For since swearing is a part of
divine worship, to swear by any creature is to ascribe a deity unto it, and to
commit idolatry. And if the original be read without a comma or colon thus,
swear not at all neither by heaven, etc. then it is evident that Christ in
these words forbids not the act of swearing, but the unlawful form. But
because in some ancient copies there is a colon after the prohibition Swear
not at all: I answer,

Secondly, that Christ here forbids all Christians to swear upon any slight,
or trifling occasion, or in their ordinary communication, but says he, let
your yea, be yea, and nay, nay; that is, affirm a truth, and deny a falsehood
simply and barely without making the holy and reverend name of God accessory to
your vain and trivial discourses; No grave or sageperson would endure to be
brought in for a witness in every petty matter of small or no consequence, to
which yet most men tremble not to call the Sovereign Majesty of heaven and
earth to testify. An oath, says Aristotle, is (...), a thing most precious
and venerable, not unfitly compared by Saint Augustine, to a dangerous
medicine, never to be applied but in a desperate disease: then and then only an
oath is warrantable, when nothing but an oath can be availeable.

Christ, says Peter Martyr loc. com. clas. 2 c. 2. Legem a nobis exigit, u^
ita fideliter and ex charitate si mul vivamus, quo nobis non opus sit
juramento. August. Sermon. 28. de verb. Apost. Dominus and Ia^ cobus ideo pr^
hibu^runt jus^ jurandum, no ut illud prorsi e rebus humanis tollerent, sed quia
cav remus a perj^ rio non facil^ jurando.
Peter Martyr, requires that all Christians so carry themselves, that there
need to be no oath among them. Saint Augustine further adds, that to prevent
the danger of perjury, Christ here forbids all customary swearing, because
perjury is a precipice and breakneck of the soul, Christ forbids us as it were
to come near the edge of the hill, and not at all to venture upon an oath
unless we be drawn thereunto, and lawfully required by a Magistrate or some
other, in a case of great importance.

Secondly, Obj. 2.
the Anabaptists dispute thus, Whatsoever comes of evil is sinful, but all
oaths come from evil. (For Christ himself Mat. 5. 37. Says, Let your
communication be yea, yea, nay, nay: for whatsoever is more then these comes
of evil) Ergo, all oaths are sinful.

But we answer, Sol. 1.
First, that the Proposition is not current. All that comes from evil, or is
occasioned by evil, is not sinful. For, Ex malis moribus bonae nascuntur
leges. The best laws were enacted upon ill occasions, and very corrupt manners
of men: apparel at the first came from evil, viz. shame for sin, and singular
Antidotes, and remedies, were found by occasion of venomous humors, and
maladies of the body: yet are they good and wholesome: so, though giving and
taking oaths came at the first from evil, namely the want of charity, or
fidelity in men, yet it does not follow that oaths are evil or sinful in
themselves.

i.) the Devil, or from an ill habit, or a bad conscience.

The Anabaptists argue thus, Obj. 3.
Those things that are future, are not in our power, therefore in swearing to
do such or such things, to perform such or such Covenants, is to expose our
selves to the danger of Perjury.

But we answer.

Si Deus voluerit, as far as God shall enable us, or So help me God, or God
being my helper.



If the heathen have been more careful to refrain the violation of the name
of God by frequent and usual swearing then we, Obj. 4.
they shall rise up in judgment against Christians, and condemn them at the
last day: for among them the Priests seldom or never swear, the Essens
esteemed no better of swearing then of perjury, if a man among them were put to
his oath, they accounted him a confessed liar, and such an one who had lost his
reputation among honest men. Plutarch in his Roman Problemes yields a reason
why the Priest of Jupiter might never swear, because they held it a great
derogation to that venerable opinion all ought to have of him. Pythagoras was
so strict in this point, Curtius l. 7. Grecorum cautio est acta consignare, and
Deos invocare, nos religionem inipsa fide novimu^ qui non reverentur homines,
fallent Deos. Cic. pro Ros^. Comaedo. Sol. 1.
that when he might have avoided a mulct of three talents if he would have
sworn, he chose rather to endure the penalty, then he would take an oath in
defense of the truth. The Scythians refused to take an oath enjoined them by
Alexander, and scoffed at the scrupulous caution of the Grecians, who would
pass no act without signing it, and swearing to it; Scythae colendo fidem
jurant, our Scythians faith is our band, and our promise our oath. Those who
blush not to break their faith with men, will make no scruple of conscience to
forswear themselves by their Gods: An honest man's word is as good as his oath,
and a profane persons oath is no more to be regarded then his word.

All these examples of the heathen may be alleged to good purpose, to shame
and confound those Christians in name, who rap out oaths by no allowance, who
turn Christ's meritorious sufferings in all his parts into blasphemies, and
wound his very wounds. Assuredly if men shall give account at the day of
judgment of every idle word, much more of execrable oaths: but it will not
follow, we may not swear lightly or rashly to the great dishonor of God, and
scandal of religion; and therefore we may not honor God by an oath, by
calling him to witness in matters of greatest moment, whereby we agnize his
sovereign Majesty, we profess his all-seeing wisdom, we invocate his sin
revenging justice, against all those who dare put his holy and dreadful name,
to that which their conscience tells them is a falsehood.

Whereas it is said that an honest man will have as well a care of his Martyr.
loc. com. class. 2. c. 7. Cum in S^nai darentur tabulae, statim ut lata lex est
de perjurio totus orbis est concussus. Jer. 4. 2.
and although many dishonest men will falsify their word for their advantage,
yet they will not so easily be brought to forswear themselves, in regard of
the severe penalty of the law; and the infamy and horror of the sin of
perjury: whereof the Hebrews write, that at the giving of the tables in Mount
Sinai, when the law was proclaimed against perjury, heaven and earth shook as
it were trembling at so horrid a crime. The issue and effect of all is this, as
God swears by himself for our comfort, so we may swear by him, for his glory:
nay the Prophet goes farther, we ought, and it is our duty to take an oath in
truth, by the truth, and for the truth; in truth, that is, in a true and just
cause; by the truth, that is, by God, who is the truth; and for the truth, that
is, for the manifestation and confirmation of truth.

The second difficulty concerning oaths, is, whether they may be imposed. I
answer briefly, they may, both by supreme and inferior Magistrates, deriving
their authority from him; this I prove, First, by clear testimony of
Scripture: Secondly, by the examples of holy and religious men, who have both
administered, and taken such oaths: Thirdly, by evidence of reason.

ARGUMENT I.
In the charge that Ioshuah gave to the Elders, Jos. 23. 7. 8.
Heads, Judges, and other officers of Israel; among other things, there is this
remarkable passage: Ye shall not make mention of the names of other Gods, nor
cause to swear by them; neither serve them nor bow your selves unto them: but
cleave to the Lord your God as you have done this day, whence I thus frame my
argument.

What the Rulers of Israel were forbidden to do to other Gods, this passage
shows, that they may and ought to do to the true God.

But the Rulers of Israel are forbidden to make mention of, or cause any to
swear by the Gods of the heathen.

Ergo, they may, and ought to make mention of the name of the true God, and
require, and cause men to swear by him; when an oath shall be required of them.

ARGUMENT II.
What the Saints of God are recorded to have done, and they are no where
reproved for the doing thereof, in holy Scripture, we may do; for all those
things were written for our example, 1. Cor. 10. 6. But the Saints of God are
recorded in holy Scripture, to have exacted, and taken oaths imposed: for
Abraham, Genesis 24. 23. makes his servant swear by the Lord God of heaven, that
he should not take a wife to his son of the daughters of the Canaanites:
David being urged by Saul, swear, 1. Sam. 24. 21. 22. that he would not cut off
Saul's seed after him. Ezra made the chief Priests, and all Israel, to swear
that they would put away their strange wives, according to the commandment of
God, Ezrah 10. 5. Nehemiah 5. 12. called the Priests and took an oath of them,
that they should do according to their promise, that they should restore unto
their brethren their lands, their vin^-yards, their olive-yards, their houses,
and also the hundred part of their money, Harm. confess. sec. 19. nempe
Helvetica. c. 30. Damnamus Anab aptistas, qui negant Magistrate ui juramenta
prestanda esse. Augusta. ^ confess. art. 16. Christianis licet exercere judicia
lege contrahere, tenere proprium jusjurandum postulantibus; Magistratibus dare.
Etinfra, Damnant Anabaptistas, qui interdicunt haec civilio officia Christianis.
and of the corn, wine, and oil; they exacted of them.

Ergo, Christians may lawfully both impose and take oaths.

ARGUMENT III.
All Christian Magistrates may command those who are subject to their
authority, such things as are lawful and necessary for the discharge of their
office, and the preservation of humane society.

But oaths are things lawful, as is proved in the former question; and they
are necessary for the execution of the Magistrates office, and the preservation
of humane society: For without such oaths the Commonwealth has no sure tie
upon public officers, and Ministers; nor Kings upon their subjects, nor Lords
upon their tenants: neither can men's titles be cleared in causes civil, nor
justice done in causes criminal; nor dangerous plots and conspiracies, be
discovered against the State.

Ergo, Christian Magistrates may command those that are under their authority,
to take oaths; and this is the constant judgment of the reformed Churches.

But they object, Obj. 1.
no man may be enforced to any act of Religion, for Tertullian says acutely
and truly, nec Religionis est Religionem cogere; It is against Religion, to
compel or enforce Religion. But the taking of an oath whereby we invocate God,
is an act of Religion: Therefore no man may or ought to be enforced to take an
oath.

There are two sorts of acts of Religion, Sol.
inward and outward; First inward, as to adhere to God; to love him, to believe
in him, and put our confidence, and place our happiness chiefly in him: these,
and such like acts of Religion cannot be enforced. Secondly outward, as coming
to Church, receiving the Sacrament, and making confession of our faith; 2 Chronicles. 24. 23.
fasting and prayer: these latter may be enforced, as we see by the example of
Josiah, who compelled all Israel to serve the Lord, and by the speech of the
King in the Parable, Luke 14. 23
who made a great supper, and bade many guests, and when they had made their
several excuses, said to his servant, Go to the high ways and hedges, and
compel them to come in, that my house may be full. Among these latter acts of
Religion is the taking of an oath, which though in all leagues, and covenants,
and holy vows, it ought to be free; yet in diverse cases for the manifestation
of truth in legal proceedings, and setting a period to otherwise endless
suits, may lawfully be exacted and imposed.

No Christian Magistrate, Obj. 2.
or any other, may incroach upon the Sovereign prerogative of Almighty God.
But it is the Sovereign prerogative of Almighty God, to bind the consciences
of men, therefore no Magistrate, or any other, may impose an oath: whereby the
consciences of men are tied and bound.

As it is the prerogative of God to search the heart, Sol. 1.
so also to bind the conscience immediately, and directly: the laws,
ordinances, or commands of men, may work upon the outward man, but they cannot
engage the conscience directly and immediately, or by themselves; but so far
only as they may be included in the general command of God, which is to obey
those that are set over us in such things, as are not repugnant to his will.
Whence it is, that the Apostle pressing the doctrine of obedience to higher
powers, says, Romans 13. 5. that we must needs be subject, not only for wrath,
but for conscience sake.

Ier. 4. 2. and so the Magistrates command has strength and power, to tie the
conscience from Gods command.

None ought to be put to their oath who are like to forswear themselves, for
this both the Civil and Common law forbids, Obj. 3.
because it is a kind of thrusting men down a steep hill, to the ruin of
their souls by perjury. But such is the condition of the greater sort of men,
that it is very likely, for hope of reward, or to save their lives, limbs,
liberty, or estate; they will streigne a vein in their heart, and take a false
oath: therefore men ought not to be put to their oaths.

If a man be defamed for a profane person, Sol. 1.
or common swearer, and much more if he have been convicted of perjury, he
ought not to be put to his oath; lest where before he dashed, he may the second
time make shipwreck of his faith, and a good conscience. But the rule of the
law is, Supponitur esse bonus, qui non probatur esse malus; He is suppased to
be an honest man, against whom there are no proofs, or strong presumptions,
that he is otherwise.

Though the Magistrate in some cases for the public good exact an

The third difficulty concerning oaths is, whether the oath ex officio, be
lawful; that is, whether a Magistrate Ecclesiastical or temporal, may
require and exact an oath of a man, which in duty he is bound to take, in a
case which concerns himself; and may tend to his own prejudice, and damage.
As in Ninus his victories, every former conquest, was gradus futurae victoriae,
a degree and step to a latter; so it falls out in the determination of the
difficulty concerning oaths: the resolution of the former question, is a step
and furtherance to the latter. For if oaths be lawful, the Magistrate may
enjoyne them by his authority; and if he may impose any oath, especially the
oath ex officio: without which, the ordinary proceedings, as well in
Ecclesiastical Courts as temporal, will be stopped; and all speedy course of
justice hindered: and although what has been formerly alleged in
justification of the imposition of oaths, might suffice to resolve the
consciences of men, not forestalled with prejudicated opinions: yet because
this kind of oath has been of late cried down with much vehemence, and
bitterness; for the satisfaction of scrupulous minds, I will endeavor to
bring more pregnant proofs, for the lawful and necessary use thereof, then I
have yet found in any, who have traveled most in this argument, especially to
bring water to their own Mills.

ARGUMENT I.
Every oath which may be taken in truth, judgment, and righteousness, is
lawful; such is the oath ex officio. Ergo, lawful.

The Proposition is the Prophet Ieremies, the assumption is thus proved,
according to each part of it. First it may be taken in truth, neither is it
required otherwise to be taken; the Tenor of it being, There are Articles in
Court against you, or questions to be demanded of you; you shall answer the
truth, and the whole truth, and nothing but the truth; so far as you know,
and by law you are bound, so help you God. Secondly, it may be taken in
judgment, for before we are required to give answer to any particular, the
Articles are distinctly read unto us, and we may deliberately and judicially
shape our answer thereunto at the present, if we perfectly remember every
circumstance, and find no scruple in the interrogatory: or we may crave farther
time to bethink our selves, to give a fuller answer. Thirdly, it may be taken
in righteousness: for if we be innocent by our oaths, we shall acquit our
selves, and if guilty, we shall give way to justice to proceed: and as it is a
righteous thing to acquit an innocent, Jos. 7. 19.
so also to detect a Malefactor, in which regard Iosuah persuades Achan to
glorify God by confession of his sin.

ARGUMENT II.
For what we have a President from the actions of our Savior, we may lawfully
do. For Saint Bernard says truly, every action of Christ serves for our
instruction.

But we have a President from Christ, for answering directly upon oath in a
case criminal; which proved also Capital. Matthew. 26. 63. 64. the high Priest
said unto him, I adjure thee by the living God, that thou tell us whether thou
be the Christ, the Son of God. Jesus said unto him, thou have said.
Nevertheless I say unto you, hereafter shall you see the Son of man sitting
at the right hand of power, and coming in the clouds of heaven; then the high
Priest rent his clothes, saying, he has spoken blasphemy.

Ergo, we may lawfully answer upon oath, in a cause criminal; concerning our
selves.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
That as it was no robbery in Christ to be equal with God, so it was no
blasphemy in him to say that he was the Son of God: and therefore this
answer of Christ was in no cause criminal; and consequently, his example no
President for us in the like.

REPLY.
It is true, that neither Christ himself, nor any of his holy Martyrs were
guilty of any such sin or crime before God, for which they notwithstanding
suffered such things: yet, because either by the Roman laws, or in the opinion
of the Magistrate, those things of which they were accused, were esteemed
crimes; and they punished as Malefactors: their examinations, and trials, are
truly said to be proceedings in criminal, yea and capital causes: and the
patient is as much prejudiced, and infinitely more wronged, if he suffer death,
or bonds, upon his confession of the fact: if it be no crime at all. Therefore
this example serves to that end, for which it is brought.

If it had been either unlawful for the high Priest to require Christ Pilate,
and him also, in other questions.

ARGUMENT III.
What was appointed by the law of God, cannot be in its own nature sinful; or
repugnant to the law of nature. For though some part of the law of God
delivered by Moses, do not now bind us to the performance thereof: yet we are
bound to believe that law was just, and holy, and good; and commanded nothing
in its own nature sinful, or repugnant to the law of nature, or right reason.

But answering upon oath in casues criminal, Exodus 22. 11. Number. 5. 19. 1 Kings
8. 31. Ezra 10. 5. 11
which might tend much to the prejudice and damage of the examined, was
appointed by the law of God.

Ergo, answering upon oath in causes criminal, is not sinful and repugnant to
the law of nature.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
Neither are the judicials of Moses now in force, neither was any oath ex
officio, administered to the Jews, like to ours.

REPLY.
This argument is not brought to prove the necessity of taking an oath now in
those very cases, as namely of jealousy, loan, and the marriage an oath in
causes criminal in general.

All these instances come home to the point in question, and the argument
holds strong a comparatus after this manner. No sufficient reason can be
alleged, why oaths may not be imposed and taken as well by Christians under
the Gospel, as by Jews under the Law in causes criminal, reflecting upon
themselves: but oaths were lawfully demanded and taken by the Jews in causes
criminal, therefore they may be so by Christians. That such oaths were by
Gods law enjoined to the Jews, appears first in case of Ioane or trust,
Exodus 22. 10, 11. If a man deliver to his neighbor an Ass, an Ox, or a
Sheep, or any beast to keep; and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, no man
seeing it: then shall an oath of the Lord be between them, both that he has
not put his hands to his neighbors goods; and the owner of it shall accept
thereof, and he shall not make it good: but if it be stolen from him, he shall
make restitution unto the owner thereof. In the case of jealousy, Numb. 5. 19.
And the Priests shall set the woman before the Lord, and uncover the woman's
head, and put the offering of memorial in her hands; which is the jealousy
offering: and the Priest shall have in his hand the bitter water, that causes
the curse; and the Priest shall charge her by an oath, and say to the woman, if
no man has lain with thee, and if thou have not gone aside to uncleanness
with another, instead of thy husband, be thou free from this bitter water,
which causes the curse, etc. In the case of trespass, 1. Kings 8. 31. If any
man trespass against his neighbor, and an oath be laid upon him, to cause him
to swear; and the oath come before thine Altar in this house: then hear thou
in heaven, and do, and judge thy servants, condemning the wicked, to bring his
way upon his head; and justifying the righteous, to give him according to his
righteousness. In case of prohibited marriages, Ezra 10. 5. 11. Then arose
Ezra, and made the chief Priests, the Levites, and all Israel to swear; that
they would put away their strange wives of the people of the land: and they
swear. And Ezra stood up, and said unto them, ye have transgressed, and have
taken strange wives, to increase the trespass of Israel. Now therefore make
confession unto the Lord God of your fathers, and do his pleasure; and
separate your selves from the people of the land, and from the strange wives.
It is true, these cases are not everyway parallel to ours, for our Priests have
no receipt at this day, to make the water of cursing; nor are we prohibited to
marry with forreyners, so we marry in the Lord: neither do we put men to
their oaths in actions of trespass, but if the party accused deny it, we
convince him by witnesses: yet this exception cutteth not asunder the sinews
of the former argument. For though the cases in particular be very different,
yet they agree in this general; that oaths have been lawfully urged and
exacted of men, touching matters dammageable, criminal and penal to
themselves: and if oaths may be lawfully imposed and taken in this kind, to
satisfy the humor of a jealous husband, or still the clamor of a private
person wronged, how much more is it equal and just, that this be done upon the
judges office, who is no way privately interessed, and for the satisfaction and
preservation of the Church or Commonwealth, to remove a common scandal and
offense by the parties clearing himself, or his condign punishment?

ARGUMENT IV.
What is just and equal and may be done without breach of Gods law in
Temporal Courts, cannot be unjust, nor derogatory to the divine law in
Spiritual.

But oaths ex officio though not known by that name, are usually taken and held
to be just and lawful in temporal Courts, namely, Leet-Courts, Sessions,
Assizes, Chancery, and Court of Request. For the Jury are upon oath to present
all annoyances, abuses, and transgression of penal Statutes, whereof
themselves may be, and often are guilty; and the Defendants in Court of Request
and Chancery, answer upon oath to bills put against them, the particulars
whereof often deeply concern them; and in case they give not a direct and full
answer, they proceed against them, pro confessis: and if they answer directly
and fully, in case they are faulty, either by denying they forswear
themselves, or by confessing the matter of fact, they consequently condemn
themselves: nay which is very considerable, they who are the greatest oppugners
of our Ecclesiastical Courts, and greatest sticklers for the discipline of
Geneva, are forced to make use of the oath ex officio themselves. For Comperell
was appointed by the consistory of Elders of Geneva to be examined upon oath
concerning three interrogatories about dancing, whereof two concerned what he
had in his very purpose and intention of mind; and this their practice was
agreeable to the decree of a National Synod held in France, in the year 1565.
whereby by it is resolved that the faithful may be constrained by the
Consistory to tell the truth, so far forth as it derogateth nothing from the
authority of the Magistrate. This constraint could not be by fine, or
imprisonment, or torturing the body: for in so doing, then they should trench
upon the Civil Magistrates right, but by imposing of an oath, which is a kind
of torturing of the conscience.

Ergo, oaths ex officio are just and lawful in Spiritual Courts.

ARGUMENT V.
If the oath of purgation, whereby a man in a cause criminal is required to
take his corporal oath, that he is not guilty of such an offense, wherewith he
is charged, be lawful; the oath ex officio cannot be unlawful: for they are
either the same, or at least stand upon the same ground. But oaths of purgation
as they have been very ancient, so they have bin always held lawful, and in
many cases necessary.

Ergo, the oath ex officio is also lawful.

Now for an oath of purgation we find it as ancient as the Trojan wars,
^ictis Creten^^^, l. 2. de bello Trojan.
Agamemnon being suspected to be naught with Hippodamia, commanded an Host, or
Sacrifice to be brought, and drawing his sword, he divided it in two parts;
and passing between them with his bloody sword, swear that he had never
defiled Hippodamia by incontinence. In the eighth general Council, Action 5.
when Photius the heretic was demanded by the Council whether he would admit
of the Ordinances of the holy Fathers, and he answered not any thing thereunto;
the President of the Synod signified unto him, that by that his silence he
should not escape, but the rather be condemned; silence in such a case
evidently arguing guilt. In a Council held at Tribur a layman, Can. 21.
in case of vehement suspicion, is appointed to purge himself by his oath: and
a Priest to be interrogated by the consecration of the holy Sacrament; and
before this, Sixtus the third an ancient Bishop of Rome, Gra^. 12. q. 4. c.
mandastis. Greg. Ep. 23. ad lustin. and l. 2. Ep. 8.
upon the accusation of one Bassus, did willingly make his purgation upon oath;
and Gregory the great enjoined Leo, Memius, and Maximus, three Bishops; to
clear and purge themselves of several crimes by their oaths.

ANABAP: OBJECT.
But they object out of the law, Obj. 1.
Nemo tenetur seipsum accusare vel prodere, sive propriam turpitudinem
raevelare: No man is bound to accuse or detect himself, or lay open his own
shame: But by taking the oath ex officio, he binds himself, if he be a
Delinquent, to discover his own crimes; and so lay open his nakedness:
therefore no man is bound to take the oath ex officio.

No man is bound to go to the Magistrate, and indict himself, Sol.
and give the first notice of any crime he has committed: but the case is
altered, when upon a fame, or strong presumptions, he is legally called before
a Judge, and according to form of law, required upon oath to testify the
truth. For then, as says Aquinas, Non ipse se prodit, sed ab alio proditur,
dum ei necessitas respondendi imponitur, per oum cui obedire tenetur: He does
not detect himself, but is detected by another; when the Judge to whom he is
bound to answer directly, by interrogation upon oath extorts the truth from him.

Neither does the law, nor the Judge principally, 2.
nor in the first place intend by ministering such an oath to entangle, much
less condemn him out of his own mouth; but find out the truth and clear the
party thereby, if he be innocent; and in such case by refusing the oath, he
wrongs himself and his own cause.

We cannot follow a better President then our Savior, Obj. 2.
but he when he was examined of his Disciples and Doctrine, Io. 18. 19. would
give no direct answer, whereof the high Priest might have taken advantage; but
puts him off, v. 20, 21. to those that heard him, saying, I spoke openly to the
world, I ever taught in the Synagogue, and in the Temple, whither the Jews
always resort; and in secret have I said nothing; why ask thou me? ask
them that heard me. Therefore we ought not to confess ought against our selves
by oath, or otherwise: but put our adversaries to the proof.

In a case where other proof may be had, Sol. 1.
there is no necessity for a man to give advantage to his adversary by his own
confession: but in case there be no other evidence, and the lawful Magistrate
to whom we are bound to give a direct answer in obedience to his lawful
command, this example of our Savior does not warrant us to use any evasion or
tergiversation.

The example of our Savior was truly alleged above to the contrary, 2.
for though upon a bare interrogation of the high Priest, he did not discover
himself unto him, what he was: yet upon his adjuration, which was a requiring
to answer upon oath, he acknowledges himself to be Christ the Son of God.

Every oath ought to be for confirmation, Obj. 3.
to put an end to all strife, Heb. 6. 16. But this oath ex officio, is not
ministered to make an end of any Litigious suite, but rather to begin it, and
set it on foot; for as soon as Articles are put in against a man, before any
pleading of the cause on either side, this oath is usually tendered.

There are two sorts of oaths, Sol. 1.
promissory of things to come, assertotory of things past. In promissory, there
is no respect at all had to compose any difference, or controversy, but to
assure loyalty or fidelity: in assertory oaths, one end is ending strifes, but
not the only end; neither does the Apostle imply, that every controversy may be
decided and ended by a single man's taking his oath. For this oath may be
suspected, and the contrary thereunto deposed by others; and sometimes evidence
of fact controls his oath: but the meaning is, that in controversies among men,
the oath of an honest man, is a great means to set a period to farther waging
of Law.



Quaestio Iuris; and the pleading it, and more maturely deciding it: and so
this oath tends to the sooner ending of strife.

Either the crimes objected against any man are manifest, Obj. 4.
or hidden: if they be open and manifest, there needs no oath ex officio to
discover them, but witnesses only are to be produced, which in such cases
cannot be wanting: and if they be hidden and secret, then the Apostles rule
takes place, 1. Cor. 4. 5. Therefore judge nothing before the time, until the
Lord come, who both will bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and
will make manifest the Counsels of the hearts; and then shall every man have
praise of God.

The Apostle speaks not in that place against any judicial proceedings, Sol.
1.
but against private, rash, and uncharitable judging of our brother, and taking
his words in the worst part, without any just ground; or censuring not so much
his outward actions or speeches, as inward intentions, known only go God. Such
perverse judging, our Savior condemns, Matthew. 7. 1. And this Apostle Romans 2.
1. Therefore thou art unexcusable O man, whosoever thou art that judge.

As in the sky sometimes there is clear light, and perfect day, sometimes
twilight, neither so light as day, nor so dark as night: so the actions of men,
for which they are questionable in Spiritual or Temporal Courts, are of three
sorts; some are altogether hidden, of which there can be brought no sure
proof, nor strong presumption; the judgment of these must be reserved to the
last day, when Christ shall reveal the secrets of all hearts: some are done as
it were in the face of the Sun, whereof there may be strong and evident
proofs brought; in such cases a Judge ought to proceed secundum allegata, and
probata; and not put the conscience of any man as it were upon the wrack, to
extort the truth from him by oath. Lastly, some are of a mixed nature, neither
fully open and manifest, nor altogether hidden, such whereof there are strong
presumptions, and a general fame, but no pregnant proof: in such cases the
oath ex officio is of use, whereby the truth may be more and more discovered,
and the party either cleared upon his denial, or convicted upon his
confession; or held pro confesso, by his evasions and tergiversations, and
refusing to be put to the test of his oath.

ARTIC. 6.
Concerning the office of the Civil Magistrate.
THere remain many other errors of the Anabaptists, some blasphemous, as the
denying the incarnation of Christ from the substance of the blessed Virgin;
some impure and lascivious, See a Book lately printed called Mons mortality.
as maintaining the plurality of wives: some drowzie and sottish, as the
casting of the soul into an Endymion sleep, until the day of judgment. But
because these absurd positions are not at this day generally owned by our
Anabaptists, the last error which I intend to encounter at this present is,
that pernicious assertion of theirs, concerning the exauctorating all Civil
Magistrates, whereby they dull the edge, or wring out of their hands the sword
of justice. Other of their errors fight against the Church, but this against
the State: others agaisnt piety, but this against Polity: Cic. l. 2. de not.
deorum.
yet as Velleius in Tully goes about, by reason, to prove that nothing is more
hurtful to man then the gift of reason; so this error against policy is most
politickly devised by them: for there being but two censures which any need to
fear, the Ecclesiastical and the Civil: and they regarding not the
Ecclesiastical, because they are out of the pale of the Church; if they could
keep themselves out of the reach and stroke of the Civil sword, all were
cock-sure with them; they might every where securely both vent their errors,
and practice their villainies. This is the true reason why they so vehemently
contend, that the coercive power of the Magistrate can no way consist with the
perfection of Christianity. Now although the Civil Magistrate be ordained of
God for the suppression of all vice and heresy: yet above all other, he ought
to have an eye to this; for this has a peculiar antipathy to Magistracy. The
Magistrate shall bear his sword in vain indeed, if he let other heresies
grow: but if this thrive in any Kingdom, State, or Commonwealth, he shall not
bear his sword at all. There is that contrariety and repugnancie between this
heresy and that calling, that if Magistracy do not speedily root out this
heresy, this heresy will extirpate all Magistracy; for thus much it
professes in formal terms.

ANABAPTIST.
No Christian may with a good conscience execute the office of a Civil
Magistrate.

REFUTATION.
Before I cut off this heresy against the material sword with the sword of
the spirit, which is the word of God: I will present to the Anabaptists a
glass wherein they may see their own faces, drawn to the life. Saint Peter, 1
Pet. 2. 10. Jude 8.
and Saint Jude, speaking against false Prophets in their days, so describe
them that all men may see who were the Grandfathers of these Heretics, who
trouble the Church at this day; They walk, says Saint Peter, after the flesh,
in the lust of uncleanness, and despise Government, and Dominion. Presumptuous
are they, selfe-willed, Calv. instruct. adv. Anabap. En Apostolorum verba, quae
tam proprie convenient Anabaptistis, ut n^ominatim de ipsis praedicta videantur.
they are not afraid to speak evil of dignities; whereas Angels which are
greater in power and might, bring not railing accusation against them before
the Lord; but these as natural brute beasts made to be taken and destroyed,
speak evil of the things they understand not: and shall utterly perish in
their own corruption. I entreat the Reader to take special notice of the
words of these two Apostles, which fall so pat upon our present Anabaptists; as
if the Apostles had particularly aimed at them. But to leave p^urtraying them,
and fall to refuting them.

ARGUMENT I.
Every office appointed by God for the administration of Justice, and
preservation of peace both in Church and Commonwealth, may with a good
conscience be executed by a Christian called thereunto.

But the office of Civil Magistrates, is an office appointed by God for the
administration of justice; and preservation of peace both in Church and
Commonwealth, Exodus 18. 20, 21. 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. 7. 11. Prove. 8. 15. Dan. 2. 21.

Ergo, the office of a Magistrate may with a good conscience be executed by a
Christian.

ANABAPTISTS ANSWER.
Although God appointed Magistrates in the time of the Law, and the Jews were
kept in order by them, yet it follows not, that Christians may exercise that
power one over another; or that they need any Civil Magistrate at all: for
they are called by Christ to a greater perfection; They must not resist evil,
but give place to wrath.

REPLY.
Acts 6. 1. 1 Cor. 3. 3, 4. and 6. 6, 7. Phil. 3. 18. James 4. 1. and daily
experience shows, that such disorders fall out among Christians, as did among
Jews; and that through the corruption of our nature, we are subject to those
passions: that unless the Civil Magistrate interpose his authority, there
will be no quiet, and peaceable living: and if the malady still remain, we
must use the remedy which God has appointed.

Matthew adds any thing to the law which the Prophet David, Psalm 19. 7.
affirms to be perfect, converting the soul; but only he vindicateth it from
the corrupt glosses, and false interpretations made thereof by the Scribes and
Pharisees. For even those duties of not resisting evil, nor revenging our
selves, and loving our enemies; in which the Anabaptists as well as Papists,
place Evangelicall perfection; were required by the law, Deuteronomy. 32. 35. To me
vengeance belongs, and recompense; I will repay, says the Lord: And, Prove.
25. 21. If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink.

ARGUMENT II.
A holy and divine office can be no derogation to Evangelicall perfection.

But such is the office of a Magistrate. For they are styled Gods, Psalm 82.
1. 6. God stands in the congregation of the mighty, he judges among the
Gods. I have said, ye are Gods, and, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. 7. You judge not for man,
but for the Lord, who is with you in the judgment; and in the execution of
their office, they are the Ministers of God both to reward them that do well,
and to execute wrath upon them that do evil. Romans 13. 14.

Ergo, the execution of the office of a Civil Magistrate, can be no derogation
to Christian perfection.

ARGUMENT III.
That dignity and power wherewith most holy and religious men, and highest in
favor, have been invested; may well stand with Evangelicall perfection.

But most holy and religious men have been invested with the dignity and power
of Magistracy, as namely Melchizedec a singular type of Christ, Joseph a man
inspired by God, and a revealer of his secrets, Job a perfect, and upright man,
Moses the servant of God, Ioshuah the Captain of the Lords Host, David a man
after Gods own heart, Daniel a man beloved of God, Iedidiah, Hezekiah, and
Josiah, after whom the Holy Ghost sends this testimony; Like unto them there
were no Kings before them, that turned to the Lord with all their heart, and
all their soul, and all their strength, according to all the law of Moses; nor
after them arose any like unto them, 2 Kings 23. 25.

Ergo the dignity and power of Magistracy may stand with Evangelicall
perfection.

ARGUMENT IV.
That which was foretold and promised for a singular blessing to the Christian
Church, cannot be repugnant to the rules of the Gospel.

But the government and protection of Kings, and their supporting and
maintaining the Gospel, is foretold and promised as a singular blessing to the
Christian Church. Psalm. 68. 29. Kings shall bring presents unto thee, Psalm.
72. 9, 10, 11. They that dwell in the wilderness shall bow before him, and his
enemies shall lick the dust, the kings of Tarshish, and of the Isles, shall
bring presents; The King of Sheba and Saba shall bring gifts, Esaias 49. 23.
Kings shall be thy nursing Fathers, and Queens shall be thy nursing Mothers;
they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the
dust of thy feet.

Ergo, the government and protection of Kings cannot be repugnant to the rule
of the Gospel.

ARGUMENT V.
The use of that authority must needs be a blessing to a land, the want
whereof is noted by the Holy Ghost, and threatened, as a great plague, and
fearful judgment upon a people.

But the want of a civil Magistrate to sway the sword of justice, is noted by
the holy Ghost, as a great plague, and fearful judgment, Iud. 17. 6. and 18.
1. and 21. 25. H^ 3. 4.

Ergo, the use of the Civil Magistrate is a blessing to a land.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The people of the Jews being stiff-necked and stubborn, needed to be
curbed and kept in by the power of the Civil Magistrate: but Christians, who
are meek Lambs, need not so.

REPLY.
1 What meek Lambs the Catul. haeret. Anabaptislae, quorum proximus superiore
tempore author fuit Thomas Monetarius seu Munzerus, commoverunt seditionem
rusticam, per Germaniam, Alsatiam, and Sweviam; ubi ad 150000. fuerunt
trucidati. Judges 17. 6. 18. 1. Judges 21. 25.
Anabaptists have been, it appears by Pontanus, who relates, that by
tumults raised by them in Germany, Holsatia, and Swethland, there were
slaughtered within a few years, no less then 150000.

2 It is true that the Jews were for the most part a stubborn and stiffnecked
people, and therefore are said by the Prophets to have sinews of iron; (and I
pray God diverse Christians at this day have not nerves in their neck of the
same metal) But yet the Holy Ghost in the places above quoted, ascribes not
the great disorders in those days to the perverse and froward disposition of
that people; but to the want of a Sovereign Magistrate: In those days there
was no King in Israel, but every one did that which was right in his own eyes:
which words are repeated verbatim, c. 21. 25. that we should take special
notice of them; and they imply, that whenever there falls an Interregnum,
this mischief will ensue thereupon: that every man will do that which is
right in his own eyes, and his lust shall be his law. Whence Instruct. adv.
Anab. Est bellum gerere cum Deo, delecore affice^e quod ipse honor avit, and
quod a Deo extollitur pedibus conculcare; neque vero breviore compendio mundi
ruinam moliri, and lat^ociniorum licentiam summam ubique introducere possent;
quam cum reipublicae administrationem ac gladii (...).
Calvin rightly inferres, that the Anabaptists could not take a more ready way
to ruin all Empires, and Kingdoms; and introduce all carnal liberty and
villainy, then by wresting the sword out of the Magistrates hand.

ARGUMENT VI.
Their authority is established by the Gospel, to whom all are bound to submit
and obey.

But all Christians are bound to obey the Civil Magistrate. Romans 13. 1. 4. 5.
Tit. 3. 1. 1. Pet. 2. 13, 14, 15.

Ergo, the authority of the Magistrate is established by the Gospel.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
The Magistrates that then were, were Infidels, and Heathen, to whom the
Christians could not with a good conscience obey, because they made many cruel
edicts against the Christian faith; the meaning therefore of the Apostle can be
no other, then that we should yield them passive obedience.

REPLY.
Saint Augustine rightly distinguishes between Dominum temporalem, Dominum
aeternum; the soldiers under Julian the Apostata, when the Emperor commanded
them to advance in Battle against the Persian, they executed his commands and
acquitted themselves valiantly against their enemy; but when he commanded them
to offer sacrifice to his Idols, they preferred their Eternal Lord, before
their Temporal; and absolutely refused to do it. In like manner, all good
Christians can put a difference between Civil and Religious commands, such
things as appertain to the government of the State, and such things as belong
to the immediate service of God. In the former, they yield their obedience even
to heathen Magistrates for God, in the latter they comply not with them,
because such their commands are against God.

Although it be true, that the greatest part of our Christian duty, Tit. 3. 1.
not only to be subject to Principalities and Powers, but to obey Magistrates,
and to be ready to every good work: namely, all such good works, as tend to
the Peace of the Commonwealth, and well managing the affairs of the State.

If evil Magistrates may not be resisted, much less good; if we

ARGUMENT VII.
Those for whom we are to offer up prayers and supplications in special, their
calling must needs be warrantable by, and agreeable to the Gospel.

But we are to offer prayers and supplications in special for Civil
Magistrates, 1 Timothy 2. 1. 2, 3, 4.

Ergo, their calling is warrantable by, and agreeable to the Gospel.

ANABAP. ANSWER.
We are to pray for their persons as men, but not for their functions as they
are Magistrates.

REPLY.
that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty;
which we cannot do, unless God bless their government over us.

Calvin rightly infers this to be the meaning of the Apostle, from the
reason he uses, verse. 4. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the
knowledge of the truth. By all men, al. opusc. 481.
says he, the Apostle cannot understand, ad unum omnes, nemine excluso, every
man in particular, none excepted: sed omnes vitae conditiones, and status, quia
status Principum rejectus a Deo, and maledictus videri poterat; eo quod omnes
Evangelium infesto animo persequerentur. Not all men universally, and every man
in particular; for then none should be damned: but all states and conditions of
men: and in that regard, he names expressly Kings, and Princes, because their
estate and condition might seem to be rejected of God, and cursed by him; by
reason that all Princes at that time were ill-affected to the Gospel, and
persecuted it to bands and death. Notwithstanding this mischief the Church
then received by Civil Magistrates, yet the Apostle teaches us, that it is
good and acceptable in the sight of God, to make supplications even for them,
because God excludes no calling or conditions of men from salvation.

ARGUMENT VIII.
What Kings are required to do under the Gospel, can be no diminution of
Evangelicall holiness, or perfection.

But Kings under the Gospel are commanded to employ their power to the
advancement of Christ's Kingdom, Psalm 2. 10, 11, 12.

Ergo, it can be no diminution of Evangelicall holiness or perfection, for
Kings to employ their regal power in the service of the Church.

ANABAPTISTS ANSWER.
King. David in the second Psalm exhorts Kings to embrace the Gespell, and
worship Christ, not to exercise their regal authority amongst Christians.

REPLY.
When Saint Paul commands that every man after his conversion to the
Christian faith to abide in the same calling whereunto they are called, 1 Cor.
7. 20.
certainly he excludes not the best and most eminent calling, which is that
of Sovereign Princes and Magistrates; and if they must not quit their calling,
undoubtedly they must employ their power to the best end; which is, the
advancing of Christ's Kingdom in theirs.

2 Saint Augustine by an acute distinction very well illustrateth the Text of
the Psalmist, Ad Bonif. Ep. 50. Aliter ser^^it Rex quia homo est, aliter, quia
etiam and Rex est: quia homo est, ei servit vivendo fideliter; quia vero etiam
Rex est, servit, leges justa praecip^entes, and contraria prohibentes,
conveniente vigore sanciendo. In hoc ergo serviunt Domino Reges, in quantum
sunt Reges, cum ea faciunt ad serviendum illi quae non possunt facere nisi
Reges.
Be wise O ye Kings, serve the Lord with fear; a King serves God two manner
of ways; as a man, by leading a godly life agreeable to the rules of the
Gospel; as a King, he serves God by enacting laws with convenient severity,
commanding just things, and prohibiting the contrary, so Hezekiah, and Josiah,
and the King of Ninive^, and Datius, and Nebuchadnezzar (he might have added)
and Constantine and Theodosius, and all religious Christian Kings, serve God;
for then properly Kings serve God as Kings, when they do those things in and
for the service of the Lord, which none can do but Kings.

ANABAP: OBJECT.
There is no Paradox so absurd, says the Orator, which meets not with some
Patron among the learned, and I may add farther, which has not some varnish
of reason, yea and gloss also of Scripture put upon it. For although as the
Poets feign that Atlas bears up the heavens, so the Civil Magistrates bear
up the pillars of the earth, and support the frame of all government: yet the
Anabaptists bid them Battle, and furnish themselves with weapons against
their calling out of Scripture. First they wrest to their wicked purpose the
words of our Savior, John 18. 36. My Kingdom is not of this world. Ergo, say
they, no Christian ought to reign as a King, or rule as a Governor in this
world. Obj. 1.


But we answer, that the inference is unsound, Sol. 1.
themselves being Judges; for as he here professes, that he had no Kingdom
here, so elsewere that he had no house, or possessions; The Foxes, says he,
have dens, and the Birds have nests, but the Son of man has not whereon to
lay his head: Yet the Anabaptists will not allow it for a good inference; Ergo,
no good Christian may hold house or lands. If then they will have Kings to quit
their Earthly Crowns, and Scepters, because our Savior had none such here,
let them give a good example, and first quit all their houses, goods, and
lands; and follow Christ naked.

The meaning of our Saviors words is, that though indeed he be a King, yet
his Kingdom is not a Temporal Kingdom, in which he swayeth a Temporal
sword, but a Spiritual Kingdom, whereby he rules the hearts of the
faithful: or that he is a King; and has both his Throne and his Guard, his
Throne of glory, and his Guard of Angels: but this his Kingdom is an heavenly,
not an earthly Kingdom. Notwithstanding, it will not hence follow, that
earthly Kings and Princes hold not their Crowns from him. For Solomon and
Saint John affirm the contrary, Solomon speaking in the person of Christ
says, Prove. 8. 15, 16. Apoc. 19. 16.
By me Kings reign; and Saint John says, He has a name written upon his
thigh, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: a Temporal Kingdom and a Spiritual
are diversa, not adversa; diverse and distinct, not adverse and contrary one to
the other: Christ in a different capacity has right to both; as God, he
administreth all Temporal Kingdoms by Kings and Princes appointed by him; and
his Spiritual Kingdom by Bishops, Pastors, and Ministers of the Gospel:
Howsoever, certain it is, that he warranteth and approves of the authority of
Secular Kings, and Magistrates; for he commands all men to pay unto Caesar
the things that are Caesar's; Matthew. 22. 21. Jo. 19. 11.
and himself paid tribute; and acknowledges Pilats power over him to be from
God.

Secondly, Obj. 2.
they strain the words of our Savior, Matthew. 20. 25. Luke 22. 25. The Kings
of the Gentiles execute Lordship over them, and they that are great, exercise
authority upon them; but it shall not be so with you: therefore say they, no
Christians may bear rule one over another.

To this objection the learned Divines, Sol. 1.
both ancient and later, shape a double answer, first, that Christ here
speaks not to all Christians, but only to his Apostles and their successors,
whose office he distinguishes from Temporal Rule and Dominion, You my
Apostles shall not by virtue of your calling challenge to your selves Regal
power, or Coactive and Temporal authority or jurisdiction, so Saint Bernard
glosseth upon the Text, If thou art an Apostle of Christ, thou must not Lord
it; if thou art a Lord, thou must not meddle with the Apostles function; thou
art forbid to exercise both: Aude ergo usurpare, aut Apostolatum, si Dominus
es; aut si Apostolicus es, Instruct. adv. Anabaptist. Non idem est Apostolarum,
and principum officium: na^^ in illa nulla Dominatio; Christus aut nihil aliud
quam alter^ ab altero discernere vol^
Dominatum. So Calvin: Christ's purpose here, was to distinguish between the
office of an Apostle, and a Prince; for this his speech was occasioned by a
strife that fell among the Apostles, which of them was the greatest in Christ's
Kingdom: to take away this strife, he admonishes them, that his Kingdom is
spiritual; and that it consists not in worldly Pomp, Greatness, or Dominion.

2. That in these words Christ forbids not simply all rule and Dominion, but
the ambitious affecting and tyrannical exercising it, and they prove this to
be the meaning. 1. From the adjunct Gentiles, he says not simply, Kings
exercise Lordship over them, but Kings of the Gentiles; but you shall not do
so, that is, you shall not rule one over another, after the manner of heathens.
2. From the preposition, (...), which is commonly taken in the worst sense, as
in Catachresis, Cataphryges, Catabaptista, so likewise (...) (the word used in
the original) signifies to abuse the Magistrates power, and to rule
tyrannically. 3. By the consequence, but he that is greatest among you, let him
be as the younger; and he that is chief, as he that does serve: which words
evidently imply an imp^rity among Christians, but such as may stand with
Christian humility, and mutual service one to another. 4. By the comparison,
verse 28. As you have me for an example, whom though you justly call Lord and
master, for so I am, yet I am among you as he that serves.

Thirdly, Obj. 3.
As before they wrested our Saviors speech; so now in a third place, they do
his practice; the same mind, say they, ought to be in all Christians as was in
Christ himself: but he refused a Kingdom, when it was offered him, John 6.
15. Therefore no Christians ought to accept of the office of a King, or civil
Magistrate.

The sinews of this argument, as the former, are weak, Sol.
for there were special reasons for which Christ refused to be made a King,
which concern not Christians: for first he was the Messiah, whose Kingdom
was not to be temporal, but spiritual, as you heard in the solution to the
first objection.

Secondly, The country of Judea was at this time reduced into the condition of
a province under the Roman Empire, neither had the people any power to choose
them a King: if then Christ had yielded to their motion, he should have been
the Author of a tumult and sedition in the State, and brought a great scandal
and oblequie upon the Gospel.

Thirdly, Christ when he came into the world, took upon him the form of a
servant, and the chief end of his coming was to bear our infirmities, and
carry our sorrows, to receive the chastisement of our peace, and to lay down
his life for our ransom: which ignominious death and sufferings would not well
consort with the Majesty of a pussiant temporal King. And how will it follow
that because by Christ's example, no Christian ought to suffer himself to be
made a King by a popular tumult, that therefore no Christian may accept of a
Crown in an elective Kingdom, if it be lawfully offered unto him, or in a
successive, if it be his right by descent?

Fourthly, Obj. 4.
They work upon Christ's refusal to interpose in a quarrel between two
brothers about their patrimony, that which Christ declined (say they) no
Christian ought to undertake: But Christ declined the office of a Judge, or
arbitratour in a litigious suit like to grow among brethren, Luke 12. 13, 14.
Therefore no Christian may take the like office upon him.

But shallow as they are, Sol.
they reach not the depth of our Saviors reason, why he refused to be umpire
or arbitratour in that controversy, belonging to the Law, concerning right of
inheritance; which was not because he simply disliked such an employment, as
inconsistent with Christian perfection, for among the eight beatitudes he
allows one to peace makers, Mat. 5. 9. and Saint Paul, who wrote by his
spirit, warranteth and commends this work of Christian charity, to compose
differences among brethren, and prevent law suits, 1. Cor. 6. 2. Dare any of
you having a matter against another, go to law before the unjust, and not
before the Saints? do ye not know the Saints shall judge the world? and if the
world shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?
But because he had no calling thereunto, who, says he, made me a judge or a
divider over you? Though it had been a good work in it self to set a period
to a vexatious suit amongst brethren, yet Christ was not sent to that end: and
if he had embraced business of this nature, as when he began to cure men
miraculously, all the sick were brought to him, both far and near: so if
like another Solomon, he had sat upon the Bench of Justice, to sentence causes
and determine men's right; he should never have wanted work, all men would have
chosen such an Arbitratour, and all perplexed an entangled suits would have
been referred to his comprimize, and hereby he would have been much hindered in
his holy progresses to preach the Gospel in all places, and much of his
precious time would have been taken up in judicature, and sacrilegiously robbed
from the Church and more holy employments for the good of souls. The
instructions we are to gather from Christ's refusal to intermeddle with business
of that nature are, first, to walk within the duties of our calling, not to
sit upon the Bench without a Commission: the eye must not do the office of the
hand, nor the hand of the foot: but every member his own work. It is one thing
to be a preacher of the Gospel, and another to be a Judge: and though it be a
good and charitable work to clear men's titles to their Lands upon earth; yet
it is better to clear their title to the Kingdom of heaven. We must not
therefore intermit, or neglect the duties of our sacred Function for any civil
whatsoever: nor upon any fair and plausible pretense, engage our selves in such
businesses which may any way stop, or hinder us in the course of our Ministry.

Fifthly, Obj. 2.
They cast some of that dust in our eyes, on which our Savior wrote with his
finger, Ioh. 8. 6. When the woman taken in adultery was brought before him, the
punishment (say they) of adultery is as necessary as of any other crime: yet
Christ would not inflict it, nor pronounce sentence against the woman
shamefully taken in that gross act of uncleanness: therefore Christians ought
not to inflict Civil punishments, or make use of the material sword, but
content themselves with the spiritual of excommunication, to cut off
malefactors from the Church therewith.

But they weigh not the circumstances of the Text; Sol.
the Scribes and Pharisees intended not the execution of justice upon the
woman, but came a birding to catch our Savior in a snare, which they laid
after this manner: Will he judge this woman fit to be stoned according to the
Law, or not? it he will not judge her, we have a just quarrel against him for
derogating from the Law of Moses: if he judge her fit to suffer death, and
condemn her to be stoned, we shall have just cause to question him, by what
authority he assumes to himself the office of a Judge; Christ discerning the
snare, thus breaks it in sunder, He that is without sin among you (says he)
let him first cast a stone at her. Which is as if he should have said, The
matter of fact is evident, the woman is guilty, and the law is as clear, she
ought to be stone^: but who are you who demand the rigor of the Law to be
executed upon her? are you free from this foul aspersion? are you innocent
from this great offense? look into the book of your own conscience, or if not,
read what you see here written in the dust. Thus touching on their sore, they
shrink, and withdraw themselves away one after another, and the woman is left
alone with our Savior, whom he dismisseth with a gracious admonition, Go and
sin no more, verse. 11. What will the Anabaptist conclude from hence? that
because Christ condemned not this woman to death according to Law, that
therefore no Christian may inflict corporal punishment for adultery? by the
same reason they might infer against themselves and their own practices,
that because Christ severed not this woman from the congregation, that
therefore no Minister of God, or spiritual Magistrate, may excommunicate for
adultery, or the like crimes.

That which we are from this example of our Savior to learn for our
instruction, is, first, That Christ came not to destroy, but to save; not to
punish, but to forgive sin, not to bereave any of their Temporal life, but
to purchase for all true believers, and penitent sinners, a Spiritual and
Eternal life.

Secondly, that all they who are overtaken with any sin or crime punishable
by the Law, ought not to prosecute the extremity against others, who stick in
the same mud with themselves. The snuffers which were to mend the lights in the
Sanctuary, by Gods appointment, were to be made of pure gold; to teach us, that
they who take upon them to accuse and censure others, ought themselves to be
most free from blame; especially in the same kind of transgression: otherwise
they are like to hear Physician cure thy self, or out of Romans 12. 21. Thou
which teach another, teach thou not thy self? thou which preachest a man
should not steal, do thou steal? thou which say a man should not commit
adultery, do thou commit adultery? or as we have it, Ioh. 8. 7. He that is
without sin, ltt him cast the first stone.

Thirdly, that the Ministers of the Gospel by the example of our blessed
Savior, when sinners are brought before them, confounded with shame in
themselves, and so strangled with their inward guilt, that they are not able to
speak a word in their own defense, or for their excuse, ought to have
compassion on them, and upon their repentance and humiliation send them away
with some comfort aad godly admonitions, as our Savior does here: Has none
condemned thee? neither do I: go, and sin no more.

Lastly, Obj. 8.
they argue very weakly, ab authoritate negative, after this manner: We read in
holy Scripture of no Christians that ever sat upon the throne of Majesty, or
Bench of Justice, neither in the age of the Apostles, nor in the prime and best
times do we hear of any Civil Magistrate exercising any authority in the
Church: therefore Christians ought to exercise no such authority, nor execute
any such office.

But this argument, like snow, when the weather grows warm, Sol.
dissolves of it self: For, 1. As we read in the New Testament of no Christian
Kings, Judges, Sheriffs, or other Officers attending on Courts of justice: so
neither do we read of any that taught the Tongues, Arts, or Sciences, or
trades in foraine parts, or exercised any kind of Manufactures now in use: yet
no man doubts but many hundred did so, and questionless Ministers of
justice, are as necessary in every City and Town Corporate, as Merchants or
Artizens. This argument therefore ab anthoritate negative, may justly be
answered negatively: If there were no Christian Magistrates, they could not be
recorded in Scriptures; but it will not follow, none are mentioned or recorded
in Scripture, Ergo, there were none.

2. Though the story of Abgarus King of Edessa his conversion to the Christian
faith may be Apocryphal, yet the story of the Eunuch related Acts 8. 27. A man
of great authority under Candace Queen of Ethopia is Canonical, and Nicodemus
a Ruler among the Jews, and Joseph of Arimathea the Senator, and Theophilus,
to whom Saint Luke intitles his Gospel, and Cornelius the Centurion, and
Publius the Governor of Melita, and Sergius Paulus the Proconsull, and Erastus
the Chamberlain, and some of Neroes family, whose names are registered in the
book of life, make good the observation of the Apostle, that though not many
Noble men, not many mighty men, not many in great place or authority; yet some
such were called even in the Apostles time, which are sufficient to rebate the
edge of this argument.

3. Admit that there were few or no Converts in the Apostles days, who held
the place, or executed the office of Magistrates: yet (that which is sufficient
to prove the lawfulness and necessity of that calling) Christ himself both
acknowledged and submitted unto the authority of Pilat, and paid tribute to
Caesar; and Saint Paul appeals to Augustus, and complains to Lysias of a
conspiracy against him, and was rescued by him.

Lastly, though the Christian Church at the beginning was cast out as it were
stark naked, and lay in the open field weltring in her own blood, and no eye
pitied her; yet in process of time the predictions of the Prophets were
accomplished, She had Kings to be her nursing Fathers, and Queens to be her
nursing Mothers, and all sorts of Civil Magistrates, both supreme and
subordinate, to be her Gardians, and Protectours. And as the earth in Italy
never bare so great a burden on it, nor yielded so plentiful a crop, as when
it was turned up laureato ato vomere, Flor. Epit. Livii.
and the plough held by the hand of Camillus the Dictatour; terra gestiente se
coli a triumphali agricola: so the Church and Commonwealth never so thrived,
as when religious Kings and Princes took the manuring and managing thereof.
Which happiness God grant to these Realms and Kingdoms even till Shilo come,
AMEN.

The Pythagoreans conceived the Celestial Spheres to be like Cymbals, and by
their regular motion to produce harmonious sounds; the Angels or Intelligencers
as they call them, turning as it were the broaches. But this Celestial music
they speak of, is but a pleasing dream, a true Celestial harmony may be heard
in the confession of all the Reformed Churches, wherewith now in the close, I
purpose to cheer up and recreate the Reader; and lest any quarrel should be
made, or offense taken at the precedencie: I will call the several Churches in
such order as they are ranked in the Latin edition of the Confessions, printed
at Geneva, An. 1581.

Concerning the Author, Office, and Authority of the Civil Magistrate, thus
we read,

In the Helvetica posterior c. 30. Magistratus omnis generis ab ipso Deo est
institutus, ad generis humani pacem, ac tran quillitatem, ac ita ut primum in
mundo locum obtineat. Sicut Deus salutem populi sui operari vult per
Magistratum, quem mundo velut patrem dedit: ita subditi omnes hoc Dei
beneficium in Magistratu agnoscere jubentur. Honorent ergo and revereantur
Magistratum tanquam Dei Ministrum, ament cum, faveant ei, and orent pro eo
tanquam pro patre; obediant item omnibus ejus justis and aequis mandatis:
Religionis cura inprimis pertinet ad Magistratum sanctum. Damnamus igitur
Anabaptistas, qui ut Christianum negant fungi posse officio Magistratus; ita
etiam negant quenquam a Magistratu just occidi.
Helvetian confession. The Magistracy of what kind soever is ordained of God
for the peace and quietness of mankind, and he ought to have the first place
in the world. (And a little afterward) As God does work the safety of his
people, by the Magistrate, whom he has given to be as a Father to the world:
so all subjects are commanded to acknowledge this benefit of God in the
Magistrate; let them therefore honor and reverence him as the Minister of God,
love him, and pray for him as their Father, obey him, in all his just and
righteous commands: the care of Religion chiefly appertains to a godly
Magistrate, let him therefore draw his sword against all malefactors,
murderers, thieves, and blasphemous heretics, etc. In this regard we condemn
the Anabaptists, who as they deny that a Christian may execute the office of a
Magistrate: so also they deny that any man may be lawfully put to death by him.

The Basil Quilibet igitur Christianus Magistratus (in quorum numero and nos
esse cupimus) omnes vires eo dirigat, ut apud suae fidei commissos nomen Dei
sanctificetur, regnum ipsius propagetur, ipsiusque voluntati cum seria
extirpatione scelerum vivatur. Hoc officium semper etiam Gentili Magistratui
injunctum fuit, quanto magis Christiano Magistratui co^mendatu^ esse debet, ut
vero Dei Vicario. Basil. cons. ar. 7.
confession. Let every Christian Magistrate bend all his forces this way, that
among all that are under him the name of God may be hallowed, his Kingdom
propagagated, and his will in the rooting out of all wickedness and vice, may
be fulfilled. This duty was ever enjoined even to the heathen Magistrates, how
much more is it required of a Christian Magistrate, who is Gods true Vicar?

The Bohemian Bohemica confess. c. 16. Ex sacris literis docetur, Politicum
Magistratum esse Ordinationem Divinam, and a Deo constitutum, qui and a Deo
originem suam ducat, and efficacitate praesentiae, and auxilii hujus perpetui
conservetur, ad gubernandum populum in iis rebus quae ad hanc in terris, and
corporis hujus vitam pertinent; universi and singuli in omnibus, quae Deo
tantum non sunt contraria, eminenti potestati subjectionem praestent, primum
Regiae Majestati, postea vero omnibus Magistratibus, and qui cum potestate
sunt, sive ipsi per se boni viri sunt, sive mali.
confession. The Civil Magistrate is the ordinance of God; and appointed by
God, who both taken his original from God, and by the effectual power of his
presence and continual aid is maintained by him, to govern the people in
those things that appertain to thelife of the body here upon earth: to whose
power all and every one ought to be subject in those things that are not
contrary to God; first to the Kings Majesty, then to all the Magistrates and
such as are in authority under him, whether they be of themselves good men or
evil.

The French Gallica confess. art. 39. Credimus Deum velle mundum legibus, and
politia gubernari, ut aliquae sint fraena quibus immoderatae mundi cupiditates
coerceantur: ideoque constituisse regna; respublicas, and reliquas principatuum
species, sive haereditario jure obveniant, sive minus; ideo gladium in
Magistratuum manus tradidit, reprimendis nimirum delictis, non modo contra
secundam tabulam, sed etiam contra primam commissis.
confession, we believe that God would have the world to be governed Civilly,
and by Laws; that there may be certain bridles, whereby the desires of men may
be restrained; and that therefore he has appointed Kingdoms, Commonwealths,
and other kinds of Principalities, whether they come by inheritance or
otherways; and because he is the author of thi^ order, we must not only
suffer them to rule, whom he has set over us, but also yield unto them all
honor and reverence; as to Deputies and Ministers assigned by him to execute
their lawful and holy function; into their hands God has put a sword to
punish all breaches, as well of the first Table, as of the second.

The Credimus Deumoptimum maxim: ob generis humani corruptelam atque
depravationem Reges, Principes, and Magistratus constituisse: velleque ut
mundus hic legibus ac certa politia gubernetur, and coercenda hominum vitia,
and ut omnia inter homines recto ordine gerantur. Idcirco Magistratus ipsos
gladio armavit, ut malos quidem plectant poenis, probos vero tueautur. Horum
porro est non modo de civili politia conservanda esse sollicitos, verum etiam
dare operam ut sacrum Ministerium conservetur, omnis Idololatria and
adulterinus Dei cultus e medio tollatur, Regnu^ Antichristi diruatur,
Christivero Regnu^ propagetur. Quamobre^ Anabaptistas and turbule^tos omnes
detestamur, qui superiores Dominationes, and Magistratus objiciu^^, jura ac
judicia pervertunt, bona omniacom. faciunt, ac denique ordines o^nes, ac
gradus, quos honestatis gratia Deus inter homines constituit, abolent aut
confundunt. Belg. con. art. 36.
Low Dutch confession. We believe that Almighty God by reason of the corruption
and depravation of mankind, did appoint Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, and
that it is his will that this world should be governed by laws, and a Civil
government; and to this end he has armed Magistrates with a sword, to punish
the wicked, and defend the good. To these it appertains of duty, not only
watchfully to preserve the Civil State, but also to endeavor that the holy
Ministry of the word be maintained, all Idolatry and false worship removed,
the Kingdom of Antichrist pulled down, and the Kingdom of Christ propagated.
Wherefore we detest all Anabaptists and seditious persons, who cast away all
government, and Magistracy, pervert judgments, and overthrow all men's rights,
make all men's goods common; and lastly, abolish and confound all orders and
degrees, appointed by God among men for honesty and comeliness sake.

The High Augustana confess. art. 16. Legitimae ordinationes civiles, sunt
bonae opera and ordinationes Dei, sicut Paulus testatur, Romans 13. 1. Damnant
Anabaptistas, qui interdicunt haec civilia officia Christianis, Damnant and
illos, qui Evangelicam perfectionem collocarunt in desertione civilium
officiorum, quum Evangelica perfectio sit spiritualis; hoc est, consistat in
motibus cordis, in timore Dei, fide, dilectione, obedientia.
Dutch confession at Ausperge. Civil governments and constitutions are good
works and ordinances of God, as Saint Paul testifies: they condemn therefore
the Anabaptists who forbid Civil offices to Christians; they condemn also
those, who place Evangelicall perfection in abandoning all civil affairs;
whereas Evangelicall perfection is Spiritual, and consists in the motions of
the heart, in the fear of God, Faith, Love, and Obedience.

The Saxon confession. Saxonica confess. art. 23. Docemus in tota doctrina Dei
per Prophetas and Apostolos tradita affirmari ordinem politicum, leges,
judicia, Magistratus, and legitimam societatem hominum, nequaquam casu existere
in genere humano; sed immensa bonitate Dei propter Ecclesiam: conservari, and
Magistratui politico subditi debent obedientiam, non solum propter iram, id est
metu poenae corporalis, qua afficiuntur contumaces ab ipsis Magistratibus, sed
etiam propter conscientiam, id est contumacia est peccatum offendens Deum; and
avellens conscientiam a Deo. Et paulo post. Cum Magistratus sint inter
praecipua Ecclesia membra, videant ut judicia in Ecclesia recte exerceantur,
sicut Constantinus, Theodosius, Arcadius, Mattianus, Carolus Magnus, and multi
pii Reges curaverunt recte exerceri judicia Ecclesiae.
We teach, that in the whole doctrine of God delivered by the Apostles and
Prophets, that Civil government is maintained; and that Magistrates, Laws,
tribunalls, and the lawful society of men, sprung not up by chance; but that
all the good order that is left, is preserved by the exceeding goodness of God
for the Churches sake: and all subjects owe to the civil Magistrate obedience,
as Saint Paul says, not only for wrath, that is, fear of corporal
punishment, wherewith the disobedient are rewarded by the Magistrate, but also
for conscience sake: Contumacie being a sin offending God, and withdrawing
the conscience from him. And seeing Magistrates are the chief members of the
Church, let them see that Judgments in the Church, and Ecclesiastical
censures, be rightly executed; as Constantine, Theodosius, Arcadius, Marcianus,
Charle-Maine; and many godly Kings took order in their times, that
Ecclesiastical judicature, and proceedings in spiritual Courts should be
rightly carried.

The Suevick Suevica conf. art. 23. Docent fungi Magistratu munus esse
sacratissimum, quod quidem homini divinitus contingere possit; unde and factum
sit, quod qui gerunt publicam, potestatem Dii in Scripturis vocentur. Item:
obedientiae quae exhibetur Magistratibus, inter primi ordinis bona opera locum
dant; and docent hoc unumquemque studiosius sese accommodare publicis legibus,
quo sincerior fuerit Christianus fideque ditior.
confession. Our Churches teach, that the office of a Magistrate is most sacred
and divine; whence it is, that they who exercise this power, are called Gods;
and our Preachers teach, that the obedience which is performed to Magistrates,
is to be placed among good works of the first rank; and that by how much a man
is a more sincere and faithful Christian, the more careful he is to observe
the Laws of the State.

I know not upon what ground the English and Scotch confession are left out of
the Harmony of Confessions, for they are as full as any of the rest; for proof
of the point in question, the Scotch runs thus:

The Confession of Scotland.
We confess and acknowledge Empires, Kingdoms, Dominions, and Cities, to be
distincted and ordained by God: that powers and authority in the same (be it of
Emperous in their Empires, Kings in their Realms, Dukes and Princes in their
Dominions, and of other Magistrates in their Cities) to be Gods holy Ordinance,
ordained for manifestation of his own glory, and for the singular profit and
commodity of mankind; so that whosoever goes about to take away, or confound
the whole state of Civil policy, now long established; we affirm the same men
not only to be enemies to mankind, but also wickedly to fight against Gods
expressed will.

The Confession of England. Art. 37.
The Kings Majesty has the chief power in this Realm of England, and other his
Dominions; unto whom the chief government of all estates of this Realm,
whether they be Ecclesiastical or Civil, in all causes does appertain, and is
not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign jurisdiction. The Laws of the
Realm may punish Christian men with death, for heinous and grievous offenses.

The sum of all is, the Civil Magistrate is a divine ordinance, and his
chief care is, or ought to be Religion; for the defense and vindication
whereof God has put a sword in his hand, to cut off the disturbers of the
Peace, as well in the Church as the Commonwealth: and because he is the
Minister of God for our wealth and safety, his authority is to be obeyed by all
sorts of men for conscience sake, and not to be resisted upon pain of
damnation,

And now Christian Reader, thou have heard a Harmony, listen not to discords;
thou have heard a consort of silver Trumpets, hearken not to a single oat-pipe,
or the harsh sound of Rams horns; thou have heard the suffrages of all the
learned Divines in the Reformed Churches; regard not the votes of a few
illiterate Mechanics, much less the fancy and dreams of fanaticall
Enthusiasts; who because they are Anomolaes themselves, would not by their good
will there should be any Rules: because they are wandering Stars, they would
have none fixed; because they are dissolute, they would have no bonds of Laws;
because they are Schismatics, and Non-conformists, they would have no
Discipline in the Church; because they are dunces, and ignorant both of Tongues
and Arts, they would have no learning, nor Universities: Lastly, because they
walk inordinately, they would have no coercive power in the Magistrate to
restrain them. There was never more cause then now to take heed what thou
hear, and to try the spirits, whether they are of God or no; for there is
not one only lying spirit, as in the days of Ahab, but many lying spirits in
the mouths of Prophets; not only Romish Priests and Jesuits, who endeavor to
seduce thee to spiritual thraldom, idolatry and superstition, but also
diverse sorts of schismatic Teachers, who entice thee to carnal liberty,
profaneness, sacrilege, and faction. When I first heard of the manner of
taking Apes in the Indies, I could scarce forbear laughter; but now seeing
daily men of worth and parts, caught after the same manner by our new
Sectaries, I can hardly refrain tears. The manner of taking those beasts is thus
described: he that goes about to catch Apes in those parts of America, which
abound with them, brings a Basin with fair water, and therein paddles with his
hands, and washes his face in sight of the Apes; and then steps aside for a
while: the Ape seeing the coast clear, steals to the Basin, and seeing his
face in the water, is much delighted therewith; and in imitation of the man,
dabbles with his feet in the clear water, and washes his face, and wipes his
eyes; and after this, he lies in wait for him, fetches away the Basin, powers
out the fair water, and fills it again with water mingled with birdlime; and
puts the Basin in the place where it stood before: the Ape returning to the
Basin and suspecting nothing, puts his feet in the birdlime, and with that foul
and mingled water washes his face, and wipes his eyes; which are thereby so
dazzled, and the eyelids closed up, that unawares he is easily caught. In like
manner, these late Proselytes, who invade many empty Pulpits in the City and
Suburbs, at the first in their Sermons set before thee as it were a Basin of
the pure water of life, wherein thou may see thy face, and wash away the spots
of thy soul; but after they have got thy liking and good opinion, and confide
in thee, then they mingle bird-lime with the water of life: the birdlime of
Socinianisme, of Libertinisme, or Antinominianisme, Brownisme, and Anabaptisme:
wherewith, after they have put out or closed the eyes of thy judgment, they
lead thee whither they lift, and make a prey of thee. Praemonitus praemunitus,
I have forewarned thee, be thou forearmed against them, and the Lord give thee
a right judgment in all things, Gastius de exord. Anabap. p. 495. Quia
Anabaptistae a veritate avertunt aures, idea Deus mittit illis Doctores, non
qui lingua medica sanarent ulcera ipsorum, sed qui pruritum ac scabiem
affectuum ipsorum commode scalperent. Because the Anabaptists turn away their
ears from the truth, God sends them teachers according to their desire; not
such as with their wholesome tongues and doctrine heal their sores, but with
their nails scratch gently the itch of their carnal lusts and affections.

Remarkable Histories OF THE ANABAPTISTS, WITH OBSERVATIONS thereupon.
THE French after the first course of solid dishes, Quelque chooses.
entertain their guests with Kicke-shoses, and we with fruit.

In the former part of this Treatise (courteous Reader) as well in the
propounding our arguments for the orthodox faith, as in the Refutation of the
Anabaptists objections against it; I desired to set before thee Solid and
substantial dishes, to strengthen thee in the true doctrine of thereformed
Church of England: but in these ensuing relations and observations, I make bold
to set on the board Kicke-shoses, and variety of strange fruits: which though
peradventure they will not much nourish thy faith, yet eaten with a grain of
Salt, will some way irritate thy appetite, and help thy digestion and
concoction.

OBSERVAT. I.
That the Anabaptists are an Illiterate, and Sottish Sect.
As Macarius, who had the care and oversight of erecting that magnificent
structure at Jerusalem, built by Helena the mother of Constantine the great,
was happy in his name: for Macarius in Greek signifies blessed; and as
Theodoret testifies, a blessed man was he: so on the contrary, many
Arch-hereticks, and Bo^tefeux of the Church and State, have been happily
unlucky in their names; their Godfathers at the Font proving Prophets, and the
names they gave them, being presages of their qualities, and fortunes, and
Characters of their persons. Haymo notes out of Iraeneus, Hay. comp^nd.
Eccles. Hist.
that Ebion the Father of the Ebionites, signifies in Hebrew poor and silly;
and a silly poor man (God wot) was he. Manes the Father of the Manichees
derives his name in Greek from (...) insanio, or a (...) insania madness; and
verily, a frantic heretic was he. Aerius the Father of the Aerian^s carries
wind in his name, and a light giddy-braind fellow was he; blown into his
heresy with the wind of ambition: as Saint Augustine declares in his bed-roll
of heresies. Aug. de haeres. ad quod-vult Deum.
What should I descend to Maldonate, whose very name speaks the abuse of his
filts ( Maldonatus quasi male donatus) and to Ignatius the Founder of his Sect
Ignatius Layola, who as he has Ignem, fire in his name, so he and his
Disciples have proved the greatest Incendiaries in the Christian world. I will
trouble thee but with one instance more, and that is the Father of the
Anabaptists of our age; who as I showed thee before out of Bullinger, and
Melancthon, was Nicholas Stock, Capite arido and macilento ac si esset ligneum.
a man every way answerable to his name, for a very Block-head was he. Robertus
Galius had a vision wherein he saw the Pope saying Mass with a lean, Theod.
Hist. l. 1. c. 18. (...).
meagre, and a dry head, like as if it had been made of wood. Such of all the
world was this Stock the head of the Anabaptists, and from this block when he
was hewn down in Germany, some Simlers praef. Bulleng. lib. 6 adv. Anabapt.
chips flew into England. Although the eye of the mind of man since the fall,
Pestis haec non tantum Germaniam, sed and Italiam, and Galliam, ^^^dudum
pervagat^ est, and (...) etiam renascenti apud Anglos Ecclefiae Christi
plurimum negoti dedit.
is like to the eye of an Owl, that cannot endure the bright beams of the
Sun of righteousness; and howsoever God in the first planting of the Gospel
made use of illiterate men, such as were Tent-makers and Fishermen; to the end
that all might know, that He that planteth and he that waters is nothing, but
all is Gods, who gives the increase: yet when the eye of man's understanding is
anointed with the ey-salve of the Lips. de Constant. Rato rectaest lumine
spiritus directa.
Spirit; the clearer and sharper the eye is, the better it discernes both
Spiritual and Natural objects: and since the extraordinary gifts of the
Spirit have failed in the Church, the learned men whose knowledge God
sanctified to that use, have proved the worthiest instruments of his glory, in
proclaiming the doctrine of Saving Grace; and Daniel 12. 1 Kings 13. 33.
turning many unto righteousness, who shall shine as Stars in the sky for
evermore. And as it remains a blot upon Jeroboam, and his house never to be
wiped out; that he made of the lowest of the people Priests of the high places:
so it is not one of the least brands of the Roman Antichrist, that he filled
the Church with a number of ignorant Mass Priests, Monks, and Friars; who
blind guides as they were, of the blinder people, fell together with them into
the ditch of superstition, heresy, and sensuality. And think we the blindest
men are the fittest to draw them out of it? This is the Anabaptists judgment;
who as the Romanists teach ignorance to be the mother of devotion, so these to
be the mother of Prophetical revelation, or interpretation. For John
Tuseoverer History the Anabaptists.
a Goldsmiths of Warendorp, pretending himself to be a Prophet sent from God,
commanded the Senate in Munster to remove all their Magistrates, and put down
all their Preachers, as well Evangelicks, as Papists; and to place in their
room twelve simple illiterate men to expound the word of God to the people,
without any help of Arts or Tongues, by mere Enthusiasmes, or sudden
inspirations, and ejaculations. Another of their Prophets, John Sleid. Commen.
l. ^ Idem Prophe mandabat ne ullum deince librum haberent aut sibi ^varent
praet sacra Biblia^ reliquos om^ in publicum referri jussi^ and aboleri; ^ se
mandatu^ Divinitus a^ cepisse diceb itaque mag^ numero libr^ deportati slamena
fuerunt omnes ^ sumpti.
Matthias, commanded that none should keep any book in his house but the
Bible, whereupon all the books that were found in any Library, Study, or House,
save Bibles; were brought into the Market place, and a bone-fire made of them.
But better all these obstinate Sectaries were burnt at a stake, then such a
bonefire made in this Kingdom: after which would follow the ruin of all
Schools, and Universities, and more then Egyptian darkness through the wide
Kingdom. Since the extraordinary gifts of Prophecy and Languages have ceased
in the Church, secular learning has been as the Day Star appearing in the
Firmament of the Church before the Sun; and where no Day Star going before,
no Sun rising after. As for rude Mechanics, and unlettered Artificers, to
choose them for our guides to the celestial Canaan, is all one, as if an Army
to march by night over narrow bridges, and by fearful precipices should by
common consent elect pur-blind men to lead the way; or a ^leet at Sea after
they have cut the line, and sail under an unknown Climate in a ruff Sea, and
tempestuous weather, should among all the Mariners choose the unskilfullest
Pilots to steer their course. We read in the Apocalypse of a Apoc. ^ 11.
Star called Wormwood, bitter in the effects and influences; but a Star in
the light thereof. Such have been the Authors, Devisers, and Broachers of other
Heresies; bitter indeed in their tenets, and distasteful in their manners; yet
Stars for their light of learning: whereas these false teachers cut as chips
out of N. Stock resemble brands of hell fire, in which there is a sultring
heat, but no light at all. Peruse if thou please (Christian Reader) all the
ancient heresies listed by Epiphanius, Augustine, Philastrius, Alfonsus a
Castro, Ambrosius de Rusconibus, and others; and therein thou shall find the
Ringleaders great Clerks, and acute Sophisters. Whence is that true
observation of Tertullian, Philosophi haereticorum Patriarchae, Gast. l. de
Anabapt. error. ^. 75. De eruditione ^uid speran^um, ubi incitia and, ut pisi
^quuntur, sim^licitas docen^ium summa ruditio est?
Philosophers have been the great Grandfathers of Heretics; but of this base
and contemptible Sect of the Stockites, there was never yet heard any
Professor of eminent learning, neither is there like ever to be: for learning,
they hold rather a disparagement, then ornament; an extinguisher, then a
kindler of their new light, and strange fire. In a gross and foggy Mist a
clear light cannot long shine, for either the light will pierce through the
Mist, or the Mist will dampe the light: so, if it should fall out that any
great Scholar should be admitted into their communion, either their gross
erronrs would in time put out the light of his knowledge, or the clear light of
his knowledge soon dispell the Mist of their ignorance, and palpable errors.
Which need the less confutation, because they contradict themselves as much as
the truth. For,

First, Contradictions (...) the doctrine and practices of ^e Anabap^^sts.
they condemn the Baptism of children upon this ground, because they say they
cannot be assured of the truth of their faith, and repentance; by which reason
they should forbid or forbear the christening of men in riper years also,
forasmuch as these teachers can be no way assured of the sincerity of their
Scholars faith, and true purpose of amendment of life. For though they profess
the one, and promise the other; yet they may do it in hypocrisy, and for
worldly ends. Or if they will say we ought to believe their profession and
promise for themselves, why then ought we not as well to believe their
profession and promise for their Children, when the Fathers or Godfathers
undertake for them at the Font?

Secondly, they preach the doctrine of mortification of the flesh, and
crucifying the lusts thereof; and yet withal they maintain plurality of
wives, and adulterous and incestuous copulations, under the title of spiritual
marriages, with those of their own Sect.

Conjugium Virg. Aen. 4.
vocat, hoc praetexit nomine culpam. Thirdly, they allow of no set forms of
prayer, or studied Sermons; because such as they conceive, who use them, pray
not by the Spirit: yet themselves in their Assemblies make use of set hymns,
and Psalms, which notwithstanding they make us believe they sing by the
Spirit, according to the example of the Apostle: Cor. 14. 15.
I will pray with the spirit, and will pray with understanding also, I will
sing with the spirit, and I will sing with understanding also.

Fourthly, they cry up the doctrine of the cross, and boast much of their
suffering for righteousness sake: yet where they get any strength and can make
head, they resist the powers ordained of God, and make war against their
lawful superiors, as we may so in Sleiden, Gastius, and Guy-de-bres.

Fifthly, They inveigh against covetousness, and to extirpate that root of all
evil, teach men to renounce all propriety in their goods, and to have all
things in common: Yet they rob Monasteries, plunder towns, and villages, rifle
houses, and turn the wicked, as they term them, out of their possessions, and
hold them themselves; and when they are upbraided with this their rapine, they
allege that text for themselves, The meek shall possess the earth, Matthew. 5.
5.
presuming themselves to be those meek ones, though we shall prove them
hereafter to be a most cruel and bloody sect.

Sixthly, They teach that the office of a civil Magistrate cannot consist with
Christian perfection, yet they themselves in Munster and elsewhere had a
Consul, and Senators, and a Headsman of their own, yea, and a King also, John
Leiden the Tailor, who stitched up a Kingdom in one year, and ravelled it out
the next.

Seventhly, They strip themselves stark naked, not only when they flock in
great multitudes, men and women together, to their Iordans to be dipped; but also
upon other occasions, when the season permits: and when they are questioned for
it, they shelter this their shameless act, with the proverb, Veritas nuda est,
the truth is naked, and desires no vail, masque, or guise; which reason if it
were good, would hinder them from holding private Conventicles as they do, and
when there is process out against them, running into corners to hide
themselves; for as the proverb is, Veritas nuda est, Truth is naked, which
warranteth them, as they conceive, to throw off their clothes: so also there is
a like proverb, Veritas non quaerit angulos, truth seeks no corners, nor
innocence starting holes, yet they do.

Lastly, in their Confession printed this year, they find themselves agrieved
with the name of Anabaptist, saying, they are falstly so called: yet it is well
known they all of them either rebaptize or are rebaptized, and consequently
are properly (...) actively or passively. But as Corvinus in his elder age so
quite lost his memory, that he forgot his own name: so these are so ignorant,
that they know not their own proper name. If these disclaim second Baptism,
they are none of the sect: if they practice it, how can they truly say that
they are falsely called Anabaptist? If Anabaptists be their nicke name, what is
their right name, whereby they may be distinguished from mother Christians
Catholic or Heretics? They have hitherto been known in general by no other
names then of Anabaptists, or Catabaptists, and never a barrel better herring.
And Anabaptist deprives children of Baptism, and a Catabaptist depraves
Baptism. A Catabaptist may sometimes be no Anabaptist, such as was Leo
Copronymus, who defiled the Font at his Baptism, yet was he not Christened
again: but every Anabaptist is necessarily a Catabaptist; for the iteration of
that Sacrament is an abuse and pollution thereof.

OBSERVAT. II.
That the Anabaptists are a lying and blasphemous sect, falsely pretending to
divine Visions and Revelations.
All devisers of new Religions and spiritual impostures ascribe their new
doctrine and worship to some divine Author, either God himself, or some Angel
sent from him; and this they do not so much to amuse the vulgar, as to secure
their tenets from the hazard of disputes, and exempt their persons and actions
from the test of examination. He that speaks from the earth, and bears
himself upon humane authority and reason, can gain no more upon his hearers,
then the point of his sword, or dint of his Arguments can enforce their assent
thereunto: Tim. 6. 16.
but he that speaks as from heaven captivateth our reason, and easily
persuades us to resign our eyes to him, who dwells in a light that none can
approach unto. In humane debates and consultations we are not to regard so much
quis as quid, who is he that speaks, as what it is that is spoken: but
contrariwise in celestriall mystries, and disputes about Religion, we are not
so much to respect, quid as quis, what is that which our belief must embrace,
as who he is that commands our assent; if it be he, who endued us with reason,
all reason there is, that our reason should veil bonnet to him: whence is that
golden Aphorism of Saint Gregory, Qui in factis dei rationem non invenit, in
infirmitate sua rationem invenit, cur rationem non inveniat, He who inquires
into celestial mysteries, and is at a fault in his search, and can find no
reason, why such things should be so, finds a sufficient reason in his own
infirmity, why he cannot dive into the reason thereof. His meaning is, the
plummet of man's wit is too light, and the line of his discourse too short to
sound the bottom of these depths: for this cause it is that the broachers of
new and absurd tenets, or rites in Religion, which natural reason abhorres, to
prevent all reasonings about them, pretend to Divine Revelations for them.
Vale^ius Maximu. l. 1. c. 2 Minos Creten sium Rex in quoddam prae altum specus
(...) cedere soleba^ and in eamorat^ tanquam a Jo^ve, a quo seor tum ferebat,
tradi^as sibi le^ges praerogabet^^. Numa Pompilius, ut P. R. sac^is obligaret,
volebat videri sibi cum Dea Aegeria congressus esse nocturnos ejusque monitu
accepta Diis immertalibus sacra i^stitue^e. Bullinger adv. Anabap. l. 1. c. 2.
Helcesai^ae glo^iabantur librum ipsis coelitus demissum esse, quo mysteria
resque divinae continerentur; qu^ quisquis recitari audisset, eum peccatorum
veniam consequi.
Minos fained that he consulted with Jupiter in a deep vault, and from him
received his law; Numa, that he had private conference with the Goddess
Aegeria, and from her received his rituall; Mahomet, that he discoursed with
the Angel Gabriel, whose dictates are registered in the Alcharon; the
Helcesaites, that they had a book sent down from heaven, in which all Divine
mysteries were revealed, which whosoever heard read, should presently receive
remission of sins. In like manner, Stock, Muncer, Melchior, Georgius,
Tuscoverer, and others by whose hands the envious man in these latter days
sowed the tares of Anabaptisme, have deluded the people with pretended
inspirations, visions, dreams, and Revelations.

Nicholas Stock gave it out that God spoke to him by an Angel, Gui de Bres. l.
1. cont. Anabap.
and revealed to him his will in dreams, promising him the plaee of the Angel
Gabriel. Ils songoyent des sor ges, and disoyent que par visions ilsparloyent
familierement aevec Dieu, and preschoyent te^s songs pour veritables, and
comme Oracles divins a leurs Disciple.


Next to this Nicholas Stock, Sleid. Comment. l. 5. Certissime v^bis confirmo
Deum nobis affutu um, nostramque fore victoriam: N^m ipse coram (...) promisit
ipse, and qui fallere non potest aut mentiri, jussit, ut ad hunc modum rem
aggrediar mulcatato Magistratu^e vos perterrefaciant machinae bellicae; pilas
enim omnes quas illi tormentisin nos ^^cient, vest mea sum excepturus.
Aspicite signum, and testimonium illius in nos perpetuae been volenctiae;
tolli^e oculos and arcum coelestem mihi ce^ite, cum enim in vexillo nostro sit
idem depictus arcus; clare significat Deus hoc simulacro se nobis affutum in
pralio.
Thomas Muncer was most famous in the Anabaptists chronicle, who when the
people that were discontented with their Magistrates, and encouraged by their
heretical teachers to rebel in Franconia, drew themselves into the body of an
Army, this Muncer marched not in the place (assigned for false prophets) in
the tail, but in the head, and there made an oration to the soldiers, Advance
brave spirits, ride on with your honor, and your right hand shall teach you
terrible things. For God has revealed to me, that the day shall be yours, he
promised me, he who cannot lie, nor deceive, assured me, that he will fight for
you; let not the Princes Artillery terrify you, for this robe of mine shall
receive, and dead all the bullets shot at you: look up to the sky, see you not
there a rainbow in the clouds, the colors whereof we bear in our Streamers
and Ancients, and can ye doubt of victory, since God, as you see, himself is
our Standard bearer, and the heavens wear our colors? A new topic, and a
true kind of preaching according to Anthony a Coneigsten his method, Per
colores rhetoricos.

But the even answered not expectation: the bow in the clouds did them no
service at all in their war, neither did their prophet Muncer his robe serve
as a target of steel to repel, and dead all the bullets shot against them;
but as soon as ever this army of the Bores, and that other of the Princes were
engaged, the people were miserably slaughtered with Veni Creator spiritus, in
their mouths; expecting that God should fight for them from heaven, according
to Muncers promise. Of Georgius, and Melchior Hofman, see before Sect. 1.

After Muncer and his chief associates; and Phifer, who deluded the people as
much with dreams, as Muncer with visions; had acted their parts: John Becold
commonly known by the name of John of Leiden, and John Tuscoverer came upon the
stage, and they so well acquitted themselves in the persons they took upon
them, that the one gained the reputation of a Prophet, the other the title, and
(for a time) the power of a King. First John of Leiden in a fanaticall fury
(pretending a Prophetical spirit) puts off his clothes, and runs naked
through the City of Munster, crying, The King of Sion is come, the King of Sion
is come: Then returning home falls into a deep sleep, dreams for three days
together, and as soon as he awaked faines himself speechless, and by signs
demands Paper and Ink, and sets down twelve men, most of them mean tradesmen,
to be governors of the City of Munster: whereto he adds certain
conclusions, that a man was not tied to one wife, Orit^r Propheta novus
aurifex, is convocata multitudine commemorat patris coelestis hoc esse
mandatum, ut imperium totius orbis terrarum Johannes Leid^nsis obtineat.
Sueton. in Cal^g.
but that he might marry as many as he pleased; and such other heretical
positions. Not long after this dumb Prophet gaining his speech, told the
people, that the spirit of prophesy was gone from him, and now rested in one
John Tuscoverer a Goldsmiths; this new Prophet having called an Assembly,
declared before them, that it was the will of the Heavenly Father, that John
Leiden should be King of the whole world. As, says he, God set Saul to be
King in Israel; and after him David taken from the sheepfold: so has he
appointed John Becold his Prophet to be King in Sion. Suetonius writes, that
after Caligula made himself a God, he ordained his great horse after the
Heathen rite to be a Priest, Dignus profecto, says Bencius, tali Deo Sacardos,
and tali Sacerdote Deus; like God, like Priest: in like manner we may say here
most truly, Bencius orat 3.
Like Prophet, like King; a Smith-forge Prophet, and a Tayler-shop-board King;
John Leiden consecrates Tuscoverer a Prophet, Lib. 1. de Ex^ ord. Anabap. p.
152.
Tuscoverer crowns him a King. And as John Leiden acted dumb Zachary, so
Gastius reports of a woman who took upon her to act the part of Judith, about
the middle of the siege of Munster. Addam stultitiae quoddam and temeritatis
exemplum: mu^ lier quaedam obsidionis tem pore inventa est, quae se Episcopo
facturam polliceretur, quod Judit^ Holoferni, etc.
This Prophetess made the people believe that God had put into her the spirit
of Judith, and that she would go out of the City, and never return till she
had brought back the Bishops head; having cut it off as Judith did the head of
Holofornes: she was not so mad, but diverse of the Citizens were as foolish,
for they put her in gorgeous apparel, and dressed her like Judith; and she
premeditated a speech like to hers: but she could not keep her own counsel.
For before she came into the presence of the Bishop, her intent was discovered;
and instead of cutting off the Bishop, head, she lost her own. I shall trouble
thee Christian Reader, but with one influence more. As Biddulph writes in his
travailes, that the Darvises (which are accounted Prophets among the Turks) run
round so long, till they fall down as it were in a trance; and after they have
layen in a seeming dead sleep for the space of an hour or more, Gastius l. 1.
p. 12. Abbarella hoc utuntur praestigie; dejicit se aliquis aliquo
Catabaptista, perinde acsi Epilepticus esset; spiritum qua^ diutissime potest
retinet ac se in exstasi esse simulat, horrendam praebere speciem aiunt qui
viderunt, etc.
rising up, they deliver their dreams for divine Oracles: so at Abbarella, a
certain sort of Anabaptists fell down on the sudden, as if they swooned;
holding their breath as long as they could possibly, till they swelled, and
looked black in the face: insomuch that the standers by, were affrighted at the
sight; in the end, after they were out of their ecstasy, and come to
themselves; they told the people, what God spoke to them in their Rapture:
namely, that Zuinglius erred in his doctrine of Baptism, that the christening
of children was unlawful, and that before two years came to an end, the day
of judgment should be; and truly the former revelations were as true as the
latter, it is now full a hundred years, since Gastio his book was printed at
Basil (namely, in the year 1544.) And he relates this Prophecy of theirs,
as much more ancient then his book: so far were these Epileptick Prophets out
in their reckoning.

OBSERVAT. III.
That the Anabaptists are an impure and carnal Sect.
In a foul and spotted glass we cannot perfectly see our face, neither in a
foul and impure foul, is there any clear reflection of the Image of God. God
is a most pure and holy Spirit, and none are capable of his divine
irradiations, and heavenly influences; but pure minds and chaste bodies: on the
contrary, ^atth. 10. 1. ^ark. 1. 27. and ^3. 11. c. 6. 7. ^atth. 8. 31. ^^ames
1. ult.
the D^vill is termed in the Gospel (...) the unclean spirit, who as he once
besought our Savior, to give him leave to enter into the herd of swine: so
wheresoever he now enters, and whatsoever soul or body he possesses, he
makes it a Nasty Sty. As the true Religion whereof God is the Author, is
undefiled before God; so all false worship of God devised by Satan and his
instruments, is both defiled it self with idolatry or superstition, and
defiles also the souls and consciences of all that practice it. Hence it is,
that the Professors thereof are termed by Saint Jude, spots and blots; dark
spots in regard of the errors of their understanding, and foul blots in
regard of the impurity of their lives and conversation. Such were the false
Prophets whom Saint Peter sets out in their colors, Pet. 2. 14.
having eyes full of adultery, and that cannot cease from sin, who allure
through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those who for a while
escaped from them; who live in error, to whom it is happened according to the
Proverb: the dog is turned to his own vomit again, and the sow that was
washed, to her wallowing in the mire.

Such were those ungodly men, Saint Jude sets a mark upon, that turned the
grace of our God into lasciviousness, verse. 4. gave themselves over to
fornication, and going after strange flesh, ver. 7. filthy dreamers, defiling
the flesh, despising dominions, and speaking evil of dignities, ver. 8. Such
were the Nicolaitans, and the Disciples of lezabell branded by the Spirit,
Apoc. 2. 6. 20. Who defiled the marriage bed, and seduced the servants of God
to commit fornication, and to eat things sacrificed unto Idols. Such were most
of the ancient Arch-hereticks, who as themselves were caught, ^eron. ad Cres.
Simon Magus ^aeresin condidit Helenae merctricis odutus auxilio, etc.
so they caught others esca voluptatis, with a fleshy bait: their Minions are
upon record, Simon Magus had his Helena, Apelles his Philumena, Montanus his
Maximilla, Donatus his Lucilia, Elpidius his Agape, Priscilian his Galla; and
others their Mistresses. Not to tell you of Sergius the Pope his Marozia,
Gregory the seventh his Matildis, Alexander the sixth his Lucretia, Leo the
tenth his Magdalena, and Paul the third his Constantia: in which consideration
I persuade my self, that the degenerating See of Rome is termed in the
Apocalypse, Cap. 17. 19.
the great whore; not only because she commits spiritual fornication in her
idolatrous worship of Saints, Images, and Relics: but because she permits
corporal tolerating Stews, and setting an easy rate upon all the impure
vents of luxury, See Taxa Camerae Apostolicae.
natural and unnatural. And though the Familists, Libertines, and
Anabaptists, stand in opposition to Papists; Pontan in Catal. Sleidan. Comment.
l. 10. Dogmata proponit Concionatoribus, viz. virum non esse devinctum uno
conjugi, etc. Gastius, l. 1. de Anabap. Exord. p. 25. Non est adul erium apud
nos, cum enim unum eundemque spiritum habeamus, nihil potest apud nos fieri,
quod peccatum sit: ut enim unumhabemus spiritum, ita unum corpus sumus. Gastius
de Exer. l. Anabap. l. 1. Sancto Galli public animadversum est in pullas duas,
quae donec ad Catabaptistas descisce, ent, inculpatae pudicitiae fuerant, sed
simul atque corpus in Catabaptismum immerserant naufragium passae sunt
virginitatis. Hist. Anabap. c. 3.
yet the great fowler of s^ules catches them all with the same foul birdlime
of impure lusts. Of the Libertines, and Familists, I need not speak; they have
discovered their filthiness in the face of the Su^: and for the Anabaptists,
all their often washing will neither cleanse their conscience from the guilt,
nor their reputation from the stain of carnal impurity. For though they
tolerate not Stews as the Pope does, yet they allow of plurality of wives, and
most unclean practices under the name of spiritual marriages, nay some of
them have not blushed to affirm that none of their Sect can commit adultery:
because adulterium, according to the Etymology ad alterum, is folly committed
with another man's wife; and defiling another body: but all that are of their
society are so knit one to the other, that they are all one body, as well as
one spirit. They had no sooner instild this doctrine into the weaker Sex, but
two maids at Sanctogall, immediately after their second Baptism, made
shipwreck of their virginity; and a third dashing at the same rock, and being
called in question by the Magistrate for her incontinency, professed that she
out of her pure conscience did it; that is, played the Whore. For the
Ringleaders of our Sect told me, said she, that it was the will of the
heavenly Father, that I should deny none the debt of Spiritual matrimony; and
propterea fui adomnia obedientissima omnibus, qui spiritualis matrimonii debita
postulabant. John of Leiden their King and Prophet himself, though he
pretended to never so much holiness, yet was observed by a soldier in the
night to steal from his wives bed, and truckle with the maid; which to color,
he made her his wife: and to justify the marriage, he fell into that
Prophetical sleep I spoke of before, and after he had dreamed three days and
three nights together, proclaimed his dream for a divine Oracle; that no man
was tied to one wife: after which his Proclamation, all his Subjects ran to the
handsomest women in the City, striving who should be served first; and some
with a form of spiritual contract, some without it, so blasted the fairest
flowers in all Munster, that there was not a maid of fourteen years of age
that was not viciated.

Of the like stain, though not altogether of the same strain, were the two
false Prophets discovered in London, 1642. Richard Farnham, and John Bull:
Whereof one of them, Richard Farnham the Weaver, to make a more sensible (as he
conceived) demonstration of his extraordinary calling, like to that of Hosea,
took to himself a wife of fornications, a Seafaring man's wife; See the
printed Relation, two years since published.
who returning home, laid her in Newgate, where she was arraigned and condemned
for having two husbands: yet through mercy, obtained a Reprieve. But I will
touch no more upon this Pitch, lest I defile my hands, and the Readers eyes
therewith.

OBSERVAT. IV.
That the Anabaptists are a cruel and bloody Sect.
Suetonius writes, that a Physiognomer being demanded what he thought
concerning the natural inclination and constitution of Tiberius the Emperor,
Sueton. in vit. Tiberii. Lutum sanguine temperatum.
answered, I see in him (...), dirt mingled with blood: Thereby intimating,
that he would prove a most lewd, lascivious, and cruel Emperor; the dirt in
his complexion representing filthiness, and the blood, Cruelty. Such is the
temper of the Anabaptists, filthy and impure, as I have showed before; and
which is far worse, cruel and bloody.

As it is the peculiar Attribute of God to be the Savior, and Preserver of
Mankind: Job. 7. 20. Apoc. 9. 11. John 8. 44.
so the Devils proper name is in Hebrew Abaddon, in Greek Apollyon, that is,
The destroyer. He was a murderer from the beginning, as our Savior teaches
us: feducing our first parents; and by his suggestion bringing in sin, and by
sin, death upon them, and all their posterity. He was accessarie to the first
murder that ever was committed, by Cain, upon the body of his brother Abel.
Fraterno primum maduerunt sanguine terrae; and since he has been the ruin and
destruction of many millions of men.

First, under color of Religion, inducing them sacrificare humanas hostias, to
butcher men in sacrifices to him; In some places their Parents, as amongst the
Tribali: in others the children, as in the valley of Hinnon: among the Indians,
their Kings and Priests: and in other Countries, either the best of men, or the
nearest of blood.

Secondly, by imbroiling single men in duels, Famili. ^ in frayes and riots,
Kingdoms in wars, both foreign and domestical.

Lastly, by raising persecutions against the live servants of God, and
maintainers of the Orthodoxe Faith; In the first Ages of the Church, by Heathen
Emperors; in the middle, by the Arians and Antitrinitarians; and in the later,
by the Antichrist of Rome, and his Adherents. As for the Heresy of the
Anabaptists, it is neither so ancient as some of the former; neither was it
ever so far dispersed; neither had it power to do so much mischief, and make
such havoc of the true Church: Yet since it first sprung up in Germany, it
has caused and occasioned the effusion of very much blood, as I declared
before in the Introduction to this Treatise, Eras. Adag.
and by a few instances as it were ex fimbria de textu, by the list and selvige
you may judge how deeply the cloth is dyed in blood.

To pass by the horrible parricide committed in the field of the Sancto Galli
by an Anabaptist upon his own brother, L. 1. p. 22. Immane par^^cidium quod
Germanum in Germanus in Germanum f^atrem admisit, in sancto Gallensium agro,
quis quomodo poterit memorare? advocat f^ater fratrem nihil tale cogitantem in
patris, matris, sororum, totiusque familiae consessum, jubet ut in medio genu
deponat; ut autem iste in genua sese demisit, corripit frater ensem quem in hoc
attulerat, atque per fratris jugulum protenus adegit, caputque detondit, quod
parentum pedibus advolutum pecto^a exanimat; e reliquis corporis trunco magna
^^uor^s vis emanat, concidunt atque amentia ^mo^iuntur quotquo^ adsunt.
which Gastius relates after this manner: The elder brother, by the
instigation of the devil, having his sword under his cloak, calls his brother
(nothing aware of his bloody intent) before his father, mother, sisters, and
the whole family; commands him there to kneel down before them, and suddenly
whips out his sword, and cuts off his head, and throws it at the feet of his
Parents; whereat they were so affrighted, that they dyed mad: The murderer
himself defending the fact, and saying, Volunt as Dei impleta est.

At the first rising of the Anabaptists in Suevia and Franconia, to the number
of forty thousand, they killed all the Nobles and Gentry that made any head to
stop their popular fury. And no marvel the peoples fingers were dipped in
blood, when their King and Prophets whole hands and arms were embrued in it.
Tho: Muncer their Prophet, Senator, and General, (for he was all these) in
the first speech he made in the head of his Army by Frankhus, (above
mentioned) told the people, That it was Gods promise that the righteous should
wash their feet in the blood of the wicked, and therefore he exhorted them to
fall pell-mell upon all the Princes, and Magistrates, and Landlords, as tyrants
and thieves that sucked the blood of the people, and lived in luxury and
wantonness; and to kill every mothers son of their enemies, and offer them
up, was an acceptable sacrifice to God.

Another Prophet of theirs, John Matthias by name, who bore great sway with the
people, when a blacksmith pinched him with a disgraceful scoff, calling him
cacatum Prophetum, he procured him to be condemned to death, and himself would
needs be the executioner, wounding him first with a holberd, and the wound
proving not mortal, History of the Anabaptists. c. 3.
he after shot him through with a pistol: then shedding a few Crocodile
tears, and seeming to take compassion on him, he pardons him for his rash
speech, saying, that God was reconciled to him, and that he had a Revelation
from heaven, that the man should not* die of his wounds: yet he proved as in
other things, so in that a false Prophet, the man dying a few days after. A
man would think that their Tailor King John of Leiden should rather use the
needle, then the rapier or sword: yet when soon after his Coronation, he made
a great^ Feast, bidding at least 4000. men and women between the first and
second course, he accuses a man of high treason, and cuts off his head with
his own hand, and returns merry to supper, and after supper, with the same
bloody hand, takes upon him to administer the blessed Sacrament of the body and
blood of our Savior, and not long after when there was a great famine in the
City of Munster, and yet the King and his courtiers a^ated nothing of their
variety of full dishes, and one of his fifteen wives (for so many he had)
somewhat more conscientious then the rest, said that she thought God was not
well pleased with their feasting, and rioting in the palace, when the people
pined for hunger in their houses, and many dyed famished in the streets; the
King being told of it, brought her to the market place with other of his wives,
and making her kneel down, there cut off her head, and commanded his other
wives to sing and give praises for it to the heavenly Father. It will be here
said that our Anabaptists in England were never arraigned, or condemned for any
such crimes, and that they seem to be a silly and harmless people: yet let
us take heed how we suffer the eggs of the cockatrice to remain amongst us;
for when they be hatched there will break out of them most venomous serpents.
The Lion when he is very young is rather gamesome then ravenous, or cruel: but
when he grows big and knows his own strength, being hunger-bit, he runs
roaring abroad seeking whom he may devour.

OBSERVAT. V.
That the Anabaptists are a profane and sacrilegious sect.
As moral virtue is placed in the middle between two extremes, the one in the
excess, the other in the defect: for example; liberlitie is in the middle
betwixt prodigality in the excess and covetousness in the defect;
magnanimity in the middle between ambition or haughtiness in the excess, and
pusillanimitie or baseuesse in the defect: fortitude or true valor in the
middle, between temeritie or fool-hardinesse in the excess, and cowardice in
the defect: so also true Religion has her proper seat in the middle between
superstition in the excess, and profaneness in the defect: and of the two
extremes profaneness is the worse, because it is near neighbor to atheism,
which plucks up all Religion by the root, out of the heart. Religio is so
called a Religando, because it binds the soul to God with the girdle of
verity: this golden belt of verity, superstition ties too hard, and strait,
profaneness too wide and loose. A superstitious man fears God in such sort
as he ought not, a profane person fears him not as he ought: the
superstitious attribute that worship to God, which he requires not, the
profane yield him not that worship he requires: superstition attireth
Religion over gorgeously, profaneness strips her of her necessary dress of
decent rites and ceremonies: in a word, superstition offers to God what he
claims not for his own, profaneness sacrilegiously robs him of that which is
his own, in a particular manner. In detestation of which ungodly disposition
in men, both Greeks and Latins have a proverbial spell, (...) procul este
prophani; and, Odi prophanu^ vulgus et arceo, says the Poet, away with profane
persons, join not hands with those who finger holy things; If it be burglarie
to break into men's houses and rifle them, what is it to rifle Churches? If it
be felony to rob men, what is it to rob God? The Anabaptists here with a heart
of Adamant, and brow of brass will be ready to answer, that like distracted
men we rave at we know not whom, we cry down such a sin as has no existence:
that the word sacrilege or holy theft is a mere scarcrow, or bugbeare to
fright fools. For those things that are truly holy are laid up in the soul as
the graces of the Spirit, which cannot be plundered: as for outward things
there is no holiness in them; neither in Churches, nor in Altars, nor in
Fonts, nor in Pulpits, nor in Vessel or Vestments, nor in gleabs or Centries.
What thou profane Esau, are there no Sabbathes now to be hallowed? No
Sanctuaries to be reverenced? no Sacraments to be Administered? no sacred
oblations to be made? no duties to be paid to God and those who attend on his
service? did thou never hear of a distinction of a twofold holiness, inherent,
and relative, or as some rather phrase it, subjectiva, and objectiva, a holiness
in the subject and a holiness in the object? inherent holiness no intelligent man
ever attributed to outward and inamimate things, for that holiness is a fruit of
faith produced in the soul by the operation of the holy Spirit, quae nec cripi
nec surripi potest; but for relative holiness, no Religious Christian ever
denied it to these things. The ground of which relative holiness is Gods
peculiar interest in them, either by virtue of his own claim, and challenge to
them, or by the fr^e will offering, donation and dedication of them to him by
godly persons. In which regard some places are holy, as Temples hallowed to his
Name: some days, as Feasts dedicated to his honor: some Persons, as Priests
and Levites under the Law, Presbyters and Deacons under the Gospel, men set a
part for his service: some Lands, profits and emoluments, as gleabs, tithes,
first fruits, oblations and other obventions, assigned for the maintenance of
the Ministry: some utensils, as Tables, Fonts, Pulpits, Chalices, vestments,
and the like, employed in the immediate service and worship of God, and to
alienate unjustly, detain or purloin any of these things from any of those
places, or persons to whom the Law of the Land agreeable to Gods Law has
appropriated or apportionated them, is that we call Sacrilege, which the
heathen themselves by the glimmering light of Nature knew not only to be a
sin, but a heinous and capital crime: for this is one of the Laws in the
twelve Tables so much commended, ^c. pro Rosc. ^mer. ^sui in cule^^ vivos, and
(...) mare projici. ^uson. acet and ex^p. sacrilegi ^hiusam bi^re coguntur, ^a
pota ter^es minasque (...) pentum ob^vari aiunt, (...) ut mortem ^i ex metu
^^sciscant.
Sacrum sacrove commodatum qui rapsit, parricida esto, Let him that steals
away any holy thing, or dedicated to a holy use, be punished as a parricide,
that is, as such a one who had murdered his father or mother, and what was such
a persons doom by the Roman Law? To be sowed in a sack and cast alive into
the sea. Neither was the punishment less severe among the Ethiopians, for if
any were convinced of that crime amongst them, there was a potion given him to
drink made of diverse kinds of poison, which they had no sooner taken of, but
it wrought so upon their fancies, that they conceived themselves to be stung
with all kinds of Serpents, and to rid themselves of the pain they made away
themselves. Here these profane wretches will be apt to reply, What are the
heathen Laws to us? How prove you out of Gods word that sacrilege is a sin?
To forbear other testimonies which might be largely insisted upon, Saint Paul
not only ranketh it among grievous sins, but sets it in a degree of impiety
above Idolatry, ^^m. 2. 2^.
thou which abhorrest Idols do thou commit sacrilege? as if he should say,
thou that so much detestest Idolatry, that thou abhorrest the very name of an
Idol, do thou worse? namely commit sacrilege; sacrilege, without all doubt,
is worse then Idolatry, for he more wrongeth the deity, who robs the true
God of that which is his due, then he who through a mistake exhibits honor to
another in stead of him. And that this kind of sacrilege we speak of, whereby
Churches or Churchmen are defrauded of their due is no better nor worse then
robbing God himself, Cap. 3. v. 8. 9.
the Prophet Malachi affirms, Verbis non tantum disertis, sedet exertis, Will
a man rob his gods? yet you have robbed me: but you say, Wherein have we robbed
thee? in tithes and offerings, therefore are ye cursed with a curse, for you
have robbed me, even this whole Nation. Ye are cursed with a curse, what means
this reduplication? can a man be cursed without a curse? are the latter words
redundant and superfluous? do they (...); no such thing; the learned know
better then so, the redoubling of the word is very significant in holy
Scriptures, as where we read, Visitando vistabo, in visiting I will visit thee,
that is, I will visit thee in a singular manner: and multiplicando
multiplicabo, in multiplying I will multiply thee, that is, I will exceedingly
multiply thee: and benedicendo benedicam, in blessing I will bless thee, that
is, I will extraordinarily bless thee: so here in the Prophet, ye shall be
cursed with a curse, imports no less then ye shall be cursed with a strange
curse, a signal curse, such a curse as he that hears his ears shall tingle,
and his knees smite one the other. Such a curse as was inflicted upon Xerxes,
and Caepio, and Marcus Crassus, and Herod, and their associats for attemping or
acting this horrible villani^: Xerxes sent an Army of 4000. to destroy the
Temple at Delphos, and pillage all those precious things, Justin. hist. l. ^
Xerxes ante navalem congressionem 4000. Armatorum Delphos a^ Templum Apollinis
diripiendum misit, quae tota manu^ nubibus and fulminib^s deleta est.
which all those Kings, Princes and Nations, who by their Ambassadors
consulted the oracle concerning the success of their wars, had laid up
there; but his whole Army was destroyed by Thunder and Lightening from heaven:
neither had Caepio the Consul better success, after he had spoiled the famous
Church of Tolouse, and from thence taken a great mass of gold, both he and
every man in his Army that had fingered any of that gold came to a miserable
end, and gave occasion to that Latin proverb spoken of a man who lives
miserably and dies desperately, aurum habit Tolosanum, surely he had some of
the gold of Tolouse in his keeping. In like manner Marcus Crassus after he had
taken 2000. talents of gold out of the Temple at Jerusalem, Eras. Chil.
which Pompey left there, was no sooner past over the river Euphrates, then his
whole Army was routed by the Parthians, and part of the gold he caused to be
carried out of the Temple, was melted and poured into his mouth, after he was
slain, with these words, Now surfeit of gold after thy death, wherewith thou
could never be satisfied all thy life long. Yet Herod who could not but hear of
this dysaster of Crassus, Dan. 5. 5.
living in those times and parts, would take no warning thereby: Theod. Eccles.
Hist. l. 3. 11.
but understanding of vast sums of money laid up for safety in the Temple, and
hid in the Sepulcher of David; sent his men of war to rifle the place, Felix
sacrorum vasorum magnificentiam conspicatus, Ec^c, inquit, quam sumptuosi^
vasis filio Mariae ministratur. Cap. 12. Sed isti impii non diu post paenas
persolverunt Faelix de^epente flagelliocoelitus impacto sanguinem dies
noctesqque ex ore fudit, flatimqque extinctus est; lulianus confestim in gravem
morbum delapsus, visceribus put redine exesi interiit, and s^eleratu^^ ejus
(...) inst^^mentum blasphemiae p^^tis illius ad flercus ejicicndum natae locum
obti^uit.
who in digging, as they came to the Cave near the Coffins of David and
Solomon, there brake out thence a fire, that burnt the sacrilegious delvers all
to ashes. To these we may add Balshazzar, Copronymus, Julian the Governor of
the East, and servant to the Apostate Emperor of that name, and Faelix, who
all read a sad Lecture to Church-robbers, written in Characters of blood.

As soon as Balshazzar took the vessels of the Temple into his hand, and
carrowsed in the cups, he saw a hand in the wall, writing his dreadful doom.
After Leo surnamed Copronymus, espied a Crown beset with Carbuncles in a
Christian Church; and coveting after it, caused it to be fetched from thence,
and had set it upon his head; there suddenly arose a Carbuncle in his
forehead, which suffered his Temples afterward to take no rest. And as close
did the punishment of the like sacrilege follow at the heels of Julian, and
Faelix; for within a few weeks after, Faelix deriding at the rich plate, Mary's
son was served in, together with Julian; had carried away all the rich
presents, and massy vessels of gold, which the devotion of Constantine and
Constantius, had dedicated to God in the new Temple at Jerusalem built by
Queen Helena, Gods vengeance seized upon them both, Faelix dying of a flux of
blood, and Julian of the foul disease, called the Miserer^; which I spare to
describe, lest it should defile my pen, as it did his sacrilegious mouth. Of
this sin which God so exemplarily punished, no sort of ancient heretics or
schismatics were more guilty then the Donatists, from whom our Anabaptists are
lineally descended; for Saint Augustine in his Epistle to Bonifacius, bitterly
exclaimes against them for ^ushing violently into the Churches of the
Catholics, Sleid. Com. l. 1o Ae^em Di^^ Mauricci suburbem invadunt, and cum
vicinis omnibus aedificii^ ^ncendunt, de^nde Templa omnia di^ipiunt.
breaking asunder the Altar boards, pulling down the partitions, and making
havoc of all things there; and herein our Anabaptists their cursed
offsprings, learn to patrizare. Rotman with Cniperdolin, in the year 1534.
after they had altered the Senate in Munster, seized upon the Church dedicated
to Mauricius, situated in the Suburbs; and pillaged all the other Churches in
the City. And in Suevia and Franconia, Muncer and Phifer, two principal
incendiaries among the Anabaptists, made their Magazins in the Covent of the
Franciscans, and cast their Ordnance there, and Phiser running into the country
of Isfield, Hist. Anab. c. 3.
pillageth all the Castles, and Churches. And their Taylor-King, John of
Leiden, of the Coapes, and Altar-cloathes, and rich vestments; (stolen from the
Churches, which they pillaged) made good use; and by the help of his former
trade, translated them all into apparel for himself, and his Courtiers. and
glittering Caparisons for his horses. And what evil their Disciples mingled
with Brownists, have done in the Sanctuar^es of God in England and Ireland,
though I should hold my peace, the timber out of the beams, and the Chalices
out of the Vestry, and the marble and brass out of the Monuments of the dead,
would proclaim it to the everlasting infamy of this profane Sect. But it is
time Claudere rivos, to shut down the Floodgates, lest my discourse be
overflowne with these muddy and brackish waters. Sat prata biberunt.

OBSERVAT. Ult.
Of the untimely deaths, and fearful ends of the Ringleaders of this Sect.
No man knows either love or hatred by all that is before him, Eccles. 9. 1.
2.
all things come alike to all; there is one event to the righteous, and to the
wicked, to the clean, and to the unclean; to him that sacrifices, and to him
that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner, and he that swears,
as he that fears an Oath. Thus speaks King Solomon, either in the person of
the Epicure denying special providence, or as most agree in his own person,
without any figure or Prosopopoeia at all, to deter men from passing rash
censures upon any in particular; for outward dysasters, in regard of the common
calamities incident to all mankind: no man may certainly judge, whether a man
be in Gods favor or state of Grace, by the floate of these outward blessings,
or that he is out of Gods favor; and in the condition of a Reprobate by the
ebb of them, or the contrary inundation of afflictions. For a man may be as
miserable as Lazarus in this world, yet destinated to Abraham's bosom: as on
the other side, a man may be as happy as Dives here, yet reserved for
everlasting torments hereafter. It is therefore sage Counsel the Poet gives,
Ne te quaesiveris extra, seek not thy self out of thy self, neither value thy
self by thy outward estate, but thy stock of inward virtues. Notwithstanding
this general observation concerning the benign aspect of heaven in this life,
or manifold dysasters, it is most certain, that God exempteth some from common
calamities, and powers the full vialls of his vengeance upon others in such
sort, even in this life; that the most secure sinners are constrained to
profess in the words of the Psalmist, Psalm. 58. 10.
utique est fructus justo, utique est Deus judex in terra; doubtless there is
reward to the just, doubtless there is a God that judges the earth. If God
did not set a mark upon some notorious offenders in this life, and make them
examples to others, upon what evidence could the Prophet say, Psalm. 9. 16.
the Lord is known by the judgment which he executes, the wicked is snared
in the works of his own hands. On which text the ensuing relations may serve
as a brief Commentary. Who cannot read Corah and his Accomplices sin in their
punishment? they made the first Schism in the congregation, and in their time
there was a wide rent made in the earth, Numb. 16. 31.
through which they descended quick into hell. Elymas the forcerer who
endeavored to seduce the proconsul from the Christian faith, and cast a mist
as it were before his eyes, that he might not discern true Religion from
superstition, was suddenly smitten with blindness. Cerinthus the old heretic,
Acts 13. 11.
who corrupted the doctrine of the Gospel in the purest times, Hayn. Compend.
Eccl. hist. ^. 1.
resorting to a common Bath where he met the Apostle of Christ, was killed by
the fall of the house, as soon as the beloved Disciple who made have to shun
him, was got out of the door: Montanus with his two trulls Priscilla and
Maximilla, who betrayed the truth of God, Hieron. in Ca^al.
took part of Judas cord, and hanging themselves, thereby strangled that
heresy in the Infancy. Manes who tare the seamelesse coat of Christ, and with
a part thereof covered the heretics called from his name Manichees, had his
skin wholly torn from his flesh, and being thus excoriated in the quickest
sense of lingering pain, he yielded up his unhappy ghost; Vitaque cum gemitu
fugit indignata sub umbras.

Arius who infected the greatest part of the world with his p^stilent heresy,
came to a most shameful end in the public James at Alexandria, voyding his
bowels at his easment there. Nestorius his tongue rotted in his mouth;
wherewith for many years he had blasphemed the person of Christ. To pass by
other Arch-hereticks, who tasted of the cup of trembling in this life, out of
which, it is to be feared, ^ontan. Catal. ^oeret.
they now suck the very dregs in Hell. The intelligent Reader who peruseth the
late stories of the Anabaptists, er Germani^n, Alsatiam (...) Sueviam ^50000.
cannot but take notice that many thousands of that Sect, who defiled their
first Baptism by their second, were baptized the third time with their own
blood, ^erunt truci^ti.
yet suffered death: ( non ut coronam fidei, sed poenam perfi^iae) Servetus an
Anabap. as an Arian received the sentence of death at Geneva, Phifer at Mulhus,
Rotman that sacrilegious Anabaptist was slain in Saint Lamberts Churchyard;
Tho: Muncer was put to the rack by George Duke of Saxony, and the Land-grave of
Hesse, where he roared most fearfully, and in the end had his head cut off, and
put upon a high pole in the fields. Three hundred Anabaptists that fell upon
the Monastery of Bilsw^rd in Frizland, and rifled it, were all of them (save
62. that fled) either killed in the ruins of the Monastery, or put to death
by the hangman. I gave thee a touch, Courteous Reader, in the first Chapter, of
their King Io: of Leiden, and their Consul Bernard Cuipperdoling, whose
judgments slept not, for before the end of two years, in which they played all
their pranks, they together with their great Prophet were tied to a stake, had
their flesh torn from them with hot pinchers, in the end they were stabbed to
the hearts, Krechting.
and after they were dead, their bodies were put in iron cages, and hanged on
the Steeple of Saint Lambert: Sleid. Com. lib. 10.
the King according to his Royal dignity having his exalation, hanging higher
then the Consul, and the Prophet. Alligantur palo, aderant binae carnifices ac
forcipes igniti and per horum and amplius lacerati transactis demum per pectora
mucronibus and caveis serreis illigati singuli ad summam turris urbis
exponuntur penfiles; Rex quidem medius and quanta est bominis statura sublimior
illis Idem verbis parum mutatis habet Pontan. in Catal. h^eret.


A Censure of a Book printed Anno 1644. Entitled, The confession of faith of
those Churches which are commonly (though falsely) called ANABAPTISTS.
PLiny writes, Not. Hist. l. 32. cap. 10.
that if the black humor of the Cuttell-fish be mingled with oil in a Lamp,
the visages of all in the room, though never so fair and beautiful, Lucerna
si sepiae atrament^ incendatur astantium vultus alioqui formosos hor^ibiles,
and Aethiopicos videri facit.
will seem ugly, and of the hieu of Blackamores: so the Proctors for our
Anabaptists would bear us in hand, that all who of late have preached, and
written against that Sect, through the black humor of malice, tanqua^ Sepiae
atram^nto, make it appear much more deformed, and odious then it is: for if we
give credit to this confession and the preface thereof, those who among us are
branded with that title, are neither Heretics, nor Scismaticks, but tender
hearted Christians: Ingerunt primum verba veritatis ut virus falsitatis
introeat.
upon whom through false suggestions, the hand of Authority fell heavy whilst
the Hierarchy stood; for they neither teach free will, nor falling away from
grace, with the Arminians, nor deny original sin with the Pelagians, nor
disclaim Magistracy with the Jesuits, nor maintain plurality of wives with
the Polygamists, nor community of goods with the Apostolici, nor going naked
with the Adamites; much less aver the mortality of the soul with Epicures;
and Psychopannychists; and to this purpose they have published this confession
of their Faith, subscribed by fifteen persons in the name of seven Churches in
London.

Of which I may truly say as Saint Hilarie does of that of the Arrians, they
offer to the unlearned their fair cup full of venom, anointing the brim with
the honey of sweet and holy words, they thrust in store of true positions, that
together with them they may juggle in the venom of their falsehood: they cover
a little ratsbane in a great quantity of sugar that it may not be discerned.
For among the fifty three Articles of their confession, there are not above six
but may pass with a fair construction: and in those six none of the foulest
and most odious positions wherewith that Sect is aspersed are expressed. What
then? are all that have employed their tongue and pen against them heretofore
no better then calumniators and false accusers of their brethren? nothing
less; for besides the testimonies of Melancthon, Bullinger, Sleiden, Gastius,
Pontanus, Guidebres, and others who lived among them, by the harmony of all
the Protestant Churches confessions it appears that the masters of our
Anabaptists and Ringleaders of that sect in Switzerland, Suevia, Franconia,
Munster, Saxony, and the Low Countries, held such erroneous tenets as are
above mentioned; and if their Scholars in England have learned no such
doctrines from them, it is because they are punies in their School, and have
not taken any Lesson in the upper forms; they have but sipt of the cup I spoke
before of, the devil holds them but by the heel only as Thetis did Achilles
when she dipped him in the sea.

We read in Diodorus Siculus of certain creatures about the shores of Nilus not
fully formed, and in a Stone-cutters shop we see here the head of a man, there
all the upper parts carved, in a third place the perfect statue: so it seems to
me that these Anabaptists are but in fieri (as the Schools speak) not in facto
esse; like the fish and Serpents in the mud of Nilus, not fully shaped: like a
statue in the Stone-cutters shop, not finished: they are Anabaptists but in
part, not in whole. Be it so, for I desire to make them rather better, then
worse then they are. I will therefore lay nothing to them but that they own,
nor bring any other evidence against them, then this their confession. In which
I except,

First, against those words in the thirty one Article, Whatsoever the Saints
any of them do possess or enjoy of God in this life, is by Faith. This
passage savours rank of that error or heresy (call it which you please)
imputed to Armacanus, who is said to have taught that the right of all
possessions and goods or temporal blessings is founded in grace, not in
nature; and that we hold them by no legal tenure, but Evangelicall promises:
and true it is that none but the faithful hold in capite, nor have any but
true believers, a comfortable and sanctified use of the creatures, and a
spiritual title to them; but yet it cannot be denied that they may have, and
many have actually a legal title to them, and civil interest in them even
before they are in Christ, or adopted into his family by actual Faith: for if
it were otherwise, Esau should have had no right to mount Seir, nor
Nebuchadnezzar to Tire, which yet the text says God bestowed upon them: nay if
this position may take place, no child shall have any right to his fathers
inheritance, nor Prince newly borne to his Crown: which is not only an absurd,
but a very dangerous and seditious assertion. None of the four great Monarchs
of the world represented in Daniels vision, for ought can be proved, were true
believers, though some of them did some outward acts of piety, and afforded
some real courtesies to the people of God: yet of these Kingdoms the Prophet
speaking, says, Dan. 4. 25. 32.
that the most High rules in them, and gives them to whomsoever he will, and
Saint Augstine is bold to say, that the same God who set the Crown upon
Constantine the Christians head, gave the Empire of the world to Julian the
Apostata: Nay Christ himself paid tribute to Caesar, and acknowledged that he
had a right to the tribute money, Mat. 22. 21.
saying, Render unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's: Yet that Caesar he
spoke of was Tiberius, an enemy to all godliness, and a kind of monster among
men.

Secondly, I except against those words in the 38. Article that the due
maintenance of the officers aforesaid should be the free, and voluntary
communication of the Church, and not by constraint to be compelled from the
people by aforced Law.

These words may carry a double sense: if their meaning be that all Religious
Christians ought freely to contribute to the maintenance of the ministry, and
should not need any law to enforce them: we embrace their good affection to the
Church, and Churchmen; but if their meaning be, that the maintenance ought to
depend upon the voluntary contribution of their parishioners, and that in case
the flock should deny their Shepherds either part of their milk or fleece,
that the Pastors should have no assistance of Law to recover them: this their
opinion is most impious and sacrilegious, and directly repugnant to the Law of
God, which assigns tithes for the maintenance of the Priests; and that Law of
God in the old Testament is not abrogated in the new, but rather confirmed, at
least in the equity thereof; for Christ speaking of tithing mint and cummin,
says, Luke. 11. 42.
those things ye ought to do, and not leave these things undone: and the
Apostle proves that the ministers of the Gospel ought to live of the Gospel, 1
Cor. 9. 9 10. For it is written in the Law of Moses, thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the ox that treads out the corn: does God take care of oxen? or
says he, is it altogether for our sakes? no doubt this is written, that he
that ploweth should plow in hope, and he that thresheth in hope shall be
partaker of his hope.
both by the Law of God, and by the Law of nature, verse. 7. Who goes a warfare
on his own charge? who planteth a vineyard and eats not of the fruit thereof?
or who feeds a flock and eats not of the milk of the flock? and verse. 13.
Do ye not know that those that minister about holy things live of the things
of the Temple, and they that wait at the Altar, be partakers with the Altar?
even so has the Lord ordained that they which preach the Gospel should live of
the Gospel. He says not God permits or allows of it, but ordains and
commands it. And lest these two strings should not be strong enough, to keep
the bow still bent, he adds a third, to wit, an Apostolical injunction, Gal.
6. 6.
let him that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches in all
good things. Moreover when we read that Abraham and Jacob gave tithes, I demand
by what Law, whether by the Law of nature, or the Leviticall or Evangelicall?
not by virtue of the Leviticall, for that Law was not then enacted, and by that
Law Levi was to receive, not pay tithes. Yet Levi himself in Abraham paid
tithes to Melchisedech: if they paid it by the Law of nature, that binds all
men: if by the Evangelicall Law, it binds all Christians to pay their tithes
toward the maintenance of Melchisedechs Priesthood which endures for ever.
And Saint Austine fearfully upon this ground threatens all those who refuse
willingly to pay their tithes, that God would reduce them to a tithe, and blast
all the nine parts of their estate. Sermon. de temp.


Thirdly, Mat. 28. 18. 19.
I except against the thirty ninth Article, viz. that baptism is an ordinance
of the new Testament, Mark 16. 16.
given by Christ to be dispensed only upon persons professing Faith, Acts 2.
37. 38. et. 8. 36. 37. 38. et. 18. 8.
or that are disciples, or taught, who upon a profession of Faith ought to be
baptized. Here they lispe not, but speak out plain their Anabaptisticall
doctrine: whereby they exclude all the children of the faithful from the
sacrament of entrance into the Church, and the only outward means of their
salvation in that state: but the best of their proofs fall short, the word
only which only can prove this their assertion is not found in any of the texts
alleged in the margent, nor can the sense of it be collected from thence. For
though it is most true and evident in the letter of those texts, that all
Nations that are to be converted, and all men in them of years of discretion,
that have been taught the principles of Religion, ought to make profession of
their Faith before they are baptized, as all that came to men's estate among the
Jews or proselytes, ought both to know, and to give their assent to the
covenant, before they received the seal thereof, to wit, circumcision: yet no
such thing was or could be required of children, who notwithstanding were
circumcised the eight day: so by the judgment of all the Christian Churches in
the world, the children of believers, who are comprised in the letter of the
covenant, may receive the seal thereof, to wit, baptism, though they cannot
make profession of their Faith by themselves, for the present, but others make
it for them, and in their stead: the affirmative is true, that all that make
profession of their Faith, and testify their unfeigned repentance are to be
baptized: but the negative is most false, that none are to be baptized who have
not before made such profession of their Faith, when by reason of their
infancy they are not capable to be taught. But this heretical assertion is at
large resu'ed by manifold Arguments drawn from Scripture, Fathers and reason,
and all their cavils and evasions exploded, Article 2. to which I refer the
Reader.

Fourthly, I except against the fortieth Article, viz. The way and manner of
dispensing of this Ordinance, the Scripture holds out to be dipping or plunging
the whole body under water; it being a sign, must answer the things signified,
which are these, 1. The washing of the whole soul in the blood of Christ: 2.
That interest the Saints have in the death, burial, and resurrection of
Christ: 3. Together with a confirmation of our Faith, that as certainly as the
body is buried under water, and rises again, so certainly shall the bodies of
the Saints be raised by the power of Christ in the day of the resurrection to
reign with Christ. This Article is wholly sowred with the new leaven of
Anabaptisme, I say the new leaven, for it cannot be proved that any of the
ancient Anabaptists maintained any such position, there being three ways of
baptizing, either by dipping, or washing, or sprinkling, to which the Scripture
alludeth in sundry places: the Sacrament is rightly administered by any of the
three, and whatsoever is here alleged for dipping, we approve of so far as it
excludes not the other two. Dipping may be, and has been used in some places,
trina immersio, a threefold dipping; but there is no necessity of it: it is not
essential to Baptism, neither do the Texts in the margent conclude any such
thing. It is true, John baptized Christ in Jordan, and Philip baptized the
Eunuch in the river: but the Text says not that either the Eunuch, or Christ
himself, or any baptized by John, or his Disciples, or any of Christ's
Disciples, were dipped, plunged, or dowsed over head and ears, as this Article
implies, and our Anabaptists now practice.

Again, the bare example of Christ and his Apostles without a precept does not
bind the Church, and precept there is none for dipping; it is certain Christ
and his Apostles celebrated the Communion after Supper, and in unleavened
bread; and with such a gesture as was then in use among the Jews: yet because
there is no precept in the Gospel for these things, no Christian Church at
this day precisely observes those circumstances, and therefore dato and non
concesso, that Christ and Saint John or their Disciples, used dipping in
Baptism; it will not follow that we ought to baptize in the like and no other
manner. Besides it ought to be noted, that in the beginning, Christians had no
Churches, nor Fonts in them; and there being many hundreds, nay thousands,
often to be baptized together: there was a kind of necessity that this
Sacrament should be administered in rivers, or such places where were store of
waters, as there were in Enon near Salem, where John baptized. John 3. 22.
But now the Church has better provided, there being Christian Oratories every
where, and Fonts in them most convenient for this purpose; whereunto I shall
need to add here no more, having fully handled this point both (...), and
(...), in the discussion of the first Article.

Fifthly, I except against the 41. Article, viz. The persons designed by Christ
to dispense this ordinance, the Scripture hold forth to be a preaching
Disciple, it being no where tied to a particular Church, Officer, or Person. If
the eye be darkness, how great is that darkness? if there be confusion in
order it self, how great must the confusion needs be? if all be Pastors,
where are their flocks? if all be teachers, where are their Scolars? a
preaching Disciple sounds as harshly as a Scholar Master, or a Lecturing
hearer; it is true, we grant that all who have received gifts from God, ought
to make use of them for the benefit of others, and if any abound in knowledge,
he ought to communicate to them that lack, and freely give, lumen de lumine,
Clouds when they are full power down, and the spowts run, and the eaves
shed, and the presses overflow, and the Aromaticall trees sweat out their
precious and sovereign oils, and every learned Scribe in the Kingdom of God,
Matthew. 13. 52.
brings out of his rich treasury new things and old. Notwithstanding this
necessary duty of employing our talent, whatsoever it be to our Masters best
advantage, none may take upon him the cure of souls without Commission; nor
divide the word, and dispense the Sacraments without ordination, and imposition
of hands: none may preach except he be sent, none may assume the honor of the
Priesthood, except he be called as was Aaron: none may open and shut the
Kingdom of heaven, except they have received the keys from Christ; neither a
calling without gifts, nor gifts without a calling, makes a man of God: if any
have a calling without gifts, their Ministry is without fruit; if any gifts
without a calling, their Ministry is without power; the former have (...) but
not (...), the latter (...), but not (...): not every one that has a strong
voice, is a lawful crier in a Court, but he that is appointed: neither is
every one that can write a good hand, a public Notary, but he that is sworn:
neither may every Mariner that is skilful in Navigation, take upon him the
office of a Pilot, but he that is chosen. But this error of the Anabaptists,
whereby they overthrow all order in the Church, and confound shepherds and
flocks, Masters and Scholars, Clergy and Laity, I have professedly impugned,
and at large refelled, Article 4. Whither I refer the Reader for further
satisfaction.

Sixthly, I except against the 45. Article. That such to whom God has given
gifts, being tried in the Church, may and ought by the appointment of the
congregation to prophecy.

When Muncer a seditious Anabaptist first set abroach their doctrine at
Mulchus, and took upon him to reform many things in Church and State; Sleid.
Com. l. 5. Luthe^us Mulhusium Literas dat graviter mon^t ne recipiat Muncerum
hominem seditiosum, recte facturum Senatum si roget ex ipso quis docendi munus
ipsi commiserit, quis evocarit; and si Deum nominet authorem tum jubeat hanc
suam vocationem aliquo evidenti signo comprobare; quod si representare non
possit, ut tum repudi^tur; hoc enim esse Deo proprium alque familiare, quoties
formulam consuetam and rationem ordinariam velit immutare, ut tum voluntatem
suam aliquo signo declaret.
Luther advised the Senate to demand of him what calling he had to do such
things he did, and if he should avouch God for the Author of his calling, then
they should require of him to prove that his calling from God by some eminent
sign; for that whenever it pleases God to change the ordinary course, and
to call any man to any office extraordinarily; he declares that his good will
and pleasure by some evident sign. If the calling of the Anabaptisticall
teachers be be ordinary, let them demonstrate it by Scripture; if
extraordinary, let them prove it by miracle. For the prophecy they spoke of,
let them distinctly declare what kind of Prophesying they mean, and whom they
esteem Prophets: for prophesying is taken in a double sense in holy Scripture;
sometimes according to the propriety of the Greek derivation, for the
prediction of things future: sometimes in a larger sense, for revealing the
mysteries of God, and expounding his Oracles either concerning things past,
present, or to come; and this two manner of ways, either with study and upon
premeditation, with the help of Arts and Tongues, and by consulting the best
Commentaries both ancient and latter, or without any study or premeditation, by
immediate revelation or inspiration. Prophecy in the first sense is an
extraordinary calling; in the last an extraordinary gift; in the middle
acception an ordinary Ministerial duty. And if that custom which Archbishop
Grindall would have introduced into the Church in the days of Q. Elizabeth,
and is in use at Geneva, and among some other reformed Churches, were put in
practice in England, and a certain number of learned and able Pastors met at
some set times, and having before notice of the Texts to be handled, should
every one in their order deliver their several interpretations, observations,
and applications thereof, (which they call Prophesying) we should exceedingly
approve of it; and questionles, thereby the Ministe^s would very much improve
their talents of knowledge. But for rude^ and illiterate Mechanics, without
calling, without knowledge of Arts, or Tongues, upon a Scripture read in the
Congregation to give their sudden judgments, and interpretations thereof, as
is the manner of the Anabaptists: we hold it an intolerable presumption in
them, and unsufferable abus^ in the Church. For those extraordinary revelations
they pretend unto, together with the miraculous gift of Tongues and healing,
for many hundred years ago: have failed in the Church. If they could now do
as the Primitive Corinthians could, not only pray by the spirit, but sing by
the spirit: if upon the first proposal of an obscure and intricate passage of
the old Prophets, or Apocalypse; they can give upon the sudden a clear and
rational interpretation, and deliver this in what Language soever; if they can
discover the secrets of the hearts of unbeleivers in such sort, that they
falling down on their face, ^ Cor. 24. 25.
shall worship God, and report that God is in your Assemblies of a truth; then
let the examples of the Primitive Christians in the Apostles days, serve them
for Precedents in this kind; but of those irradiations of the Spirit, together
with the glisning of the fiery tongues, have not been seen in any Christian
Church these many ages; if they come as short of the prime converts to the
Christian Religion in extraordinary gifts, as in time: if they are so far from
speaking with strange tongues, that they cannot speak correctly and coherently
in one: if they are so wide of the sense of the place they expound, that their
Paraphrases are often without sense: if they utter old broken notes taken from
none of the best Sermons, for new revelations: if they furbish up ancient
heresies that have layne long in the dark, for Christian Armor of Light: if in
their interpretations they not only contradict the Scriptures but themselves:
and in stead of a musical consent we hear nothing but vain janglings: if their
prophecyings for the time past have bin no better, and none can prophecy or
promise better of them for the time to come, though they pretend never so much
to the spirit, and boast of visions and Revelations, though some of them have a
glib tongue, and thereby slide into the approbation of the vulgar sort: though
in their contemplations they sore up so high, that they lose themselves and
their hearers: though they draw their thin^e wier to a great length: though
notwithstanding they are often gravelled and interfeere: yet they outrun the
hour-glasse, and tire all their auditors before themselves are out of breath;
they shall give us leave to esteem them no Prophets, but Enthusiasts: no
inspired men, but distracted: no seers, but dreamers: no expositours, but
impostours: no commentaters, but commenters, nay rather commentiters: no
workmen, but botchers: no carbuncles, but gloeworms: no fixed Stars, but
wanderers: no lights, but ignes fatuos: exhalations incensed in the night,
which lead fools out of their way, sometimes into thickets, sometimes into
ditches, and quagmires, and many of them into rivers over head and ears.
Ferunt rana^ lam pade supra lacum in quo tumultuantur appensa, illius fulgore
repercussas conticescere.
Hermannus Leomelius in his apology for the Regulars against the usurped
authority of the Bishop of Chalcedon reports that when the frogs make a
hideous noise in any lake or ditch, about the house, if a candle or bright
burning lamp be set upon the bank, they become suddenly silent and are
presently hushed: the frogs which about the lakes and ditches near the City,
and suburbs, have made such a hideous noise in the dark, that they have much
disquieted Christ's spouse, and interrupted her sweet repose, are the late fry
of Anabaptists. Aristoph. (...)
But now since I have set up a light upon the banks, and clearly discovered
both them, and their errors: I hope we shall see no more of their
Froggalliards, nor hear of their harsh croaking and coaxation either in the
Pulpit or the Press.


