AN ALARM OF TRUTH Sounded forth to the Nations; OR The Way of Truth from the
Way of Error, plainly Manifested and Declared.
And the true Worship of God (which is in the Spirit) from the false worships
of the World, distinguished.

Whereby people may come to know which Way they are in, and what Worship they
are in, and what Spirit they are of, and led by; Whether they are in the Spirit
of God, which the Saints were in, and now are in at this day; or the spirit of
this World, which is the spirit of Antichrist, gone out into the World; which
has the words of Christ and the Saints, and a form of godliness, but denies
the power where it is manifest, and is turned against it, and persecute it: But
that spirit is denied, and the true Spirit witnessed.

Also an invitation (of love) to all people, and Professors of all sorts and
sects, to turn in their minds to the Light of Christ Jesus in them, which does
reprove them for sin, which is the manifestation of the Spirit of truth, which
is freely given; that with it they may all see, and try themselves, and all
their Teachers whom they have long followed, what spirit they are of, seeing
they cannot say they have the same Spirit they Apostles had.

Written by a Friend to Truth, called HENRY FELL.

London, Prinred for Robert Wilson, and are to be sold at the Sign of the
Black-spread-Ha^^e and Windmill in Martins Le Grand 1660.

To all the People, and Teachers, and Professors of all sorts in these Nations,
or elsewhere.
FRIENDS and People, the Truth has been declared among you; and the sound of
it has been heard by you, and the everlasting Gospel has been preached, and
must be preached to all Nations, Kindreds and Tongues, that thereby the large
love of God may be known, and made manifest unto all mankind, that he would not
have any to perish, but that they might all come to the knowledge of his truth,
that they might be saved. And therefore he has uttered forth his voice from on
high, and is causing the sound of it to be heard in the Nations, that all
people should fear God, and give glory to him, for the hour of his Judgment is
come, and coming; and his day is appearing after so long a time of darkness,
and night of apostasy which has been over the face of the earth; even over all
Nations, Kindreds and People, for many ages and Generations past, So that
darkness has covered the earth, and gross darkness the people, and the way
of the Lord has been hid from them, which is a straight way, and a way of
holiness, wherein the unclean cannot walk, but they have been walking in
untroden paths, and in crooked ways, and have been erred from the Lord, and
from his way, days without number, nor have not known it. For their hearts
have been filled with filthiness, and all manner of uncleanness, in so much
that they have committed sin with greediness, and followed after the vanities
of their own minds, and walking after their own hearts lusts, to the satisfying
thereof, and have been stubborn and rebellious children against the Lord, in so
much that the Lord has been against them, and his jealousy has been
provoked, and his indignation has been kindled against them, and his wrath
has been revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of
men, who have holden his truth in the unrighteousness, and there has not been
peace to him that came in, nor to him that went out; for that which was
manifested of God in them has not been regarded, therefore has the anger of
the Lord been kindled, and his hand has been stretched out still, because of
all the abominations that have been committed in the Nations, and among the
people: who have professed the knowledge of his name; whereby his Name: has
been profaned and blasphemed among the Heathen round about, 2 Thessalonians, 2.9, 10,
11.
and his Truth dishonored which they have professed in words, but in works
denied, and held it in the unrighteousness; Who have not received the truth in
the love of it ( which God has showed unto them) nor have not obeyed it, but
have taken pleasure in unrighteousness, and therefore have they been given up
to strong delusions, to believe lies, and to commit iniquity with a high hand,
and rejected the truth, and erred from it in their hearts, and striven against
it, and have loved their evil deeds, and their unrighteous ways, and have not
chosen the way of the Lord, nor served the Law of the Lord with their hearts
nor with their minds, but whilst they have drawn nigh unto God with their
mouths and with their lips have honored him, their hearts have been removed
far off from him: And their fear toward him has been taught by the precepts
of men; for the Precepts of God, and his Commands, and Law in the heart has
been disregarded and cast behind their backs; Isa. 5.24.
And they have despised the word of the Holy One of Israel: Therefore as the
fire devoureth the stubble, and as the flame consumes the chafe, so their
root shall be rottenness, and their blossom shall ascend as the dust; for
behold the Lord will come with fire, and with his Chariots like a whirlwind to
render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with slames of fire; for by fire
and by his sword will the Lord plead with all flesh, who have corrupted their
ways before him, Isa. 66.15.
and delighted in the thing that was not good, whereby he has been provoked to
anger.

And now this is come to pass among all the Professions in the world, who have
had the Scriptures of truth which was declared and spoken forth by the Holy men
of God, from the Spitit of Truth which was in them, and dwelt in them; whereby
they were made able Ministers ( not of the letter but) of the Spirit; by which
they were able to try, and judge of all Spirits whether they were of God, and
saw many in their days who had gotten the true words, and had a form of
godliness but denied the power, and so they turned away from such, 2 Timothy 3.5.
and did bear their testimony then against such whom they saw separating
themselves, being sensual having not the Spirit, and saw such as were erred
from the Spirit going in the way of Cain, to envy, and running greedily after
the error of Balaam, for gifts and rewards, and for the wages of
unrighteousness, And such as served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own
bellyes, and preached for filthy lucre, and through covetousness with fained
words made merchandise of the people, and were enemies to the Cross of Christ,
whose God was their belly, who gloryed in their shame, whose and was
destruction, who minded earthly things; And such as had great swelling words of
vanity, whilst they themselves were servants of corruption, and what they
knew; Jude 10.
They knew naturally as bruit beasts, and in those things they corrupted
themselves. And false Prophets there was, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2.
as there shall be false Teachers amongst you; (says the Apostle) who privily
shall bring in damnable heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them, and
many shall follow their pernicious ways; by reason of whom the way of truth
should be evil spoken of; And that perilous times should come, that men should
be lovers of themselves, covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to
parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false
accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, 2 Timothy 3.

Now all those before mentioned, were, and are erred from the Spirit of truth
which was in the Saints, the holy-men of God, who spoke forth the Scriptures
which declares of these things, that there was such then, and that there should
be such. Therefore now behold all People and see whether the things which the
Apostles prophesied of concerning the false Teachers which should come, be not
come to pass abundantly in the Generations since their days, and also in this
our age; insomuch as the whole world has been deceived by them, and led after
them, and they have drawn them into many Religions, Sects, and Opinions, and
set them to kill and murder one another about Religion, and about the
Scriptures, and about their worships and Laws to compel men to them; being all
erred from the Spirit, and from the Truth, and now know not the Truth, nor the
Spirit which was in the Apostles and Saints, in which Spirit they worshipped
God in their days; and those then that got Christ's words, and the Prophets
words, and had not his Spirit ( but were arred from it) and were out of the
Life, and out of the Truth, which they did profess in words; These I say the
Saints and true Christians, who were followers of Christ, and had his Spirit,
with it they tried the spirits of the other, who had it not; and found them not
to be of God, nor to be believed, nor received, but turned from; for they were
false Spirits and false Prophets which were gone out into the world from
Christ, and from the Saints, that had the Spirit of God in them, by which they
tried the other, and found them to be of the world, and Antichrists in the
spirit of this world, and by it led, which comes from him who is called, The
god of this world who had blinded their minds. 12 Cor. 4.
And so they were not true Prophets (or Seers) or true Ministers of Christ, nor
true Teachers, but false Teachers, false Ministers, false Prophets and
Antichrists, and blind guids gone out into the world, in the worlds Spirit, and
so with that spirit they could not confess Christ come in the flesh, though in
words they might say he was come in the flesh (as all the Priests and
Professors who are called Christians, do now at this day in words confess him)
but not with the Spirit confess him, as their fruits make it manifest.

Now says the Apostle, hereby know ye the Spirit of God. Every Spirit that
confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God; And every Spirit
that confesses not that Jesus Christ as come in the flesh is not of God, and
this is the spirit of Antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come,
and even now already is in the world. Ye are of God little children, and have
over come them, because greater is he that is in you, then he that is in the
world. They are of the world, therefore speak they of the world, and the world
hears them. We are of God, he that knows God hears us: Hereby know me the
Spirit of Truth and the spirit of Error, John 1.4. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. verses.
Now if those had not had Christ's words, and confessed him in words to be come
in the flesh, (while they were out of his life, and of another spirit) then the
Apostle would not have called them Antichrists, and Prophets, and Teachers, but
he would have called them Jews, or Gentiles, or Heathers; but this was it which
did differ them from the Jews, and unbelieving Gentiles, and Heathers then;
Namely, They had the words of Christ and the Saints, and the Prophets, and did
profess them as the Priests and Teachers, and Professors do now the
Scriptures, but are erred from the life of Christ, and from the Spirit that was
in the Saints who gave forth the Scriptures as they were then, whom John
speaks of, erred from the life and Spirit of Christ and the Saints, and so
were Antichrists, and false Prophets, and false Teachers and Deceivers, which
were gone out into the World, from the Saints life, and Spirit, and so the
World heard them, (as they do now the Priests and false Teachers) and they
drew people after them then, from the Saints the true Church, and so set up
false Churches and Religions in the World, and false worships in imitation of
the true Church, and true Religion, and true worship of God, which is in the
Spirit; and so by this means deceived people then at the first, and scattered
them from God, and led them into confusion, and darkness, and disorder, and
error, and so they broke out into many Sects, and Opinions, and Religions, and
ways of Worship; being once gone from the true Worship, which is in the Spirit
of God alone, in which the unity is, and where this is wanting there cannot be
unity, nor gathering unto God nor true worship of God: And so after the
Apostles decease, they being erred from the true Spirit, who did profess
themselves to be gatherers, could not gather unto God, but did draw people more
and more from God; and so the whole world went after the false Prophets and
false Teachers.

Acts 20.29.
And these were the grievous Wolves which entered, and scattered the Flock;
Math 12.30.
(which the Apostle spoke of before which should come) and Christ's words were
fulfilled, who said, He that is not with me is against me and he that gathers
not with me scatters. So he that is not with Christ, but is against him, the
same is Antichrist; and he that gathers not with him, but scatters, there
is the grievous Wolf that scatters the Flock, and spoils the Sheep of the
Lords pasture and makes havoc of them: And such are all they now at this day,
who are called Ministers, and have been accounted gatherers, and Divines, and
are called Orthodox men; but are found to be Wolves in Sheeps clothing, who
do scatter the Flock, and make havoc of the Sheep of Christ, and spoil their
goods, and cast into Prison, and whip, and stock, and cut off ears, and wound,
and hang, and banish, etc. and cause people to hayle them before Magistrates,
and stone, and beat them, and knock them down in streets for dead, and hail
out of the Synagogues, and Steeple Houses, and reproach, and scoff, and scome,
and speak all manner of evil falsely against them who are true Christians
that not only confess Christ come in flesh in words, but also in works, and
walk in that spirit which confelseth him come in the flesh; who walk
harmlesly, innocently, and righteously before all men, in meekness, in
patience, in humillity, in lowliness, in truth and uprightness before the
Lord in all their dealing, and abide in Christ's Doctrine, to speak the truth
in all their communications, their yea to be yea, and their nay, nay; who will
not swear, nor lie, nor cozen, nor cheat, nor defraud their neighbors; who are
no fighters, nor quarellers, who resist not evil, but do good for evil, and
pray for enemies, and bless them that curse them; who are not in the envy, and
hatred, and malice, and persecution, but are persecuted for righteousness
sake; who covets no man's silver nor gold, that are willing to deny themselves
and their reputations in the world, and forsake the worlds friendships to
follow Christ, and suffer the loss of all for Christ's sake and the Gospel.

Now are not those grievous Wolvs and Antichrists that turn against such, and
rent such, etc. I say, are not these the grievous Wolves that are entered? and
the Antichrists that are gone out into the world? And is there not now very
many of them Antichrists and Wolves in Sheeps clothing, among the Professors,
and the Apostate Christians, or Antichristians, Who are out of the life of
Christ and the true Christians? Such are not with Christ, but against him, and
such gathers not with him, but scatters, and rents, and tears his Lambs,
and Sheep, and persecutes Christ, and his Church the true Christians, who are
followers of him, and are gathered to him by his Spirit in them. Romans 8.
And if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. Now the
Antichrists who are gone out into the World, and the Wolves come in Sheeps
clothing, who inwardly are ravening Wolves; these have not the Spirit of
Christ in them, nor are his, and so do turn against him and his; and they are
of another spirit, which their fruits do make manifest, whereby they may
easily be known: The true Christians knew them so merly, and did bear their
testimony against them; so we know them now, and have, and do bear our
testimony against them, for their fruits have appeared more plainly in this,
then in any age since the Arostles days.

Therefore now come all ye Priests, Teachers, and Professors in the world who
are called Christians; try your selves, and examine your selves, and see what
spirit ye are of, who act these things before mentioned against the true
Christians, and Sheep of Christ, (who by you in scorn are called Quakers) who
hear his voice, and follow him; and yet ye confess Christ in words to be come
in the flesh: But what spirit is this in you, by which ye are led to act these
things wherein ye are now found? Is this the Spirit of Christ, or the spirit of
Antichrist gone out into the world, which lies in the wickedness, where there
is many Antichrists? and the world hears them, for they are of its own; but who
are true Christians and followers of Christ Jesus, 1 John 4.5.
( who is not of this World) and are led by his Spirit, these the World will
not hear; nay, the Priests and Professors therein, but cry against them, and
speak all manner of evil against them falsely for Christ's sake (by whose
spirit they are gathered out of the world) and say hang them, away with them,
they are not fit to live upon the earth; and so would murder, and kill, and
destroy. By this we know that this spirit is not of God, nor does confess
Christ come in the flesh, but denies him who came not to kill, but to save men's
lives; and to destroy the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning; and
therefore we cannot believe that spirit, but deny it, and declare against it,
to be that spirit of Antichrist gone out into the. World; and the same spirit
that was in the Scribes, and Pharisees and Jews, who would have Jesus
crucified, and Barrabbas released, (who was a Robber) for he was of their own
spirit, and therefore they chused him before Jesus, who was of another Spirit,
and bore witness against them for their hypocrisy, and therefore they hated
him.

And so now, they that are of God, in the Spirit of truth have tried this
spirit, which the Priests are in now, and have found it to be the spirit of
error, which neither knows God, nor loves him; For he that loves not,
knows not God, for God is love: 1 John 4 8.
And so all who are found persecuting for conscience sake, and compelling men
to swear, and to worship God in their ways which they have set up, and hating
and envying of people, and reviling and reproaching for matter of Religion, and
worship, etc. are found to be of that spirit which is not of God, 1.3.12, 13.
which loves not nor knows not God, who is love; but is of the Devil, John
8.44.
who was a Murderer from the beginning, and a Liar from the beginning, 1 John
2.22.4.20.
(and the father of all liars, and murderers, and Persecutors, and envious
ones) who is out of the Truth, from whence all lies, and murder, and envy, and
pride, and hatred, and persecution, and strife, and emulations, and enmity
comes, and all the deeds of darkness: And he is the god of the world, who
has blinded the minds of all men of the World that believe not, lest the Light
of the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.4.
who is the Image of God should shine in them. So he it is that makes people
dark, and blind, to work the works of darkness, and to act as blind men,
where they are walking in the darkness, Isa. 5.20.
and love it, and put darkness for light, and call good evil, and evil good,
and know not whither they go, nor know not the truth, nor the way of God, but
persecute it, and call it error, and heresy; as it was in all ages past, even
so it is now; for Truth was never persecuted under the name of Truth, but of
erruor, and they who did persecute it, were always blind, and will be, for
they are out of the Truth, and therefore they know it not; as the Jews did not
know Christ, for if they had known him, they would not have crucified the Lord
of life, 1 Cor. 2.8.
(says the Apostle.) So all the worlds Professors now are blind, Math. 15.14.
(who do persecute) they are all groaping in the dark, 2 Pet, 1.19.
as the men of Sodom did, who wearied themselves to find Lots door, Rev. 3.17.
Genesis 19.11. And so it has been in the World, in all their professions that
has be^ since the days of the Apostles, they have been fighting, and ^^^ing,
and persecuting one another, and hating, and speaking evil one of another, and
even wearyed themselves by setting up of this form, and that form of worship,
and making Laws to compel to them (which they have called Church Discipline)
and by running from one way of worship to another, and from Mountain to Hill,
and have been climbing till they are weary, and groaping in the dark, till they
are weary to find the door, and to find the true way, and yet they have not
found it; For the Door is Christ, who says, I am the Door of the Sheep; all
that ever went before me are Thieves and Robbers, John 10.7. And again, I am
the Light of the World, etc.

So Friends and people all, know this assuredly, that there is none ever comes
to the Door, to find the Door, but who comes to the Light which Christ Jesus
has enlightened them withal, and every one that comes into the World, John
1.9.
to wait in it, and believe in it, and be obedient to it; For Christ says,
While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be children of the
Light. John 12.35.36.
So who are children of the Light, they see, and are not blind, (as the
Sodomites were, and as the Professors now are, who believe not in the Light of
Christ.) I say, they see the Door, which is Christ, from whence the Light
comes, and enter in, and are his Sheep, who know the true Shepherds voice; But
all who deny the Light, and turn from it, and hate it, and speak against it,
they are the children of darkness, who are unbeleevers, that are without, the
Door is shut against them, and the Light is their condemnation: So they are all
walking in darkness, and wearying themselves, and groping, and cannot find the
Door, and so never come to enter in by it, nor to find rest for their souls,
but are still without where the Sodomites are (shut out of Lots Door,) and
without where the Dogs, and Unbeleevers are, and where the Whoremongers, and
Murderers, and Liars are, and the Unclean, and Sorcerers, and the Idolaters
are, Isa. 55.
22 Rev. 15. And so people do weary themselves there, and spend their money for
that which is not bread, and their labor for that which satisfies not; But
never comes to hearken diligently to the Light of Christ Jesus in them, which
reproves them for sin, that by it they might be led out of sin, (and out of
Sodom and Egypt) that their souls might live and find rest, for the Light
leads to Christ, who gives rest to the soul. And till ye come to hearken
diligently to the Light, ye cannot know your souls to live, but still are the
people that are dead while ye live, and that have ears, and hear not, eyes,
and see not, Mark 8.18.
and hearts, and understand not; and so are all as dead men, and blind men, and
deaf men, and lame men, (that cannot walk, and say none can keep Christ's
commands) and dumb men, and foolish men, without understanding in the things
of God, which are spiritually discerned; and without tasting, and feeling, and
smelling, that cannot savor the things of God. And here are all the
Professions of the World, and their Priests, and Teachers, (even the highest of
them all) who denies that Christ Jesus has enlightened every one with his true
Light, and tell people its a natural Light, and a delusion of Satan to draw
them from it, and seduce them, and tells them its not sufficient to lead to
salvation, etc. I say they are all blind leaders who say so.

And now People, Let me tell you who comes to the true Light which Christ Jesus
has enlightened every one with that are come into the world, John 1.9. and
believe in it, and wait in it (which is true and spiritual) it brings people to
spiritual seeing, and lets them see and discern the thoughts and intents of
their hearts; and who comes to believe in this Light, and hearken diligently to
it, they come to hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live; So these are they that come out of death, and come to be made alive unto
God; then they are not dead men, Ephef: 2.1.
nor deaf men, as the Scripture salth, You has he quickened, who were dead in
your si^ts and trespasses; And who comes to have their minds turned into the
light of Christ Jesus in them, it will let them see the vanity of their minds;
this will unblind their minds which the god of this world has blinded, see 2
Cor. 4.3. And bring them to see the Light of the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus Christ, then will they not be blind men, who have eyes and
see not, and ears and hear not, as the Scripture says, Isa. 47.
, I will give him for a Covenant, for a Light unto the Gentiles, to open the
blind eyes, etc. And again says Christ, Buy of me eye salve that ye may see,
Rev: 3.18.
and gold that ye may be rich, and white raiment that ye may be clothed, then
ye will not be blind men nor naked. And who believes in the Light of Christ
(which is spiritual) which Christ has enlightened them withal, it will bring
them to understand the things of God, and gives to discern them, 1 Cor: 2.10,
11, 12, etc.
and to know God. And this is it which reprooves, and judges the deceit, and
pride, and hypocrisy, and error in the heart, and the desperate wickedness
in the heart, and the foolishness in the heart, and that which is contrary to
God in the heart, and discerns the thoughts and intents of the heart, and so
brings people to be of an understanding heart, and to discern the spiritual
things of God, Heb. 3.10.
and not always to be of those that have hearts and understand not; Rom: 1.21.
who are erred in their hearts, and know not the way of God, and are become
vain in their imaginations, and by their foolish hearts are deceived. And
again who come to the Light, and wait in it, they come to taste and savor the
things of God, and come to taste of the Heavenly gist, and to taste of the word
of God, and the power of the world to come, see Heb. 6.3.5. And they come to
discern the things of God, from the things of the world, and come to discern
between the Spirit of God, and the spirit of the world, and come to have Salt
in themselves to savor withal, that which will season the heart (which is not
to be trodden under men's feet) for it is good to judge out that which has
corrupted the heart, Matthew: 5.13.
and desiled it; Mark 9.5.
The Light which shines in the heart, which has no fellowship with darkness,
nor with the works of darkness; And so this will season it, and keep it cleah
from corrupting, as every one minds it, and keeps to it, to love in, and
believe in it, and obey it; For there is nothing that is corrupt brought forth,
Matthew: 15.11.
but first is in the heart, for says Christ, Out of the heart proceeds evil
thoughts, Mark 7.20.
thefts, murders, adulter yes, uncleanness; Matthew: 15.18.19
for that which goes into the man does not desile the man, but that which
comes out; So every one whose minds be turned into the Light of Christ, this
will bring you to taste, and savor, and discern between the good and the evil,
the Light and the darkness, the precious and the vile, the holy and the
profane, the clean and the unclean, the right hand and the left; the Sheep and
the Goats; him that serves God, and him that serves him not, between the
righteous and the wicked, between him that swears, Eccles. 9.2.
and him that fears an oath. So then ye will not put darkness for Light, and
Light for darkness; nor call evil good, nor good evil; Mal: 3.15.18
nor put bitter for sweet, not sweet for bitter; nor call that which is corrupt
holy; nor the proud happy, as they did in former times (who wereblind) and as
they do now, who deny the Light of Christ, and teach people that it is but a
natural light, etc. These are they now who are blind, and without discerning,
and tasting and savouring of the things of God; and their hearts are hardened
through the deceitfulnesle of sin, and they are without feeling.

Now the Light of Christ will let you see what is in your hearts, and in your
minds, and in your thoughts, and what ye think, and what ye speak, Luke 6.45.
For a good man (says Christ) out of the treasure of his heart, brings forth
good things, and an evil man out of the treasure of his heart brings forth
evil things; Now whose minds are turned to the Light of Christ within, it will
let you see what treasure you have in your hearts, and what ye do bring forth;
or whether ye be the good men which brings forth good things, good words, and
good deeds, good desires, good motions, good thoughts, and good affections; or
whether ye be the evil men (who out of the evil treasure of your hearts) brings
forth the evil things, as evil thoughts, evil words, and evil deeds, etc. This
will let ye see whether the good things be there, or the evil things be there
at all times (if ye do mind it) and show ye what ye bring forth, and what ye
keep in secret, which ye would not have seen, for that is the evil doer, who
does not do truth, that would not have his work seen, and so does not love the
Light because the Light will reproove him; but the good man who does truth, he
loves it, and brings his deeds to the Light to be proved. And the Light will
let ye see if there be any deceit, Ier: 17.9.
or hypocrisy in your hearts, or desperate wickedness there, and it will
reprove for that, and will search your hearts, and try your Rains, and ler you
see what rules there, and what Reigns there, in your hearts, and in your minds,
and desires, and affections; and whether ye have any Rains to hold in your
desires and affections, that they should not run into the lusts and vanities of
the world, and of the flesh; yea, or nay. And it will let ye see whether ye
have the girdle of truth to girt up the loins of your minds to God; or whether
they are at liberty and loose, and tossed to and fro, as the raging Sea, yea,
or nay. And it will let ye see whether ye have a Bit and Bridle for your
tongue, Psalm. 32.9.39.
which otherwise will be unruly, and thereby you will offend, James 1.26.
if ye use it as your own; I say the Light will discover this unto every one
whose minds are turned to it, James 3.2.
and wait in it, and who hearken diligently to it, and believe in it, and obey
it; they shall come to know their souls to live; For obedience to it is life,
and disobedience to it is death.

And now whilst men who have been in power to govern the Nations, have been
making laws without to bind men's consciences, and to limit them, and compel
them to this or that worship, and have been talking long of Reformation and
Church Government, and have gathered-Churches (as they have called them) and
made Leagues and Covenants, and Assemblies of Divines (so called) to make
confessions of Faith, Catechismes, and setForms of worships (as Directoryes,
etc.) to worship God by, and to settle Church Government, and have Laws that
all that would not worship God in such a way, and such a Form as they had set
up, to fine them, imprison them, and whip them, and stock them, and banish
them, and hang them, or cut often their ears, etc. These have been the
Reformations in the world, in the Apostasy, among the Apostate Christians,
since the days of the Apostles' Among the Protestants and Papists, with their
Laws, and Statutes, and Customs, and Ordinances without, and carnal Weapons,
and Goales, and Whips, and Houses of correction, and Inquisitions, and Fires,
and Faggots, and Courts, and Penance, and Stools of Repentance (so called) now
all these things have been, and are in order to their Reformation, and
worshipping of God, and to bring people to the Kingdom of God.

But now mind People, what has all this produced? For they have all this while
begun at the wrong end of the work, and their labor has been in vain
hitherto, and will be; and little Reformation has been wrought among people
all this while, for many himdreds of years past, but one Generation has
exceeded another in wickedness, pride and covetousness, drunkenness,
uncleanness, deceit and hypocrisy, etc. I say, what has it brought sorth,
but to make people hypocrites, not Saints, false Christians, not true
Christians; and Wolves in Sheeps clothing; to profess God and Christ in
words, but in works to deny God; And profess the Scriptures to be their Rule,
and yet they are walking as contrary to that which they call their Rule, as if
they had no Rule at all, nor no Scripture at all, nor no Law at all to bind
them to this or that form of worship.

These are but Babels builders, whose work the Lord is comingto confound and
throw down, and their languages is already confounded; and they are all on
heaps still; After all their bustle and stir, which the many builders have made
for many hundreds of years about Religion, and worship, and Reformation; and
they are as far from the true worship as they were: And people do not yet know
the Truth, nor the true worship of God which is in the Spirit. John 4.23, 24.
And the Lord is seeking such to worship him, as worship him in the Spirit, and
in the Truth, for God is a Spirit. But all the world, Teachers, and the
Priests, and Professors therein, do not know the Spirit of God, nor know not
the truth yer, and so were not like to worship God in it, or to find him in
their outward worships, and carnal Ordinances, and Doctrines, and
Commandments, or in the outward Observations and Forms, which men have
prescribed. Nay, God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in
Spirit and in Truth.

Now all this while people have been erred from the Spirit of God, and the Wolf
has been covered with the Sheeps clothing, Matthew: 7
and the Wolves nature still retained and lived in, and not the Sheeps nature.
2 Pet. 1.3, 4.
They have been all inwardly ravening Wolves, and not in the true Christians
nature, which is the Divine Nature, Innocent and harmless, and separated from
sinners. Now it has been contrary in the world and is still; they that depart
from iniquity are made a prey of, and have been; even the innocent and
harmless Sheep, and Lambs of Christ have been rent and torn by the Wolves,
who did appear like Sheep in the Sheeps clothing, and had the Saints words in
their mouths, and have made havoc and spoil of their goods, and imprisoned
their bodies, where the life of Christ has been made manifest in any measure,
which is the Divine nature which the Saints and true Christians were made
partakers of, as ye may read in the Scriptures: These I say have been made a
prey upon, and persecuted in all ages, since the days of the Apostles by the
Priests and Professors, which does appear, that though they have had the Sheeps
clothing on, Matthew. 7.15, 16, 17.
yet they were inwardly ravening Wolves, and by their fruits they are seen, and
now do appear plainly in this our age and day, wherein never more profession
has been made since the days of the Apostles, then now has been of late
years, and yet their fruits have been as bad as the worst; Even persecuting the
innocent to death without cause, devouring of them, and making a prey of them,
and accounting of them as sheep for the slaughter all the day long.

These are not, nor never were the fruits of the true Christians, who were
called Sheep of Christ; for it is contrary to their nature to persecute any, to
whip or imprison any, to kill or destroy any, to bite and devour, and rend and
tear to pieces like Dogs and Wolves (as this Generation has done, Jeremy 23.
of Priests and Professors) But now this is not contrary to the Wolves nature
to devour and rent and tear, Isa. 56.
nor contrary to their nature, Romans 16.
who come in sheeps clothing for the fleece, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3.
and divine for money, and preach for hire, 10, etc.
and their gain from their quarter, and for their filthy lucre, and for their
bellyes, it is not contrary to these who are inwardly ravening Wolves; and these
are the fruits by which ye may know them, John 10.
and they are known now by all the Lambs and Sheep of Christ, who are his stock
which he has gathered from under their mouths, who do deny them (therefore
they follow after them to devour them) and these are children of Light who do
believe in the Light of Christ, and follow him, and know his voice from the
strangers; For those who are in the Wolves nature are strangers to Christ, and
alienated from his life, and erred from his Spirit. John 10.
And so whilst we were in the darkness, and in the Alienation from the life
of God and strangers to the Covenant of promise (as they are now) then we did
sollow them, and their voice was not strange to us, for we were one with them
in the same nature, but then enemies in out minds to God, and without Christ,
Ephesians 2.12.
and without God in the world, But after that we came to believe in the Light
of Christ, and to hear Christ's voice, and to follow him, then we turned from
the strangers, and would not hear them (the Priests) any longer, for the
children of the Light see them, and bear testimony against them, but who are
not yet come to the Light of Christ in them they are still in the darkness,
and in the night, and are in Babylon still, nor are not yet come to know a
separation between the night and the day, the Light and the darkness, Truth and
Error, Christ's voice from the Strangers voice; between the good Shepherds
voice, and the Thieves and Robbers voice, who come not but to kill, and teale,
and carry away, see, John 10. And these come in the night, and so ye being in
the nigh, cannot see them. Now they that steal steal in the night, 1 Thessalonians. 5.7.
and these do rob and spoil ye, and dovour the widows houses, and makes
merchandise of your soul, and ye see them not, John 10.10.
and so they kill and steal, and carry away undiscovered; And make ye spend
your money for that which is nor bread, and your labor for that which does not
satisfy; and so keeps you always laboring and never satisfied, and always
learning and never come to the knowledge of the truth, for who knows the truth,
2 Timothy 3.6.
the Truth sets them free, and gives them ease and rest from their burdens and
labors, and peace, and satisfies their fouls; But while people are in the sins
and diverse lusts (and your Teachers tells you that ye must be there as long as
ye are here upon earth) you know not truth which sets free from sin, which
loads and burdens the soul, and keeps it in death, where there is no peace,
nor rest, nor satisfaction to it; and so it cannot praise God, for its the
living that praises God, the dead praises him not, Isa. 3.12.
nor they that go down to the pit. And so ye are all as a company of weak
silly women, who are laden with sins and diverse lusts, all in the
transgression, and in the death, not a living man amongst you, to speak and to
pray in your Church; But its the woman in the transgression, and so all is in
the disorder and confusion, where the woman Rules, and Exercises Authority
over the man (He that can receive this let him) 1 Timothy (...)


And thus ye have been, and are cheated, and deceived by the Deceivers, which
are come amongst you, the blind guids who leads you blind into the Ditch, John
3.19, 20
and ye love to have it so, and love the darkness, and will not come to the
Light, because your does be evil, least it should reprove them. And there you
remain blind and weak under them uncured, for they are all Physicians of no
value.

But now the children of the light sees them, how they do deceive, and cozen,
and cheat you, and they declare against them, and they tell you of it, and show
you plainly how, and wherein ye are deceived by them, and yet ye will not
believe them, nor receive their testimony, and so if ye will be deceived, ye
are like to be so; and if ye perish, your destruction will be of your selves,
for the Lord will be clear of all your blood, and we shall be clear also, who
have warned you to come out of Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, 2 Cor. 6.17.
(the false Church) and be separate from her, and touch no unclean thing, and
the Lord will receive you; But if ye be partakers of her sins, Rev.17.4.9, 10,
11, 12, 15, 20.
and trade with her Merchants, and buy of their Merchandise, ye will partake of
her plagues that is coming upon her, and that speedily, and the time is at
hand; and the Saints shall rejoice at her fall, when her judgment and torment
shall come upon her; but her Merchants shall howl and mourn for her, for by her
were they made rich. And these things are seen and made manifest to the
children of Light, glory, and honor, and living praises be unto the Lord for
evermore: The hidden things of darkness is making manifest, and coming to be
preached upon the house top, and all the hidden things of dishonesty comes to
be laid open to the view of all men. 1 Cor. 3.13.
For the day is come and coming, which reveals all things, and which will prove
every man's work of what sort it is; And every man shall receive a reward
according to his deeds done in the body, whether they be good or evil.

Therefore all people, in whom there is any fear of the Lord, or any desire
after the knowledge of his way, or any love to his truth, or to your souls
peace and welfare. It is high time for you to look about you and to consider
your ways, what ye have beendoing, and what ye are doing, for the times of
ignorance God has winked at, but now he calls all men every where to repent;
For it is not a Profession of the words now will serve you, without the
possession of the life, for that will not be accepted of God. But all to repent
and turn from the evil of your ways which ye have long been reproved for, by
the light of Christ Jesus in you, John 3.19.
which is Gods witness in all your consciences, which otherwise will be your
eternal condemnation, for your profession of Christ will not serve you, nor
hide you; nor your mountains, Ierem: 3.23.
nor your hills where ye have been gotten up high, and looking for salvation
from them, but it has been all in vain. Come down from them to Gods witness
in you, and hearken to that, what that does testify to you, for that is true
and will not lie, nor deceive you, for that is of God, and leads to God. And
with the Lord Jehovan alone is Salvation, and with him is everlasting strength;
For those mountains will all fly away from you which ye now do trust in, Rev.
6.15.16.
and they shall not hide you from the face of the Lamb, though ye may call to
them to cover you, and to the Rocks to fall upon you; nay though ye seek death
it shall fly from you.

Therefore I say in time all be warned, and hearken diligently that your souls
may live; And away with all your false and deceitful coverings, which are but
as so many Fig Leaves sowed together to cover your nakedness: which will not
endure long, and your profession will wither suddenly, and your nakedness will
then appear more to your shame, then if ye had made no profession at all, to
have that plucked off wherewith ye have been covered all this while, which made
ye seem to be some body, when that is gone then ye will be naked, and as it
were like no body, and have nothing to cover your shame from the eyes of all;
for Christ Jesus disowns ye, who are workers of iniquity, Matthew. 7.23.
and ye must depart from him, and not name his Name. Luke 13.27.
For its not every one that says Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, Matthew. 7.20.
but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven, says Christ. Gal.
7.17.
But while ye have been seeking to be justified by Christ, and yet lived in
sin, and are found sinners (ye have not been doing the will of God) for thereby
ye would make Christ the Minister of sin, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8.
who came to destroy sin, and the Devil who is the Author of it, Heb. 2.14.
and therein he did the will of the Father, 1 John 3.8.
and plased him. John 8.29.
And so as many as receive him and believe in his name, John 1.11, 12.
to them he gives power to become the sons of God, and to do his will in earth
as it is done in Heaven, Matthew. 6.9.
which ye have been praying so long, and saying these words, Romans 10.
but do not believe in your hearts that any shall ever attain to that here,
which you pray for, therefore its not of faith, for with the heart man
believes unto righteousness, etc. and ye are not like to recelve that, which
ye cannot believe; so ye are not come to the measure of faith, Luke 17.20.
even as a grain of Mustard Seed, for he that has it, shall say unto this
Mountain be thou removed into the Sea, and it shall be so, says Christ; But
these are all parables, to all you Professors in the world unknown, as it was
to them to whom they were spoken then. But who comes to the Light of Christ
Jesus to believe in it, they read the parables, and they know the faith that
removes the Mountains and brings them down, and exalts the valleys, and makes
the crooked ways straight, Matthew. 3.23.
and the rough ways plain, and prepares the way of the Lord in the
Wilderness, Heb. 12.13.
and make straight paths for his feet, and such knows the kingdom of God to
come, where his will is done on sarth, as in Heaven, and where the daily bread
is received, and sins forgiven, and enemies loved; And Christ said to those
that did not know nor believe, If I toll ye of earthly things, and ye cannot
believe, how should you believe if I tell you of Heavenly things? John 3.12.
And again, I speak that which I have seen with my Father, and ye speak that
which ye have seen with your father, John 8.39.

Therefore all ye Professors of the Scriptures, and Teachers of the Prophets
and Christ's words, and the words which ye have received by tradition from your
fathers. Acts 13.41.
Its no wonder if the things declared of by the Prophets, Christ, and the
Saints, be strange to you, that ye neither know them, nor can believe them,
seeing ye me all erred from the Spirit of the Father, even that Spirit which
was in the Prophets, John 16.25.
Christ, and the Apostles, and Saints, which shows plainly of the Father,
13.verse.
and showed them things to come, which was, and now is the Saints Comforter,
which Christ said he would send; Even the Spirit of Truth, which should lead
them into all Truth, and should bring all things to their remembrance.

This the Saints did receive in former times, by which they did plainly
declare, what they had heard, and what they had seen, and tasted, and handled
of the word of life; And this the Saints do now receive, even the same Spirit
of the Father which was in the Saints, and is now in the Saints, and shall be
in the Saints to the end of the World, as Christ said; by which the Saints do
now know the Scriptures which were spoken forth by the Spirit of God (in the
holy men of God) and understand them, and witness the thing they speak of; So
that they are not a Book sealed to us, nor parrables to us, who come to enjoy
the things they speak of, which is freely given to us of God, as they were to
them who spoke forth the Scriptures, as the Apostle said, 1 Cor. 2.11, 12, 13.
We have not received the spirit of this World, but we have received the Spirit
which is of God, by which we know the things which are freely given to us of
God; which things we declare in the plain demonstration of the Spirit, and not
with words which man's wisdom teaches, comparing spiritual things with
spiritual. But the natural man perceives not the things of God, for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he receive them, because they are spiritually
discerned. And so with this Spirit which we have received of God the Father,
and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, doe-we speaks of the things of God,
which we have seen with him; by which Spirit the Saints are now led to declare
forth the Truth to the world as it is revealed in them from the Father of
spirits, as the Children of God did formerly by the same Spirit, who said, As
many as are the Sons of God, Romans 8.
the same are led by the Spirit of God. And so now it is, 1 Pet. 4.10.
as every one has received the Gift of the Father, so to minister to others; 1
Tam. 17.
and according to the abillity which God has given, from whence every good and
perfect Gift does come, from the Father of lights, with whom is no
variableness, nor shadow of turning. And this we know and declare, that if any
man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his, which is the gift of the
Fathers love, and he that has it, has received it freely from the Father,
from whence every good and perfect gift does come: Mark! Who receives a gift
from God, they receive that which is perfect, that which is heavenly, that
which is free, and that which comes from the Father of Lights, and so with that
they see, and know, and can freely declare of the things of God, of the
heavenly things, of that which is perfect, of that which is holy, of that which
is true, of that which sins not, of that which is born of God, which overcomes
the World, as the Saints did of old, who said, hereby know we that we dwell in
him, and he in us, because he has given us of his Spirit, 1 John 4.13. No
otherwise can any one know him now truly, but by his Spirit, which quickens,
and makes alive unto God: John 17.3.
For it is life eternal to know these the only true God, 1 Ioh. 5.19, 20.
and Jesus Christ, whom thou have sent, says the Saints; and herein is our
love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of the Lord; for as he
is, so are we in this present World. And we know that the Son of God is come,
and has given us an understanding, and we know him that is true, and we are in
him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and
eternal life; and this we have not of our selves, but this we have freely
received from God, (as the Saints had) and this we freely declare, and testify
to the world as they did, that so others might come to receive of the same from
him, in whom the fullriesse of the Godhead dwells, of whose fulness have we
all recelved, John 1.16.
and grace for grace. And so we have nothing to boast of, or glory in of our
selves, for it is by grace, which is the free Gift of God, that we are what we
are; that no flesh might glory in his sight, but that all the Honor, and the
Praise, and the Glory might be given unto God alone, Romans 11.6.
from whence every good, and perfect gift comes. 1 Cor. 1.29.


And now Oh all ye Priests, and Teachers, and Professors, unto whom these
things seems strange, which we declare of; so that ye cannot believe them, but
get up into rage, and envy against us to persecute and reproach us, and speak
all manner of evil falsely against us, as your forefathers did (the Scribes
and Pharisees, who were Hypocrites) against Christ and the Saints in former
times, who did declare of those things then, which the blind guides did not
know, nor could believe, and therefore did they persecute them, and hail them
before Magistrates, and cast them into Prisons, and put them to death, though
the things which the Saints did declare were true, and the same which Moses and
the Prophets, the holy men of God had declared of, which should come to pass,
and so did come to pass according to their words: yet now the Scribes, and
Pharisees, and Jews, who had the words of Moses and the Prophets, and were the
greatest Professors of Religion then that were in the World; they having the
words, but being out of the power, out of the Life of Abraham, and Moses, and
the Prophets that declared those things by the Spirit of God; these I say
(being erred from the Spirit) did not know the things which the holy men of God
did foretell of to come. The holy thing which was to be borne, which is called
the Son of the living God, and when he was come, they did unto him as they
listed, Luker. 35.
and crucified the Lord of Life, because they knew him not. 1 Cor. 2.8.
Though they said they were Abraham's children, and knew God, and were Moses
Disciples, and were called Jews, and rested in the Law, and made their boasts
of God, and that they knew his Will, Romans 2.19, 20, ^^.
and did approve of the things that are more excellent, and were confident that
they themselves were guides to the blind, and a light to them that are in
darkness, and Instructers of the foolish, and Teachers of babes, which had the
form of knowledge, and of the truth in the Law. Thou therefore (says the
Apostle) that teach another, teach thou not thy self, etc. All these
were untaught themselves, though they were teachers of the Law, they were
Transgressors of the Law, and when Christ Jesus came, who was the substance,
the holy Seed, the end of the Law, who fullfilled it, and brought in
everlasting righteousness, who was the Way to God, the Truth and the Life, they
knew him not, but slew him; (And so it is at this day, the Professors of the
World, who only have) the name of Christians, persecute them that are in the
true Christians life and nature) for they were blind Leaders of the blind; (as
Christ told them) and that they were of their father the Devil, who was a
liar, and a Murderer from the beginning, for whom God has sent, him ye believe
not, but seek to kill him: And so though they had the true men's words, and the
righteous men's words, and the just men's words, yet they were erred from their
Spirit, and therefore they knew not the just and righteous One, and Holy one of
Israel, but were in the murtherous spirit, and in the lying spirit, which is of
the Devil, who did not abide in the truth; and in the envious spirit, and in
the persecuting spirit, which is not of God, (as all ye Priests and Professors
are found in at this day,) which spirit I say is not of God, nor received of
God, For the fruits of Gods Spirit is Love, Gal. 5.22.
Meekness, Gentleness, Patience, Long-suffering, Charity, etc. But the fruits
of your spirit is the contrary, as the fruits of theirs was coutrary, who
persecuted the Saints in former times, as the Scriptures declares, and plainly
makes manifest.

And so now ye come to be tried, and seen, and manifest, and declared against,
by the same Spirit as was in the Saints formerly, and the testimony thereof we
know is true, and your deceit and hypocrisy comes to be laid open, as theirs
were, whom ye have been crying against for many years, (the Scribes, and
Pharisees, and Jews, who crucified Christ, and killed the Saints, and
Prophets) and have been envying against them, (and have a Law made that none of
the Jews should come into this Nation, etc.) and speak against them, as they
did against the false Prophets, and their forefathers that slew the true
Prophets, and said, if they had been in the days of their forefathers, they
would not have done so; Math. 23.31.
but Christ told them not withstanding, that they were the Children of them
that killed the Prophets, and they built their Tombs, and garnished the
Sepulchers of the righteous; And he called them, Whited Walls, and painted
Sepulchers, and Serpents, and a generation of Vipers, etc.

Therefore come now ye Professors, and Teachers, and Priests, own your
forefathers, the Scribes, and Pharisees, and Jews, which are gone before you,
whom ye have cried against, and said, ye would not have done as they did; And
yet have ye not done, and are doing many of the same things as they did, in
persecuting of the righteous; for now have ye not slain the Prophet in you
which Moses spoke of, Deuteronomy. 12.85.18.
Saying, Like unto me will the Lord raise up a Prophet in the midst of you, him
ye shall hear in all things, etc. And are ye not slaying, Iam. 5.6.
and persecuring the righteous, and killing the just, who does not resist you;
and are painting and garnishing the Sepulchers, and building the Tombs of the
Prophet, and of the righteous? And are in your fair outside Worships, (as they
were) to be seen of men; and crying (...) this Form, and the other Form of
Church government; and this Ordinance, and the other Ordinance; and this way of
Worship, and the other way of Worship; and crying up this Learned man, and the
other Rabbi, and are in your Observations, as they were; and have set up the
Jews Tithes, (which were to the first Priesthood) and so deny Christ Jesus the
second Priesthood; and have set up Sacraments, and Sabboths, and Schools, and
Colleges, and Churches, (which God never commanded) and giving them Saints
names, as the Papists do, and call the Papists old Masse-houses Churches, and
so are crying up dead things, and dead Names, and Ordinances of men, and
Doctrines of men, and things which may be touched, tasted, and handled, which
all perish with the using.

And by these things have ye kept people in the Death, while they have seemed
to live, and have made a great stir and bustle in the World for many hundreds
of years, by crying them up, and setting them up; and your Ministry or
Ministers as the Oracles of God, and the maintenance for them, and have killed
some for witnessing against these things, and have been ready to kill one
another about these things, and could not agree about them; and one has built
a Wall, and another has dawbed with untempered Mortar, and so have been
dawbing and dawbing to keep it up from falling, and whiteing of it to make it
appear beautiful to please men, and to be seen of men: And all this invented
Worship and Imitations which ye have set up, and brought people into, are but
as so many Tombs and Sepulchers of the righteous; and these have been cried up
by the Priests for Divine Institutions, and Orthodox, and Canonical, and
whiteed over with large Pretenses, and plausible Arguments, and undeniable
Consequences, (as they have called them) and the poor people have received all
this for Gospel, and Ordinances of Christ, and of his Church, as if Christ had
been there present, (who is the true Prophet, and the Righteous Seed which the
Promise is to) when as there was nothing but Tombs, and Sepulchers of he
Prophets and of the Righteous which they had garnished. And so people while ye
have been in these things, ye have been all in the darkness and in the Death,
and have been all as Graves which men go over unawares, being erred from the
Spirit which quickens and makes alive; which Spirit was in the Prophets, by
which they Prophesied and declared forth the Truth, which came to pass
accordingly to the Jews, That in seeing they should see, and not perceive,
Math. 13.14.
and in hearing they should hear, but not understand, Mark 9.12.
which also is come to pass in these our days, among all the Teachers and
Professors who have been thus dawbing, and building, and painting the Tombs
and Sepulchers, and whiteing the Walls; the just has been killed, and he has
not resisted you, and the Prophet lies flain in you all, and ye understand not,
nor hear him, nor see him, neither have perceived, nor known his Voice, who is
the true Light that lights every one, Ioh. 5.37, 38.
that all in the Light might believe him whom Moses said was like unto him,
whom the Lord would raise up a Prophet from the midst of them, whom ye should
hear in all things: And it shall come to pass, says he, that whosoever will
not hearken unto this Prophet, shall be cut off from amongst the people. And so
Moses saw and declared of concerning Christ, that which ye do not know, nor
see, nor hear, though ye have long been talking of him, and naming of his Name;
but it was but death speaking of the fame of Wisdom, because ye have been
erred from his Spirir, which is the Spirit of truth, which convinces the World
of sin, and reproves them for sin; but this the World cannot receive, which
does reprove them for their sins and evil deeds, because they love their sins
and evil deeds, and not God; Now they that love the Lord hate evil, but he
that loves not God, nor receives the Light of Christ, nor believes in it,
(which is the true Propher, and faithful Witness of God) he loves his evil
deeds, but hates the Light which reproves him for his sins, and evil deeds,
Joh. 3.19, 20, (21.
and therefore the Light is his condemnation, as Christ says; and so this is
not their Comforter, who believe not but love their evil deeds; But this is he
whom we have received and followed, Joh. 8.12.
( even Christ Jesus who is come a Light into the World) and denied our selves,
and our own Wills for him, and taken up his Cross, and we know the Prophet
raised the Spirit of truth come, which is our Comforter in all our troubles,
and leads us into all truth, and brings all things to our remembrance and
knowledge, which were spoken before by the Prophets, Christ, and the Saints,
which Spirit is in us, which was made manifest in the flesh, John 1.
and dwelt amongst the Saints, and they saw his Glory, who was the begotten Son
of God, and did hear Testimony of him, who said unto them who believed in him,
I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, that he may
abide with you for ever: Even the Spirit of truth, whom the World cannot
receive: Mark! Because it seath him not, neither knows him; but ye know him,
for he dwells with you, and shall be in you, (Joh. 14.16, 17.) and now is in
all his Saints, and so he did come to them according to his Promise, 1 Cor.
12.7.
Acts 1.4. And he does come again to all that wait for him in the
manifestation of his Spirit, which is given to every one to profit withal,
which is the true Light which Christ Jesus has enlightened every man that
comes into the World withal, that all through the Ligh might believe, and
follow the Light, 1 John 9.
and not walk in darkness, but might come to have the Light of Life, and might
come to Christ from whence the Light comes.

But now all ye who have set your selves against the Light, and denied it to be
sufficient to lead to Christ, and say it is natural, and so have kept people
from it, are the seducers which John speaks of, 1 John 2.26. Ye are still in
darkness, and walking in darkness, and following your own spirits, and have
seen nothing, Ezekiel. 13.3.
who have prophesied lies in the name of the Lord, Ier. 14 14.
and have been walking in the light of the fire, Ier. 23.25.
and of the sparks of your own kindling; but you shall lie down in sorrow,
Isa, 50.11.
for that will not bring you to Christ, neither has, nor to his Life, whose
Life is the Light of men, with which he has enlightened them that they might
believe in it, and follow him; and so with this they know him, and hear him,
and deny you, who are strangers, and hear him not, nor know him, nor receive
him, and so have not power, but are crying out ye want power, and the reason
is, because ye receive him nor, nor believe in his Name, 1 Ioh. 11.12.
who gives power to become the Sons of God; and yet are prosessing his Name,
and asking, and preaching, and praying, and baptizing in his Name, 2. Tim. 2.19.
but none of you are baptized yet into his Name, who depart not from iniquity,
though ye have been crying, Lord, Lord, We have eaten, and drunken in thy
Presence, etc. Who have had a Form of godliness, but denied the Power, which
was before the Form, Isa. 53.2, 3.
and is without Form, and is the substance which shall stand, when all your
Forms shall end. And so ye know not the Life, the Power, Isa. 6, 13.
the Substance, the Holy Seed which is come, who stands, and remains, and
abides, and lives for ever, ye are all out of that, and strangers to it: But ye
are in that which ends, out of the truth, who denies the Power, and Life, but
retains the Form, and have a show of Wisdom in your will-Worships, and
voluntary Humility, intruding into those things ye have not seen, 2 Col. 1.
being vainly rufft up by your fleshly minds, having a Form and Shadows of
things to come, but the Body which is Christ, (who is the Life and Substance)
has been wanting amongst you, who have been making a large Profession of
Christ and of the Gospel, and had a Form, but the Substance being wanting,
which is the Life and Power, which ye are all our of, Romans 1.
and therefore ye do not know Christ, nor the Gospel, for it is the Four of
God unto Salvation, to every one that believes: But many have had that which ye
have called the Gospel, (namely the four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John.) and yet want this Power, and know nothing of it, but say they want Power
to do what they should do, and ought to do; and this is the farthest that
any of them can come, and there they are still in the weakness in the flesh,
ferred from the Spirit, and cry out they want power, which is the Gospel, and
so want peace and want Salvation to their souls, for the Gospel is still hid
from them, which is the Power of God which saves the soul.

So the Gospel had need to be preached to you all again, ye Priests and
Teachers and Profestors, for it is hid from you, and ye are all in the lost
State, seeing ye are all erred from the Spirit, by which it was Preached, (and
is Preached) which proceeeds from the Father, and came down from Heaven, and so
it is hid from you, you want it, ye have lost it, lost the Power, but retained
a Form in the long night of Apostasy, 2 Timothy 3.8.
since the days of the Apostles, and have been erred from the Faith, 1 Timothy
6.10, 21.
which was once delivered to the Saints, Judge. 3.
which stood not in the wisdom of Words, but in the Power of God; 1. Cor. 2.5.
but the Power you want, and so the Faith ye have lost, and erred from it, and
it has been so long wanting among you, that ye do not know it, what it is;
for it is a Mystery held in a pure Conscience: And ye have been in the night
all this while, 1 Timothy 3.9.
(and are still) and have been eating and drinking with the drunken, and
beating your fellow servants, and have said in your hearts, Math. 29.48.(49.
The Lord deferreth his Coming, (who has been in a far Country from you, and
ye have not known where he has been, for the Man-child has been caught up
unto God) but he is come and coming upon you as a thief in the Night, and ye
do not see him, because ye have not watched for his coming, but have been
asleep in sin, and have been careless, and thought your selves secure as if
all had been well with you, and said none can be free from sin here, Luke 18.8.
etc. And now behold the Son of man is come, He does not find faith in the
earth, as Christ said, When the Son of man comes, shall be find faith in the
earth?

And now the day of the Lord is come, and coming, wherein every man's work shall
be tried of what sort it is, Luke 1.78.
and Truth shall now be known from error and deceit; I say the Dayspring from
on high has now again visited us after the long time of darkness which has
been over the earth; Yea such a time has been, that the darkness has been so
great, that it might be felt, that none could rise from the place where they
sat, and is yet upon many Peoples, and Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues, as
it was in Egypt of old, (see Exed. 10.21, 22.) so it is now, and has been in
spiritual Egypt, where also our Lord Jesus Christ has been crucified.

And so his Gospel is again to be preached unto all Nations, Math. 24.14.
Kindreds, and Tongues, and People, Mark 16.15.
whom God has given for a Covenant, for a Light unto the Gentiles, to open the
blind eyes, Isa; 49.8.42.6.
and to bring the prisoner out of prison, and them that have sat in darkness
out of the prisonhouse. For People have sat in darkness, and have taken up
their seat there, and the Priests have labored to keep them there, and have
been crying out against New-Lights, and calling it Heresy, and getting Laws
made to keep out all New-Light (as they called it) to keep out Truth from being
known any more then it was, and so have made a Covenant with death, Isa. 28.18,
and an agreement with hell, and to keep people in the death, and in the
darkness, and error (which they called Light and Truth) and none must remove
from the place where he sat in darkness, and in the shadow of death; this
has been the Priests work for many years past to keep people there, in
spiritual Egypt, and darkness; So the Leaders of the people have caused them
to err, and they have told people that these Laws were the Discipline of the
Church, to keep out error, and to preserve the Gospel, and to keep Heresy
from spreading: Now this has been their cry and their pretense whilst they
have been keeping out Truth thereby, and limitting the Spirit of God to this or
that form, so that Truth has not had its liberty, which is only able to keep
people from Error and Heresy.

And what Error, and Heresy, and wickedness is there that can be named, that
is not amongst them? And you (Oh ye Priests and Teachers notwithstanding all
your outward Laws) who have had all these fair pretenses to keep up your Forms
of worships withour the power, even by your outward Laws, and carnal weapons,
as Stocks, and Whips, and Prisons, and Courts, and Leagues, and Covenants, and
Oaths, and Protestations, and Assemblies of Divines, (so called) and
Confessions of Faith, and Directories to worship by, etc. All this has been
but to hold up your Trade to preach for hire and filthy lucre, and for your
bellyes, and to bear rule by your means over the people, and to keep them still
in the house of bondage, and darkness, in Egypt, to labor in the Brick, and
so have been as the Taskmasters over them, who would have their tale of brick,
Exodus 5.
and would allow them no straw; but they must go abroad to get it, and so have
oppressed the people, and have been cruel, so that ye have made them to groan
under their burdens, and there was none to help them. And now the Lord has
heard their cry, and is risen, and come to deliver his people from under you,
even from under the mouths of such devouring Wolves, who have made a prey upon
them; And have cried peace to people in their sins and wickedness, and have
had men's persons in admiration because of advantage, and have kept and do keep
many there.

Now ye that have done so, have not been the Ministers of Christ, but of
Antichrist; not of righteousness, but of unrighteousness, and Messengers of
Satan; 2 Gor. 11.15.
though ye have transformed your selves into several forms and shapes, but your
end is seen, and your reward will be according to your work; For though the
strong man armed have kept the Palace, Matthew 12.29.
and so the things therein has been in peace, Luke 11.12.
yet now a stronger then he is come (who is in us) even stronger then he who is
in the world; And this is he whom we preach, Christ Jesus the true Light, who
has enlightened every one that comes into the world, which convinces them of
sin, Matthew. 10.34.
and reproves for sin, and speaks not peace to them there, but sends a sword to
take it away, and leads them out of sin who believes and obeys him; and this is
he who saves his people from their sins, and destroys the work of the Devil.

And he is come and appeared in his Servants and Ministers, as of old; Acts
26.18.
To call sinners to repentance, and to turn from sin unto God, and from the
darkness to the Light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that so they
might receive remission of sins, and an inheritance amongst them that are
sanctified; Which many who have been turned, and are turned (by them) can
witness the inheritance, and an entrance into it; Glory be unto the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth for ever.

Therefore do I exhort and warn every one of you in the fear of the Lord, to
turn in your minds to the Light of Christ Jesus within you; Who is given for a
Light to the Gentiles, and for a new Covenant to the house of Israel, Isa. 42.
where the Law is written in the heart, Iere. 31.31.
that so ye may come to read there what is in your hearts, to know Good from
evil, and the just from the unjust, and Truth from error; the right way from
the wrong; For the Light will show you if your minds be turned to it. For the
Law is Light Pro: 6.23.
says Solomon, and it is a Light unto my feet, and a Lamp unto my paths, says
David; And again he says, The Law of the Lord is perfect, converting the
soul; The Testimony of the Lord is sure, Psalm. 19.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
making wise the simple; The Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing the
heart; The Commandments of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes: The fear of
the Lord is clean, and endures for ever; The Judgments of the Lord are true,
and righteous altogether; By them thy servant is forwarned, and in keeping of
them there is great reward. And again says he, Oh how do I love thy Law,
Psalm. 119.97, 98, 99.
it is my delight, it is my meditation day and night; Whereby he became witer
then all his Enemies, and more understanding then all his Teachers. And this is
it which gives the knowledge of sin, and convinces of sin, and reproves the
world for sin, and condemns for sin them that believe not. And this Law is
Spiritual, Holy, Rome 7.
Just, and Good; and this will let you see, that ye are carnal, sold under sin,
and found in the sin and transgression of it, and in the corruption, whilst ye
have been promising of your selves liberty and saying ye are justified by
Christ ( and so would have made him the Minister of sin, Gal. 2.17.) while yet
ye are under the Law, and the Law has dominion over you, and condemns you for
your sins, and evil deeds; As the Apostle says, Know ye not, Rom: 7.1.
for I speak to them that know the Law, how that the Law has dominion ever a
man so long at he ^^^eth. For Paul says Romans 7. I was alive without the Law
once, but when the Commandment came sin revived, and I dyed; That slew him,
and so that which was ordained unto life, became death unto him; he being in
the transgression of it; and so dying unto sin he was dead to the Law, not
under it, for then he faith, I through the Law am dead to the Law, but alive
unto God; So that which slew him, and made him dead unto sin, brought him unto
Christ Jesus who is the Life, Rom: 10.4.
the end of the Law for righteousness to every one that believes; So the Law
was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ, says he, Gal. 3.24. So who are
come to Christ they are come out of the transgression, they are come to live
unto God, they are come to Christ who sulalls it, Who is the Way, the Truth,
and the Life, and they are not under the Law but under Grace. For the law was
given by Moses, but Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ.

And now ( to the witness of God in you all do I speak, who have long been
professing Christ, and justification by him, etc.) To turn in to the Light
which is Gods witness, and with it try your selves, and examine your selves
truly and honestly; and it will let you all see that ye are not come to Christ
yet, nor yet known him, who is the end of the Law for righteousness, who
fulfillls it; but ye are under it still, alive without the Law, unslaine by it
(as Paul was) in the sin and transgression, and so not justisied by Christ,
neither know him: All ye who do deny the Light which he has enlightened ye
withal; For none comes to know him, but who believes in the Light which Christ
has enlightened them withal; nor none come into the righteousness which is
the end of the Law, and fulals it; but who believe in the Light and are
obedient to the Light, and walk in it: Here is the righteous nesse known, which
exceeds the righteoulnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees who should in no wise
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, who had the Law without, and read it every
Sabbath day, but they were sayers and not doers, and hypocrites of whom Christ
said, Go not after them, for they had the Form, but not the Power; They had a
show of righteousness, and made clean the outside, but the inside was
unclean, and unrighteous, and were but as whited Walls and painted Sepulchers,
which did appear beautiful and righteous before men, Mat. 23.27.
but within were no^^ing but rottenness and deads men's bones, and so were as
Graves which men go over unawares, and what they did it was to be seen of men,
and thereby did beguile, and deceive the hearts of the simple, and so shut the
Kingdom of Heaven against men (as Christ said) and neither entered in
themselves, nor suffered others that were entering.

Now are not all ye Teachers, Priests, and professors found here in the
Pharisees spirit, and in the same generation with them, in outward shows of
holiness and righteousness, and forms of godliness, and making clean the
outsides, as they did, and saying, and are Sayers as they were, but not doers,
and so are hypocrites as they were. And ye keep people always saying, but
never bring them to do what they say; but teach them that Christ has done all
for them, and if they can but believe that, then they are well enough; and so
blindes people by that means, that they do not mind what they do themselves,
Mat: 23.13
nor what they say to perform, and so are out of the truth, and never come to
the knowledge of it, and so the kingdom of heaven is shut against you and
them, and so you are ever teaching them, and they are ever learning, and saying
after you; and so make a fair show in the flesh, and appear to be something
outwardly, and persuade them that they are Justified by the righteousness of
Christ, which he has wrought for them without, and so there they rest as the
Pharisees did in the outward observations, whilst in the mean time, they are
inwardly unclean, their hearts unclean, 2 Pet. 2.14.
their minds defiled, their eyes full of adultery, who cannot cease from sin,
and so are shut out of the kingdom, into which no unrighteous thing, or
unclean thing must ever enter; and are but as Tombs garnished, and Sepulchers
painted (wherein is rottenness, and dead men's bones) mark! like the Scribes
and Pharisees, and so your righteousness does not exceed theirs. In the same
generation with them are ye, and their Children are ye, who slew Christ Jesus
the true Prophet, which Moses spoke of, when he said, Like unto me will the
Lord raise up a Prophet, which all were to hear, etc. as the Pharisees were
the Children of them that slew the Prophets that went before them, and are like
unto them. And are still slaying, and have been slaying, and killing, and
persecuting, and hailing before Magistrates, and out of the Synagogues as they
did, those who are the true Chriftians, in whom the Spirit of Christ is
manifest, who bear witness against your hypocrisy and deceit now, as Christ
did, and the true Christians did in the primitive times; And it is your srultes
makes ye manifest now, as theirs did then: and your fair sayings, and not
doing now cannot cover you, no more then that could cover the Pharisees then,
who said, and did not; and therefore Christ calls them hypocrites. Moreover, as
they would not hear him of whom the Father said, This is my beloved Son, in
whom I am well pleased, hear ye him; and of whom John bore witness and said,
He was the true Light, John 1.9.
that Lights every man that comes into the world. And so because they did
not believe in the true Light, therefore they were blind leaders of the
blind; and so it is, and has been with you, who do not believe in the Light
which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, but speak against it, and say
it is Insufficient and natural, etc. Therefore ye abide in darkness, and are
Children of darkness, who know not whither ye go, John 12.35.
nor know not that ye are walking in the stepps of your forefathers the
Scribes and Pharisees, who were hypocrites and blind guides, who persecuted
Christ, and put him to death, and persecuted the Saints ( the true Church) and
halled them before Magistrates, and shut them up in prisous, and thought they
did God good service in so doing; even so it is now with many of you at this
day ye think so, who walk in darkness, and know not whither ye go; But the
Children of the Light who believe in the Light, they see the true Way which is
Christ, and with the Light they see you all where you are in the false ways,
in the way of the Pharisees (and not in the way Christ) and bear witness
against you now, as the Saints did then against them. And ye can no longer be
hid, but your folly will come to be laid open, and manifest more and more, so
that ye cannot proceed much further.

For now is the Day dawning, and the Day-starr arising in the hearts of many
people, 2 Pet. 1.17, 18, 19.
who take head unto the more sure mord of prophecy, as unto a Light that
shines in a dark place; and such as do so, do well; and when the Day-starr
does arise, the Sun is near approaching which expells all the darkness, that
men comes to see round about them; And then they can see what the holy men of
God did, and what Christ and the Saints did, and what the Scribes and Pharisees
did, and so see over the Apostasy to the Apostles days; And what the Apostate
Christians have been doing since the Apostles days, and what they are still
doing, and what the Saints the true Christians are now doing, and who are they;
and can know them who have done well, and who now do well, from them that have
done evil, and now do evil; for the day is that, which tryes every man's
work of what sort it is. And all who are come to the day now, can see beyond
the night of the Apostasy, and over it, and what was before it, and what has
been since in it, among the Apostate Christians since the Apostles days; that
people have been in the darkness and night, who have not seen the true way,
nor known whither they have been going. Mal. 4.
But now unto all that fear my Name shall the Sun of righteoususse arise with
healing in his wings, says the Lord. For who comes to take heed unto the Light
which shines in the dark place, they do well; and who comes to do well, they
come to be healed, and to know the Sun of righteousness to arise from whence
the Light comes, and they are those who do righteously, and truly, and
honestly, and walk as in the day time, and to put off unrighteousness, and the
works of darkness, and fleshly lusts which war against the souls. For that
is it which has wounded the soul, even the fleshly lusts that wars against
it: 1 Pet. 2.11.
now the Light which shines in the heart leads from the fleshly lusts, and out
of them to Christ Jesus the Sun of righteousness, who arises with healing.
For as the unrighteousness, and works of darkness is put off, and the fieshly
lusts abstained from, which wars against the soul and wounds it; so Christ
Jesus the Sun of righteousness arises, and is put on, who heales and binds up
the wounds, and powers in wine and oil thereinto, Luke 10.30, 31, 32.33.
who is the good Samaritan, who is better than the Priest, and the Levite, who
passed by like strangers, and left the man half dead, who had fallen among
thieves and robbers, among his Enemies, and was wounded; as the hyrelings
Priests do now, who are strangers that pass by, and leave many wounded, and
as it were half dead; and instead of helping of them, are rather the thieves
that rob, and wound, and murder, and kill. For, says Christ, John 10.
the hyroling comes not but for to kill, and to steal, and to destroy,
neither cares he for the sheep, but for the fleece, and for his Tithes; as
the Priests and Levits did, who passed by. And again, says the Prophet, As
atrope of Robbers wait for a man, Hosea 6.9.
so do a Company of Priests further in the way by consent. And these things
have been seen, and are as plainly fulfilled, and manifested amongst this
generation of Priests, and Teachers, and professors, as in any age of the
world. Nay it will be more tolerable for those that went before, then for
these, even the Scribes and Pharisees, who perfecuted the Saints, and put
Christ to death ( whom they did not know that it was he that should come, as
the Scripture says, If they had known they would not have crucified the Lord
of life) But these say they believe that he is come, and profess they know
him, and yet persecute him, where ever he is made manifest in sons, or
daughters, and cast him into prison, etc. Math. 25.
Now the Fewes and Pharisees were under another Priesthood which God had
commanded, and so had a righteousness there according to the Law of Moses
outwardly, which mey sought to establish, and so could not own Christ Jesus,
the second Priesthood, Romans 10.3.
who is Gods righteousness, nor submit unto it, and so were rejected.

But now the Priests and professors and Apostare Christians they do confess
Christ Jesus comain the flesh ( in words) who is the second Priesthood, who is
Gods righteousness, and do deny the Jews and Rharisees And yet they set up
another Priesthood, which is contrary to Christ, and contrary to the Jews,
which God never commanded; and they take Tithes, and stipends, and
Augmentations, and gleabe-lands, etc. and seek to set up a righteousness
without them to be justried by ( which they call the righteousness of Christ)
while they are in the unrighteousness themselves, and in the sin, and
transgression of the Law of God, and so have not submitted to the
righteousness which is of God by faith in Christ Jesus, no more then the Jews
did; Therefore this is but their own righteousness ( which is but as filthy
rags) and Antichrist in the likeness of Christ, and Antichristians and
Apostates, in the likeneste of true Christians. For this is but their own
Inventions, and their own righteousness (which inderd is not worthy to be
called righteousnesses, where they are puffed up in their sleshly minds) which
they go about to establish, whilst they are disobedient to him who is the
righteousness of God, Rom: 8
and was made manifest in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for, sin
condemned sin in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us, who walk not afrer the flesh, but after the Spirit.

Now there is none ever comes to the righteousness of God, and to have the
righteousness of the Law fulfilled in them, and to walk after the Spirit, but
who come to believe in the Light of Christ in their own particulars, and obey
it; which convinces of sin, and reproves for sin, and condemns sin in the
flesh; who do so they walk not after the flesh, they come our of the
weakness; for the Law was weak through the flesh, or they come to feel the
power, and the opperation of the Spirit, which makes free from the Law of sin,
and death; which the Law could not do because it was weak through the flesh:
But now God has sent his Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin
condemned sin, in the flesh, that the righteousness of the Law might be
fulfilled in us (say the Saints) who walk not after the flesh, but after the
Spirit. And this Law of the Spirit of life, which condemns sin in thee, and
makes free from the Law of sin and death, and is in Christ Jesus; and this is
the Light which Christ Jesus has enlightened every one with that comes into
the world, and is a manifestation of the Spirit which is given to every one to
profit withal his which is sent into the world to convince the world of sin,
and to reprove for sin; and will be, the condemnation of all the world who
believe not in it, but dirobey it, and hate it, and love their evil deeds, and
their sins which it does reprove them for; So that it is not their comforter,
but their reprover and condemner that do not receive ir, and love it not, but
reject it. But it is the comforter of all those who do receive and love is,
and believe and obey it, and are led by it; for it leads into all truth, and
sets free from sin and death, and hears witness with their spirits, that they
are the sons of God; for as many as are led by the Spirit of God, the same are
the Sons of God. This the Saints did bear witness of in former times, and
this the Saints do, witness now, glory and honor and living praises be unto
the Lord God of heaven and earth for evermore.

But this is a mystery to the world, and hid from all the Apostate Christians
in it; of what sect, or opinion, or judgment, or Religion soever they be of,
who deny the Light which Christ Jesus bath Lighted every one withal to be
^ufficient to lead to salvation, (...). I say, John 1.34.
they know not that which makes free from sin and death, and brings to life; no
can they believe that, Rom: 4.7.
when it is declared to them; Rom: 6.2.6, 7.
but say none can be free from sin on this fide of the grave; Rom: 6.18.
and account it error to say that any can be free from sin here, Rome 8.10.
or be righteous here without sin; 1 John 1.7.
and say the most righteous man sins, 1 John: 3.8.9.
and he that is borne of God sin ( which is Blasphemy so to say) and this is, I
Joh: 3.6.
and has been their doctrine in the world, amongst the Priests and profelsors,
I John 5.18.
the Antichrists and Anrichristians, who are out of the life of Christ, and the
true Christians that now their nakedness appears to thein shame, because they
have not submitted to the righteousness by faith in Christ Jesus that they
might be covered with it, who is the true Light; to believe in the Light, that
by it they might be led unto Christ Jesus from whence it comes, who is Gods
righteousness, and thereby know the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in them,
Rom: 8.3.4.
and know the kingdom of god within, which comes not with observation, as
Christ says, and the righreousness in which it stands, and the power in which
it stands is within; and the Law of the Spirit, which makes free from the Law
of sin and death, and the life which is eternal, which is the gist of God
through Romans 8.2.
Jesus Christ, in whom the Law of the Spirit of life is. But now all who are
pleading for sin, and say, None be free from sin here, they are still under the
Law of sin and death, ( which Paul said he was made free from) Sin is still a
Law to them, and they are servants to it, and so they are free from
righteousness, as the Apostle said; While ye were servants of sin, ye were free
from righteousness; but being made free from sin, ye became the servants of
righteousness: Romans 6.18, 20.
That at sin had reigned unto death, so righteousness might reign unto life
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And again; His servants ye are whom ye obey,
whether sin unto death, or obedience unto righteousness.

Therefore come all ye Teachers and Professors of the World, what say you? Can
none be made free from Sin and Death here, while he is upon Earth? Ephef. 1.1.
what is there not a living man amongst you all who is quickened? Is there none
of you come up out of the Grave that can truly say, 1 Gor. 15.55, 56, 57.
Oh Death, where is thy Sting? Oh Grave, where is thy Victory? Thanks be to
God, who has given me Victory over Death? Ioh. 5.25, 28.
What are you all as Graves which men go over unawares? Have none of you heard
the Voice of the Son of God yet, which they that hear shall live? Are you all
dead in your sins and trespasses, unquickned yet, in the Fall, in the first
Adams state, in the Disobedience, Romans 5.12, 19.(21.
by which Sin entare dinto the World, and Death by Sin? Are you all there still
where Death reigns? Is there none come to Lise, which is through the Obedience
to Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 15.46.(48.
the second Adam, the quickening Spirit, the Lord from Heaven? Have none of you
the Word of God abiding in you, Heb. 4.12.
which Word is Quick, and Powerful, and the entrance of it gives Life? Come
forth and answer for your selves; What are you all shur up in the unbelief
until this day, and have not believed in him whom God has sent, who is the
Resurrection and the Life, John 11.26.
(who says) he that believes in me shall live for ever, he shall never dye;
for he has Life in himself, and he gives Life to every one that believes;
What are you all searching the Scriptures which testifies of Christ, and think
to have eternal Life in them, and you not yet come to Christ that you may have
Life? him whom the Scriptures testifies of, and says, He is the trus Light
that lights every man that comes into the World, that all might believe in
the Light, Ioh. 8.12.
and become Children of Light, and he who follows him should not walk in
darkness, but he shall have the Light of Life, and know Christ Jesus, who is
the way so the Father, the Truth, and the Life, who says, No man comes unto
the Father but by me: I am come a Light into the World, etc. What do you not
believe Christ? Or do you think to sind another Way to the Father? an easier
Way then Christ? or a broader Way? a Way which is not a Cross to your Wills,
or a Way where you may walk your selves without a Guids, that ye may go
whither you list, ( but that is not the Way to God) as Christ told Peter, when
he was young he girt himself, and went whither he would, etc. Answer me plainly
to these Queries, Oh ye Priests and Professors, who have been so long talking
of the Scriptures, but have been out of the Truth, and out of the Life of
Righteousness, and out of the Light, and out of the Way, who have been
wandering in the Darkness, not knowing whether you go, and seeking the Living
amongst the Dead, and are erred from the Truth in your hearts, and hold it in
the unrighteousness, professing the true Words, but are, and have been out of
the Truth, and so could never be established there; for none can ever be
established, but in the Truth and in the Righteousness.

But ye have been out of the Life, and so are dead men still, and are yet in
the Graves, and have not heard his Voice that should raise you up yet, because
you have not hearkened diligently that your souls might live; though you have
been long talking of him, and searching for him without in the Observations,
and have been saying, Lot, here is Christ, and Lot he is there, in this Form,
or in that Form of Worship, and in this, or that Ordinande; Job 28.22.
so Death hith heard of the fame of Wisdom, and has been talking of the fame
of Wisdom, which is justisied of her Children; but ye who only have been
talking of Wisdom, and speaking of it, while you were in the Death, and did
not learn the Way to Life, ye are but soolish Children, and are not justified;
for you have all been but as the foolish. Virgins (the best of you) who have
had Lamps, but wanted Oil, and so ye are in the dark still, Luke 10.
your Lamps are not burning, nor your Lights shining; neither has your Light
so shined before men, that they may see your good works, Math. 5.16.
and glorify the Father: But you have all professed that which ye did not
possess, and so are found in the hypocrisy, and your righteousness has been
like the Righreousnesse of the Scribes and Pharisees, whom Christ told, should
in is wise enter into the Kingdom of Heaven; Now all that are but there will
be shut out; though you have been talking of Faith, and Hope, and
Sanctification, and Redemption, and Adoption, and Justification by Christ, and
by his Righteousness, while you are in the Unrighteousness, and in the Sin,
and Transgression, who would have Christ's righteousness to be a Cloak and
Cover for your sins, and would be justified by Christ in your sins, who came to
save his peopie from sin, and to destroy sin, and to destroy the Devil who is
the Author of it; and he came to take away all Cloaks and covers for sin, who
says himself, If I had not come and spokon to you, ye had not had sin, but
now have ye no Cloak for your sin, so he it is that has spoken to you once
and again, but ye have not regarded, and he does speak to you, and reproves
you for sin, all of you secretly in your consciences, and for your evil deeds,
by the Light of his Spirit, with which he has enlightened you all; who says,
Except ye believe that I am he, ye shall dye in your sins; and then there will
be no covering for you, for your shame and nakedness will be seen, though ye
may call to the Rocks and Mountains to fall upon you, and cover you. But the
woe is unto all, who are covered with a covering, and not of my Spirit, says
the Lord; and woe will be for ever to all such who want the covering of Gods
Spirit at the last day.

Therefore all people, turn in your minds to the Light of Christ Jesuswithin
you, which does reprove you for sin, and never consents to the doing of any
unrighteous thing, and believe in the Light, and be obedient to it ( for
obedience to it is life.) Then will ye come to put off that, and be uncovered
of that, which ye have been covered with, which the woe is too, and brings the
trouble, and sorrow, and anguish upon your souls; and which will bring shame
and confusion, and woe and torment for ever, except it be cast off, and
separated from. And who come to the Light of Christ, and believe in it, and
love it ( which is the Law of the Spirit of life) with it they come to be
quickened, and made alive unto God, and made dead unto sin; and so come to be
covered with the covering which the woe is not too; for the Spirit is Life
because of Righteousness, but the body is dead unto sin; As the Apostle said,
How can we who are dead unto sin, live any longer therein? Mark! They who were
quickened (which Paul writ to, who were once dead in sins and trespasses, and
children of wrath as well as others) these were made alive unto God; but they
were first dead unto sin, and so could not live any longer therein, except they
would go about to build again that which before they had destroyed, and so
make themselves transgres7s;ors, 2 Gal. 18.

Now this the Saints said and witnessed who were made alive unto God, and
quickened by his Spirit dwelling in them, and made free from the Law of Sin and
Death; but now this is conttary to all the Apostate Christians ( the Priests
and Professors) in this Age; who say, That they must live in Sin, and have the
Body of Sin as long as they be here, and none can be perfect here, nor be made
free from sin, but they sin in thought, word and deed daily; and say they had
need to pray for the forgiveness of the sins of their Prayers, and the best of
their holy Duties is full of sin, and the most righteous does sin, etc. and so
teach people.

These I say never yet did know sin destroyed, nor never yet come out of the
transgression, nor our of the fallen Adams state, nor we yet re-quickned, but
are still dead in their sins and trespasses, and therefore they are not like to
show people the way out of sin, or how to be freed from sin, for they
themselves are still in the Death, the dead not raised yet, and therefore has
all their preaching and praying been in vain, both to themselves and others,
and their faith vain also, and they are yet in their sins, even as the Apostle
said, If the dead arise not, 1 Cor. 15.14.
then is our Preaching vain, and your faith is vain also, and ye are still in
your sins. Now you (I say,) who long have been called Christians, and you who
have professed your selves to be Ministers of Christ, and yet are walking
according to the Course of this World, not redeemed out of the World, nor
separated from the World, but dead in sins and trespasses, unquickned yet,
unmade alive unto God, in the Death yet, where all the World lies who are in
the wickedness; your conditions are far unlike to the Saints conditions, who
spoke sorth the Scriptures, ye who are not yet come from among the dark world,
who sit in the darkness, and in the shadow of Death, and love darkness rather
than Light, because their deeds are evil: And will not these Teachers and
Professors abide with them in the darkness? And does it not appear that they
are resolved upon it, who say they must have sin, and cannot be freed from it
here, but as long as they live here they must carny a body of sin about with
them, and a body of Death, and so they walk in the shadow of it, and sit in the
shadow of Death, and are not yet come to the Light, nor will they come to the
Light, ( that they might see a way out of it) but love their evil deeds rather
than the Light, so there they are sat down in the darkness, and remain in
the Death until this day, and will not arise, and hearken to the Voice of
Christ Jesus, Isa. 42.
whom God has given for a Covenant, for a Light unto the Gentiles, Isa. 49.
to open the blind eyes, and to unstop the deaf ears, and to bring the
Prisoners oat of Prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the Prison
house; and out of the House of bondage, where they are all in Egypt still, in
the Land of darkness; and it has been and is still the work of the hireling
Priests to cry peace to the people there; and when any of the Servants of the
Lord have been sent by him to call people our of the darkness, to come to the
Light of Christ, which he has enlightened them withal, that by it they might
be led out of spiritual Sodom and Egypt, Rev. 1.8.
where our Lord Jesus Christ has been, and is crucified afresh, and put to
open shame; I say the Priests and Teachers, they have stood up to oppose, and
have been like Jannes and Jambres who withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8.
and would have hindered the people from going our of Egypt, even to keep people
in the darkness, and by the flesh-pors of Egypt, where they may eat and drink
with the drunken, and satissie their lusts, and yet notwithstanding tell the
people that they are the Children of God, and Christians, and that none can be
free from sin, and the best have their sailings, and so dawb with untempered
Mortar, and speak peace where the Lord speaks no peace, 2 Timothy 3: 6.
and so lead people about like silly women, laden with sins and diverse lusts,
ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth; For who
knows the truth, Ioh. 8.32.
the truth makes them free, and brings them from under the load, and from under
that which burdens, and vexes the righteous soul, as the righteous soul of
Lot was vexed from day to day with the unclean conversation of the wicked
Sodomites; Now these would keep people in Sodom and Egypt, under the heavy
burdens and loads in the fleshly lusts, and filthiness by the fleshpots of
Egypt, that even peoples hearts and minds have been boiling up with wickedness
and uncleanness, and their eyes full of Adulrery who cannot cease from sin,
and here they have been ever learning, but could not know truth while they are
there; and so by this means they have made people to pay them for reaching of
them, and to uphold them, and give them fire, and these are the blind leaders
of the blind into the Ditch.

But who comes to the Light which Christ Jesus has enlighmed them withal, to
wait in it, and hearken diligently to it, they hear the Voice of Christ and
live, and arise up from their seats, and so come out of Egypt, and out of the
shadow of Death, and the house of bondage, and from under Pharaoh and his
Taskmasters, and they come through the Sea, (as Israel did, and was Baptized
unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea,) I Cor. 10.2.
and through the fire to be Baptized into the name of Christ, with the Spirit
and with Fire and to be baptized all into one Spirit, Rom: 6.3, 4.
and to be made like unto Christ in his Death, to be made dead unto sin that
they may not live any longer therein, and to drink of the spiritual drink, and
to eat of the spiritual meat, and to drink of the spiritual Rock, which
Rock is Christ that is gone before us, ( which Rock is the same which Israel
drank of which followed them) who were under the Law until the Seed came,
which Seed is Christ, Gal. 3.19.
who redeems from under the Law, who was made under the Law, that he might
redeem them which were under the Law, who fulfilled the Law, and blotted out
the hand writing of Ordinances, and nailed them to his Cross, which whosoever
are followers of him, Math. 16.24.
they must take up this Cross which crucifies the flesh with the affections, 1
Coll. 20.
and lusts, and makes dead unto sin, 2 Coll. 14.
and slayes the Transgressor, and so makes peace through the blood of his
Cross; I say this Cross must be taken up daily by all who will be true
Disciples indeed, and true Christians; the Preaching of which Cross now to the
World and Professors therein is foolishness, and is despised, and cannot be
endured, Cor. 1.18 etc.
as it was formerly to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness; but unto them that believed therein both Jews and Greeks, it was
the Power of God, and the Wisdom of God, and to them that believe now it is
the same, but unto the unbeleeving it is foolishness even to all who are not
yet turred to the Light of Christ Jesus within, which he has enlightened them
withal, they are still in the unbelief, and so never yet knew the Power of
God, nor the Wisdom of God, and so it is foolishness to them, for they are
all spiritually blind, and so cannot discern the things of God which are
spiritually discerned, but are all as foolish and sottish Children without
understanding, and untaught, and unlearned, neither are they come to receive
the Law from him who is the Lawgiver, that they might be taught of him, Mat.
11.30.
who sarth, Learn of me, I am meek, and lowly im heart, and ye shall find
rest for your souls, and be made wise unto salvation, for in him is hid the
treasure of wisdom cand knowledge. Now all those who only looks out at, the
Scriptures, and comes not to the Light of Christ within, which the Scriptures
declares of, the treasure of wisdom and knowledge is still hid from them; for
it is in Christ Jesus from whence the Light comes; which Light leads to
Christ, where the treasure is hid, and where the Life is hid from all the world
yet, who are searching the Scriptures, 1 John 4.5.
and thinking in them to have eternal life; But ye will not come unto me that
ye may have life, John 26.40.
says Christ; I am the Life, John 11.25.
the Way, and the Truth, and our Life is hid with Christ in God, John 14.6.
said the Saints.

Therefore now all people, this is an Invitation of love to all your souls, to
turn in your minds to the Light of Christ within you, which is spiritual,
holy, true, just and good, which will let you all see what your words are, your
actings are ( though done in secret) and what the thoughts and intents of your
hearts are, it will try them all, and let you all see ( your minds being truly
turned to it) what is in your hearts and minds, and what your ways are now,
and have been, and what your lives are, and how you have lived. Now this I say,
which lets you see these things, and reproves what is contrary to it, will let
ye see whether ye are come to Christ yea or nay; who is the Way unto God, the
Truth, and the Life; and the righteousness of God, from whence the Light
comes; and so here every one of you will know Judgment laid to the Line, Isa.
28.17.
and righteousness to the Plummet, and that which is lies and deceit, and
hypocrisy, will be Judged, and condemned in every particular, with the Light,
which is and will be the condemnation of the world, who love their evil deeds,
evil ways, evil lives, evil thoughts and intents of their hearts, and evil
words, rather than the Light which does reprove them: and therefore the way,
the truth, and the life, which is Christ, is hid from them; Col. 2.3.
and they know not him in whom the treasure of wisdom and knowledge is hid.
Now the Light is that which does Reveal, and make manifest that which is hid,
and has been hid from the wise and prudent men of this world, Col 1.26.
and has been hid from ages and generations past. But now is the Truth plainly
seen, and known, and declared, as it was in former ages ( by them whom it was
then manifested to, by the Spirit of God) Even by us ( whom the world in soorns
call Quakers) who have believed in the Light of Christ, and received the
manifestation of his Spirit ( which is Light) which is freely given, and
tendered unto all, and has appeared unto all; but is not, neither hach been
received by all. But as many as receives him, to thom does he give power to
become the Sons of God, even to as many as believe i^ his Name, who is the true
Light, and who is true, and faithful, and everlasting; The same to day,
yesterday, and the same for evermore.

And this we can declare forth freely unto the Nations round about, which we
have freely received of him, even of his Spirit of truth, which was the promise
of the Father, To lead us into all truth, whereby we are come to know the
Leadings of the Spirit; and know that we are the Children of God, and taught of
God; and led by his Spirit, and this is it which does comfort our hearts, and
assure us that we are his Children: And as many as are the Sons of God, the
same are led by the Spirit of God; as the Children of this world are led by the
spirin that is of the world, which is of him who is called the God of the
world; Ephef. 2.3.
whose work it is to blind the minds of people (as we were also at well as
others) while we were in the vain conversation, and walked according to the
course of this world, even the Prince of the power of the air; that spirit
which now works in all. the Children of disobedience. And they may be easily
known, for they are full of air, and talk of that which they possess not, of
others conditions and not their own, and so have been in travel ( as it were)
but have brought forth nothing but wind; have a form of godliness, but want
the power, and are talking of the Spirit of God, but are led by the spirit of
this world, and are disobedient to the manifestation of the Spirit of God,
which reproves them for sin, and checks them secretly when they do evil. But
all who receives it, and are obedient to it, they know the movings of the
Spirit, and the teachings and leadings of the Spitit; and what it is to be
borne of the Spirir, and what it is to live in the Spirit, and to walk in the
Spirit, and to mortify the deeds of the body by the Spirit, and so to be
quickened by the Spirit; and what it is to be raised up from the Dead ( with
Christ) by his Spirit dwelling in them; Rom.8.11.
Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, the same is none of his.
Therefore how can any of the Priests, and Teachers, and professors in the world
confess Christ come in the flesh, and know not the Spirit which is of God,
etc. Who say they have not the same Spirit that was in Christ and the Apostles,
and Saints, and say none have the same Spirit now which they had? Therefore I
say truly they are not like to know that Spirit, who are erred from it, nor
confess Christ come in the flesh, who are of another spirit, which not being
the same, must needs be the spirit of this world ( which is the spirit of
Antichrist) by which they cannot know the things of God; 1 Cor.2, 12, 13, 19.
for none knows the things of God, saving the Spirit of God; neither were they
like to discern them, or demonstrate them by the Spirit which they have not,
but are erred from it; nor know the Scriptures which were given forth by the
Spirit of God in the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, but give their private
interpretation of them, and meaning which they add to them, which is of no
private Interpretation; for the Spirit of the Lord was but one in all them that
spoke them forth; and them who are in the same Spirit and Life now reads them,
Isa. 9.24.
and knows them again as they were spoken, and knows the Interpretation of
them, which is not private, but public, and plain, and manifest; But all who
are of another spirit, they are erred not knowing the Scriptures, Math. 2.29.
nor the power of God (as Christ said) and so they neither know that which has
been spoken by the Spirit of God formerly, Mark 2. 24.
not what the same Spirit speaks expressly now, not what the Scripture
means where it is spoken plainly and expressly. Ezekiel. 3.
And truly it is no wonder now to see it so; 1 Timothy 4.1.
for people and their teachers are so far erred from the Spirit by which the
Scriptures were spoken forth, that it is become a strange thing ( which cannot
be believed) even amongst all forts of professors who are called Christians;
For one to say he is moved by the Spirit of the Lord to speak, 2 Pet.1.20, 21.
or to pray, or to do any thing else (as the servants of the Lord were in
former times) and this is become a scorn and derision amongst them, which is a
shame to them, and does plainly manisest what spirit they are of.

Now if they were Children of God, or Sons of God ( who are led by the Spirit
of God, as some of the one profess themselves to be) mark this diligently, then
must they needs know the meaning of the Spirit of God, and the leadings of it,
otherwise it could not lead them and they not know it; And they would be in the
spiritual feeling, and tasting, and savouring, and discerning of the things of
God in themselves, and of the fruits of the Spirit in others brought forth, and
try all Spirits with that, and know them, and love the good, and not mock and
scoff at them. And so I say, then it would not be a strange thing unto them,
if they themselves were come to know a motion, or leading by the Spirit of God
in themselves, which would manifest that they were the Children of God, and
Sons of God; that they were of Christ, who have his Spirit, and are led by it,
and so were true Christians, and followers of Christ; and this would be a true
restimony to themselves, and to others; And then surely they, neither any of
you would mock, or scoff, or scorn at any who can witness the same.

But now the want of this has caused your nakedness appear to your shame, and
to the shame of all your blind guides whom ye have so long been following for
teaching, who have caused you to err by their lies, otherwise they might have
brought you to have known the truth before now, and to have raught you better
manners, then to have scoffed at it, and at those who have declared it amongst
you, and walk in it ( whom you in scorn call Quakers) and utter forth evil
words, which corrupts the good manners; howsoever if it were so, that we were
not in the truth, but in the error, and not moved by the Spirit of the Lord,
as ye say, but erred from it; then we were but where ye are.

Now Friends this I say, and testify in the Lord, and know assuredly that my
testimony is true, and Gods witness in all your Consciences shall bear
witness to it to be true, and the Scriptures of truth will bear witness to
the same; That ye cannot say in truth ( whom any of you do scoff, or scorn,
or mock, or reproach any of us, or others) that ye are moved thereunto by the
Spirit of God, or led unto it by the Spirit of God, or taught by the Spirit of
God to do so, or taught by the Scriptures to do so, which the holy men of God
spoke forth, which ye call your rule. Neither can ye say, that scoffing, and
scorning, and repsoaching, and persecuting is the fruits of the Spirit of God.
But on the contrary, it is the fruits of that spirit in you which lusts to
envy, James. 41.5.
which is of the Envious one, the enemy of all mankind, the Devil, who was a
liar, and a murderer from the beginning, and out of the truth.

And so it is he that moves some to murder now, and some to accuse falsely, (
for he is the accuser of the Brethron) and he moves some to persecute, and to
hate, and to cast into prisons now, (those that live in the truth, and bear
witnessetoit) and he moves others to scoff, and scorn, and speak all manner of
evil of them that are good now in these days, as he did of old; He it was
that led Cain to murder his Brother Abell who was a righteous man, and it was
he who moved Ishmaell to mock at Isaac, who was the Son of promise; and it was
he (the Devil) that moved the Scribes and Pharisees to say that Christ had a
Devil, and that he cast out Devils through Beelzebub, etc. and led them to
persecure Christ, and put him to death, and Judas to betray him, and the High
Priests and the rest to spit upon him, and smite him, and Crown him with
thorns, and mock at him, and to say hail King of the Jews, and to cry to
have him crucified, and Barrabas to be released, (who was a Robber) Now here
are some of the fruits of that spirit which is not of God, nor of Christ Jesus,
but is against God, and against Christ Jesus: And the Scripture says Be not ye
mockers, lest your bonds be made strong; and the Scriptures speaks of some who
mocked the Messengers of God, and despised those whom he sent to warn them till
his wrath broke out upon them to destroy them; now they that did so were not
moved and led by the Spirit of God, but by the evil spirit which is of the
Devil.

Therefore now all people try and examine your selves, and see what Spirit ye
are of, and what Spirit ye are led by, by the fruits which ye bring forth: For
this I say, and know and testify, that there is no people upon the face of the
earth, but they are either of the good Spirit, or of the evil Spirit; that is,
they are either led by the Spirit of God, or by the Spirit of the Devil; and
this is that, which does nearly concern all people to know which of these they
are led by, Chron. 6.16.
which they may know by the fruits which they bring forth, Isa. 6.22.
for that is it which does, and will make it manifest plainly, even as a Tree
does manifest it self what it is, whether good or evil, by the fruit it
brings forth, for the fruit does come from the sap and virtue, ( or as I may
say, the spirit and life that is in the Tree) which comes from the Root of it,
and ground in which it stands; Math. 7.16, 17, 18, 19.
Now the Scripture says, A good Tree brings forth good fruit, and again, If
the Root be holy, so are the Branches, then the fruit is good, there is the
good Tree; but now if the root be rotten or corrupt, which stands in the cursed
ground, then the branches will be rotten and corrupt, and the fruit will be
evil, or none at all, and there is the corrupt Tree, which is to be hewn down
and cast into the fire, and burned, for it is good for nothing else; And there
is the plant which must be plucked up, which Christ says, the Father has not
planted, for its a degenerate plant.

Now people these Parables are true, therefore learn to read them, and
understand them with the Light that Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal,
who spoke them forth unto the World, who is the Gift of the Fathers love unto
the World, whom he has sent a Light into the World, that all men through the
Light may believe, which they that did believe in him who is the Light, he said
unto them, Joh. 1.9, 10.
it was given to know the Mystery of the Kingdoms of God, Math. 13.11.
but unto the World who did not then believe in him, they were Parables, and
are so still to this day.

Now the Light which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal is the Gift of
God to you, and the manifestation of his Spirit which is given to you, Titus
2.11.
and his grace which has appeared unto you all, (which brings salvation)
therefore receive it, and believe in it, and be obedient to it, and so you will
come to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom, Rev.3.7.
and to understand all the Parables which Christ spoke to the World, and know
the Key of David which opens and none shuts, and shuts and noman opens;
otherwise ye will all remame in the dark World still, which loves not the
Light, but does choose darkness rather; and they will remain Parables to you
still, and ye will be shut up in the unbelief, and in the darkness, and the
Light will be your Condemnation for ever.

Therefore in true love I exhort you all to consider, in time oh all ye People,
Professors and Profane, that ye may escape that eternal condemnation and
Judgment which will come upon all the World of Unbeleevers, and ungodly men,
who do not believe in the Light of Christ Jesus, who is come a Light into the
World, but slight it, and hate it, ( and say it is not sufficient to lead to
Christ, and to lead to salvation) which reproves you for sin, and for your
evil deeds, that ye might be turned from sin and from the power of Satan to
God; otherwise your sins, and your evil deeds, which now ye love rather then
the Light which reproves them, will be sufficient to sink ye down into hell,
and into the pit of perdition.

I say now is the day of the Lords visitation of his grace and mercy and love
to your souls, that he would not have any of you to perish, but all to come to
the knowledge of his truth, which would surely save you, and set you free.
Every one therefore seriously to sit down and consider where ye have been, and
what ye have been doing, and what ye are doing, and what ye have gotten, and
what ye do possess of all that which ye have made profession of, and what
assurance ye have of the health, and welfare, and salvarion of your souls; and
what certain Evidence and testimony ye have thereof in your selves, and to your
selves; For that alone will stand you in stead, and be your comfort and stay in
time of trouble, and in the hour of tempration, and when ye come to lie upon
your deathbeds, when all things else will fail you, and yield ye no comfort
nor help; nay your teachers whom ye have so long been following, cannot help
you, nor comfort you, if ye have not the witness in your selves, and testimony
of Gods Spirit to bear witness with your spirits that ye are the Children of
God; all your profession will be nothing worth, which has only stood in words
and outside worships, and forms, without the power and life of that which ye
have professed.

Therefore honestly consider in time, and turn in your minds to the Light of
Christ Jesus in all your Consciences, which is Gods witness in you all, which
will either accuse or excuse you, and acquit, or condemn you in every thing
that ye do, or word ye speak, or thought that ye think. If ye do turn your
minds into it, and wait in it, by it you will come to see, and examine, and
truly to search and try what is in your hearts and minds at all times, and so
come to be acquainted therewith, and see what lodges there. Otherwise ye will
not know, nor be acquainted with your own hearts, which will then deceive you,
for they are desperately wicked, and ye will not know that wickedness that is
there, which is ready to join to any thing that is evil, and to be led into
any error; but as ye do mind that of God within you, which will searh your
hearts, and try your reins. And in this Condition have people been, and are
still in the World, and in all their professions there and worships, which
stands in ourward observations, and carnal ordinances, and worships set up in
men's wills, and practiced in the worlds spirit, which knows not God, nor the
things of God, and are in their own wills, and led by that spirit. So their
hearts and minds are drawn out into those things, to look at the things that
are seen which are temporal, 2 Cor. 4.16.
which are of the World, from that which may be known of God, which is manifest
in them, from the things which are not seen, which are eternal, and with
which they should know the true, and living God, Acts 17.23.
whom they have for a long time been thus ignorantly worshipping, not knowing
of him, though he was not far from every one of them, neither have they known
the true worship of him, which is in the Spirit, and in the truth, in which the
true Church stands and is gathered our of the world, and out of itsworships and
ways and customs, which are corrupt, and are upholden by men's laws, made in
their corrupt wills, whereby they have compelled people to their worships which
is not true, but are all erred from the truth, and true worship, and true
Church which is in God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, the pillar and
ground of truth, wherein they worship God in the Spirit, and in the truth, and
so have found the Father, John 4.
who is seeking such to worship him in this his day, which now is dawned after
the long night of Apostasy and darkness which has been over all people, so
that the whole earth has been covered with darkness, and the veil has been
over all faces, and the whole Earth been corrupted by the abominable worships
that has been therein in this time of darkness in the false Church, which is
the whore of Babylon, the mother of harlots, and the abomination of the Earth
(gotten up in the room of the true Church) with her false worships in
Imitation of the true worship, whereby all nations have been drunken with the
Cup of her fornications; Rev. 17.2.18.
And all the Emperors, Kings, Princes and Judges, 18.3.9.
and Rulers of the Earth, 19. and 19.
and they have all been making of Laws to uphold her, and she has ridden upon
them, for they have been the beast which have carried her; Rev. 13.4.
and the beast and the false Prophet (which receives their power from the
Dragon) have made war with the Saints, 17. and 3.
and overcome them; and their blood has been shed by her, which has cried,
and does cry unto the Lord for vengeance, and the Lord has heard the cry of
it. And he is now risen to take vengeance upon all them that dwell upon the
earth, where the Devil has been their King, Rev. 12.9.
who is the Dragon that old Serpent, who was cast out into the earth; And now
the time is come that he shall be bound and chained and cast into the pit, Rev.
20.3.
and the beast and the false Prophet) with him, shall be taken alive and cast
into the Lake. And the Lord God is come to Judge the great whore (the false
Church) who has set upon the Kings of the Earth, and made them drunk with her
cup, and to render vengeance with fury upon her, and burn her with fire. And
all her Merchants shall cry woe and alack, who have been made rich with her
merchandise: and the great City shall fall in which they have been trading;
which is Babylon the mother of them all; in what form, or profession, of show,
or color, or dress soever they have appeared; For the hour of her Judgment
is come, and strong is the Lord that Judges her. Therefore woe, woe, from the
Lord will be unto all that seek to uphold her, and come (...) of her! For all
that drink of her cup, and partake with her in her s^^^, must be sure to
partake of her plagues. And the decree of the Lord is sealed, and gone forth
against her, Rev. 8.4.
and the war is openly proclaimed against her, and the Beast, and the false
Prophets who have gove forth to deceive. Rev. 17.4.
And the Lamb is come forth, and his sword is drawn, and ho is riding on
conguering and to conquer, and with him are his Saints, who are called, and
faithful, and chosen, who are made willing to follow him whither soever he
goes. Rev. 14.4.
And the victory is determined, the Lamb and the Saints shall have the
victory; and their weapons are not carnal, but spiritual: For with the sword
of the Spirit which proceeds out of the mouth of the Lamb shall all his
enemies be slain; and great shall be the day of slaughter of Gods enemies, who
have the Beasts mark, or his name, or are of the number of his name; Rev.
21.27.
they shall all be slain both small and great; even all whose names are not
written in the Lambs book of life, who was stain from the foundation of the
world. And this the Lord is now bringing to pass in this his day, Zach. 4.6.
not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit will I do this, says the Lord.
And therefore blessed are all they who have an care to hear, and an eye open
to see what the Lord is doing, and a heart to understand, and receive his
counsel, and to do his Commandments, and his will, and to answer his
requirings. Written by a Friend to all your souls, a lover of truth and
righteousness, and a sufferer for the testimony of a good Conscience toward
God;

Who am called by the name of Henry Fell.

Written at Thersord in Norfolk the place of my Imprisonment, the 5th month in
the year 1660.

THE END.

