A LETTER Sent to the KING From M. F. Here is also thereunto Annexed a Paper
written unto the Magistrates in 1664. which was then Printed, and should have
been dispersed, but was prevented by wicked hands.

By M. F.

They judge not the cause of the Fatherless, and the right of the needy they do
not judge.

Shall not I visit for these things says the Lord, shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this.

Jer. 5.29. and Isa. 1.24. There is no King saved by the multitude of an Host,
a mighty Man is not delivered by much strength, but blessed is the Nation whose
God is the Lord, and the People whom he has chosen for his Inheritance.

Ps. 33. Many are the devises of Man, but the counsel of the Lord will stand,

Prove. 19.21. This was delivered to the King, the 29th. of the 6. Month, 1666
by Elizabeth Stubbs,

A Letter sent to the King from M. F. etc. KING CHARLES, I desire thee to read
this over, which may be for thy satisfaction and profit.
IN the fear of the Lord God stand still, and consider, what thou and you have
been doing these six years, since the Lord brought you peaceably into this
Realm, and made you Rulers over this People. The righteous eye of the Almighty
has been over you, and has seen all your doings and actions.

What Laws have you made or changed, save such as have laid oppression and
bondage on the Consciences of Gods People? and that of no less penalty then
Banishment cut of their Native Country. The greatest crime that you could find
with the People of God, was, that they obeyed and worshipped Christ Jesus; so
that the greatest stroke that has appeared of your J^stice has been upon such
as you counted Offenders for worshipping of God; In so much that several of your
Judges of the Land have several times, said in open Court to any that did
confess that they met to worship the Lord God, That, that was crime enough,
whereby they could proceed to Banishment; and when it was asked in open Court;
whether it was n^w bec^me a transgr^ssi^n or a crime in England to worship God.
He that was then the Chief Justice of England answered; Yes, yes; Oh wonderful!
let this be Chronicled in England for after Ages, that all Mag^st^ates may
dread and fear so to affront the Almighty; except they da^e say, they are
stronger then he.

And all this has been without any just cause given at any time by that People
which was the object of this Law; so that Men that had but the least measure of
righteousness and equity, could never have proceeded on to have inflicted such
a height of punishment, without some just ground.

And all that ever was pretended was but suspicion, which never can be
pa^alleld; to be prosecuted to such a height of suffering without a just ground
given; although occasion has been continually sought and watched for, but
never found; but the Lord has preserved his People innocent and harmless; and
therefore is he engaged to plead their Cause into whose hand it is wholly given
and committed.

I desire you also to consider seriously in the fear of the Lord, what effects
and fruits these things has brought forth.

First, I believe it has brought hundreds of Gods People to their Graves; it
has also rendered this Realm, and the Governors of it cruel, in the eyes of
all People, both within its own body, and in other Nations; besides the guilt
of innocent blood lies upon this Kingdom.

Since which time the Lord in his judgment has taken many thousands of its
People away by his two Judgments, Pestilence and Sword.

And before any of this was, when you first entered into this Kingdom; I was
sent of the Lord to you, to inform you, truly of the state and condition of
our People: And when I came before thee oh King.

I told thee I was come to thee in the behalf of an innocent, harmless,
peaceable People; which words I would then and ever since, and should at this
day seal with my blood, if I were put to it; and thy answer was to me; If they
be peaceable, they shall be protected.

I also wrote to thee several times concerning our says and principles; how
that we could not swear for Conscience sake; neither could we take up Arms,
nor Plot, nor contrive to do any Man wrong nor injury, much less the King.

I also told you, that we must worship God; for God required it of us.

We did likewise give you, many of our Books, which contained our faith and
principles and doctrine, that thereby we might be tried by the Scriptures of
truth (which all of you do profess) whether our Principles were erroneous or
no; and to that purpose we gave our Books to the King and Parliament; and to
the Bishops, and Ministers, both Ecclesiastical and Civil.

Our Books were sold openly amongst all people; and our Principles declared in
a Declaration, and freely holden forth to the whole World.

We also desired that we might have a Meeting of the Bishops or Ministers of
the Land, and that our friends would freely and willingly give them a Meeting,
that thereby they and we, might be tried by the Scriptures, which of us was in
the error: -- whereupon thou wast pleased to grant us our requests; and
promised us that we should have a Meeting, which was but reasonable; but the
Bishops and those that was concerned, feared that their cause would not hold
stitch with the rule of the Scriptures; and so they turned it off; when our
friends were ready; and would not give us a Meeting; this action of theirs did
clearly manifest them to be out of the life and power of the Scriptures; for
Christ Jesus said to those that he sent forth, that they should not be afraid,
for he would give them a mouth and wisdom, that all their adversaries should
not be able to gainsay nor resist; and likewise the Apostle when he wrote to
his Son Timothy, in the 2 Timothy 2.24, 25, 26. and the Servant of the Lord
(says he) must not strive, but be gentle unto all Men; apt to teach; patient,
in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will
give them repentance, and come to the acknowledging of the truth, etc.

If they had been the Ministers of Christ, and in the Apostles Doctrine, they
would have taken this way with us; they would have endeavored to have
convinced us by sound Doctrine, or at least have tried us this way, before they
had put the civil Magistrates upon it to make Laws against us; but this
manifested their spirits and principle; for they rather choosed to deliver us
up to you, that had the Whip and the Scourge in your hands; and that which they
could not do by sound Doctrine; they put it upon others to do it for them by
compulsion.

But the all-seeing God, has seen all this.

And all this we did that you should not be ignorant what we could do; and what
we could not do.

I told you also that we could give unto Caesar, the thing that was Caesar's;
and give unto God also the thing that was Gods.

And this is a witness for the Lord in this day that he pleads, that you were
not ignorant.

I also writ to thee to beware how thou ruled in this Nation, for the people of
this Nation was a britle people generally; and besides them the Lord had a
people here that was dear unto him.

And I desi^ed thee not to touch them, nor hurt them; I also desi^ed thee to
beware of the Council of the Bishops; for if thou hearkened to their Council,
they would be thy ruin; for it was their Council was the ruin of thy Father;
for their counsel is the same that Reboboams young Men was; read what the Lord
did with that King in the 1. of Kings and 12. Thou know this is true their
counsel is to make the burden heavier, as theirs was.

All this with much more I wrote to thee, and warned thee of; I can truly say
in the fear of the Lord; In much love and tenderness to thee; and now I may say
unto thee, for which of these things have thou kept me in Prison three long
Winters, in a place not fit for people to lie in; sometime for wind and storm
and rain, and sometime for smoke; so that it is much that I am alive; but that
the power and goodness of God has been with me. I was kept a year and seven
Months in this Prison, before I was suffered to fee the House that was mine, or
Children or Family, except they came to me over two dangerous Sands in the cold
Winter; when they came with much danger of their lives; but since the last
Assizes I have had a little more respect from this Sheriff then formerly from
others. And in all this I am very well satisfied; and praises the Lord who
counts me worthy to suffer for his sake.

For I never did thee nor any other man in the Nation any wrong and so I may
say for many more of our Friends that have suffered even until death; and all
that we could write or speak we were not believed, and all the warnings that we
gave of Judgments; and told you plainly we had done so with other Governors
before you; and how the Lord had overthrown them; and desired you many times to
beware least the Lords Judgments came over you also; but all was to no purpose,
for as long as there was peace in the Land the maine business of the Parliament
was to invent Laws to punish and persecute Quakers; but to make Laws to
punish vice, sin and wickedness, and lasciviousness, we had but a little of
such Laws.

And now after all my sufferings, in the same love that I visited thee in the
beginning, I desire thee once more to fear the Lord God by whom Kings rule, and
Princes decree justice, who sets up one and pulls down another at his pleasure.

And let not the g^ilt or the burden of that word that passed from thee at
Breda lie upon thy conscience, but as thou promised when thou wast in distress,
and also renewed it many times since, that thou would give liberty to tender
Consciences; in the fear of the Lord perform it and purge thy Conscience of
it, and hearken not to wicked Counselors that has stopped it in thee: all
this time, for they will bear none of thy burden for thee, when the Lord pleads
for breach of Covenant with him and his people; I know it has been often in
thy heart to perform it, and thou have seen what fruit the want of it has
brought forth.

So if thou love thy eternal peace and comfort with the Lord, try what the
performance of it will bring forth, who wilt thereby see thou have hearkened to
wrong Counselors.

And every mortal Man has but a moment in this life, either to serve, fear,
and honor the Lord, and therein to receive mercy from him, or else to
transgress, sin, disobey, and dishonor him, and so receive the judgment of
eternal misery.

So never a one of you knows how long, or how short your day may be; therefore
fear not man that can kill the body, but fear the Lord who when he has killed
the body can cast the soul into hell; yea I say unto you fear him.

From a true lover of all your souls (though a sufferer by you) and the desire
of my heart is that you may take these things into consideration betime before
it be too late; and set open the Prison doors and let the innocent go free, and
that will take part of the burden and guilt off you, lest the door of mercy be
shut to you.

From my Prison at Lancaster Castle the 6. d. 6. Mon. 1666. Margaret Fell.

To the Magistrates and People of England where this may come.
WHat is the matter with the Christians of our age, and of our English Nation
that has been looked upon to be a Garden and a Nurcery in Christianity and
Religion beyond all other Nations, that have made so great profession of God
and Christ, and of the Scriptures; and are they turned persecuters and Law
makers against Christianity? and against those that are in the same spirit of
God, power and fellowship as they were in, that gave forth the Scriptures which
the people of England professes; and are these now become the greatest enemies
that England have, and for no other cause but because they worship God, and
obey Christ's command, and abides in his Doctrine, and bears the same Testimony
of truth, and Resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ as the Apostles did: And
all that they do, and act, and speak, and suffer for, is according to
Scripture, and nothing that they suffer for is contrary to the Scriptures; is
these things become a crime in England? and is this thegreatest offense that
England has taken with the People of God? even because they believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ, and obeys his Doctrine. Oh take up a Lamentation for
England, surely there is some heavy, sad, and grievous Judgment waiting upon
her; and is not hardness of heart and a reprobate mind, and a seared Conscience
one of the greatest Judgments that can befall a people? and is not this already
seized upon the Law makers of England, that have hardened their hearts against
the Lord and his people; as if they had no other enemies but they, who never
did them wrong nor hurt, nor never desired or intended any hurt against them,
but has ever desired their good, and peace, and welfare, and that they might
come to the true knowledge of the Lord, and to the true knowledge of his truth,
as it is in Jesus.

Which they clearly manifest they are ignorant of, by their making of Laws
against those amongst them that fears God, and worships him, and gives glory to
his name, though they be freeborn Englishmen and women, nor have they
transgressed any just Law of England, until they were forced to make one, to
make them transgressors with, though they be of the same Religion that they
themselves profess, they profess Christ and the ^criptures in words, but those
that come to the works of Righteousness and to believe in the Lord Jesus
Christ, which is the work of God, such they persecute and make Laws aga^^st;
so that England appears now as if it would shut Christianity out of its
dominion, and what will they bring in and set up next? seeing they banish out
Christ and his Members, and s^^vants; and saints, and so makes them slaves that
be freeborn English men, which has been a blessing unto them, and to the Land
wherein they lived, and no hurt to them, and if they had given them the liberty
of their Conscience, to have served the Lord God, they might have been
partakers of the blessing with them; but being that they have turned their hand
against the Lord, and turned their sword backwards against the Righteous;
surely the Lord will plead for this, and surely there will a recompense come,
for its hard to strive against the Lord, and to touch his Anointed, and to do
his Prophets any harm, when they were but few in number, be reproved Kings for
their sake; and he is the same now, he changes not, and his arm and power is
the same, and his Righteousness is the same, which is to be revealed upon the
head of the wicked, and he is engaged to plead the cause of the innocent, who
has no pleader in the Earth, and his eye sees and beholds all the Actions of
the Children of Men, and those that acts against him and his servants, he takes
special notice of, and be saw the affliction of his people formerly, when they
were afflicted in Egypt, and heard their cries, and knew their sufferings; and
surely he is the same now as he was then; and as he has said himself, in as
much as you do it unto my little ones, you do it unto me; this he said when he
knew that his next appearance should be in his Saints: and certainly those that
persecuted his Saints even without a Law, when they had none, and contrary to
several Laws of England (as several of the servants of the Lord has suffered)
has Christ's servants been persecuted by those that were in power formerly, and
they that did this, and they that make new Laws; certainly if Christ and the
Apostles had been and were upon the Earth they would have done the same unto
them; but all these things the Lord has taken notice of, and they are written
where they cannot be bloted out; and all the righteous blood that has been
shed since Abel, and all the Saints sufferings in all ages the Lord has taken
notice of, and all those Christians in these latter times, where several have
been imprisoned to death for the Christian faith; all this the Lord has in
everlasting remembrance; and when he comes to make inquisition for the blood of
his saints and servants, it will be a hard and a sad day for the acters and
fighters against God; so all ye Christian Magistrates beware what ye d^, and
keep your hands out of blood, and persecution of the innocent, and let that
which is past suffice, for ^e will find it heavy enough; and for the time to
come dread and fear the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, that has all your lives
and breath in his hand to give and take away at his pleasure; and do not that
which may incur the Lords displeasure against you, by making Children
fatherless, and wives widows, as there are already several in England at this
day; it is better for you to offend Man then God, and so endanger your mortal
souls, so mind that which concerns your eternal peace, and the eternal welfare
of your souls; and this I am moved of the Lord to forwarn you of, least you
bring we and misery on your souls, and a general judgment on the whole Land,
and this is true love unto you, and the desire of the general peace and good.
And remember that you were warned from a prisoner of the Lord in Lancaster
Castle.

7th. day, ^th. Mon. 1664. Margaret Fell.

THE END.

