A Touchstone, OR, A Perfect Trial by the Scriptures, of all the Priests,
Bishops, and Ministers, who have called themselves, the Ministers of the
Gospel, whose Time and Day has been in the last Ages past, or rather in the
Night of Apostasy; they are tried and weighed by the Scriptures of Truth, and
are found out of the Life and Power of the Scriptures, and out of the Spirit
and Doctrine of them that gave them forth, and quite contrary to their
Principle and practice, both Papists and Protestants.

Unto which is annexed, Women's Speaking Justified, etc.

Little Children, it is the last time, as you have heard, that Antichrist
should come; even now there are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it is
the last time. These things have I written unto you, concerning those that
seduce you; but the Anointing which ye have received of him abides in you, and
ye need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you.

1 John 2. And I stood upon the sand of the Sea, and saw a Beast rise out of
the Sea, having seven Heads, and ten Horns, and upon his Heads the names of
Blasphemy: and he opened his mouth in Blasphemy against God to blaspheme his
Name and his Tabernacle, and them that dwell in Heaven. He that leads into
Captivity must go into captivity; he that kills with the sword, must be
killed with the sword; here is the faith and patience of the Saints,

Rev. 13. London, Printed in the Year, 1667.

The Epistle to the READER.
Serious Reader,
LEt it enter into thy serious consideration, the sad and perilous days that
this Age is fallen into, even into those last days that Christ and his
Apostles foresaw, and foretold of, which are the last days (as the
Scriptures do plentifully declare and hold forth) that were to come to pass,
before the coming of the day of the Lord; and that there was to be a falling
away from the Truth of the Lord God, and that then the Man of Sin was to be
revealed, the Son of Perdition; 2 These. 2. 3, 4.

Also John in the Revelations, when he stood upon the sand of the Sea, saw the
first Beast rise out of the Sea, and the second out of the Earth, which
exercised the Authority of the first, and the Dragon gave the power to the
Beast, and them that worshipped him, Rev. 13. And John saw the War he made with
the Lamb, and with the Saints, and overcame them, for he was to continue 42
Months, which is by the account of the Spirit of God, according as it is
recorded in the Scripture, above 1200 Years, which is fully completed and
finished, with many years over, since that great City Babylon had a foundation,
with whom the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication, and the
Inhabitants of the Earth have been made drunk with the Wine of her fornication.

But the Angel carried John into the Wilderness, Rev. 16, where he saw the
Judgments of this great Whore, and this woman which has been arrayed in
Purple, and Scarlet color, decked with Gold and Precious Stones, and in her
hand a golden Cup full of abominations; and the Woman which thou saw, says
the Angel, is that great City which reigns over the Kings of the Earth. But
after this, John saw another Angel, and he cried mightily, with a strong voice,
saying, Babylon, Babylon the great, is fallen, is fallen, and become the
habitation of Devils. And John heard another voice from Heaven, saying, Come
out of her my People, that ye he not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her Plagues; for her sins have reached unto Heaven, and God has
remembered her Iniquities. Reward her even as she has rewarded you, and double
unto her double, according to her works, in the Cup that she has filled, fill
her double, Rev. 18.

Where ye may read the destruction and desolation of this great City, Mystery
of Babylon the great, and Mother of Harlots and Abominations of the Earth;
therefore rejoice over her thou Heaven, and ye holy Apostles and Prophets, for
God has avenged you of her; for after this John saw a mighty Angel take up a
stone like a Mil-stone, and cast it into the Sea, saying, Thus with violence
shall that great City Babylon be cast down; and shall be found no more at all.

Glory, Glory to the Highest for evermore, her day of destruction and calamity
and desolation hastens on apace, the darkness is past, the night is over, and
the true Light now shines; the Resurrection of Jesus Christ the Righteous, the
Blessed Seed, is rising in the hearts of People; the Son of Man is coming to be
lifted up from the Earth, and will draw all men after him, and in his power and
in his great glory is coming to reign, and to rule in the hearts and
consciences of men; and the Tabernacle of the Testimony is opened in Heaven,
and is with men, and the Mystery of Godliness is manifested in the hearts of
People, and God is manifesting himself in them, who has said he will dwell in
Men, and walk in them; and he is making their Bodies his Temples; and he is
coming to root out and race out of the hearts of Men and Women, that Man of
Sin, that Son of Perdition, that has sitten in the Temple of God, and has
been exalted above all that is called God, and has showed himself as God; and
now the Lord is discovering him by the Resurrection of his Power and Spirit in
the hearts of People, which he is coming to pour upon all flesh according to
his word and promise: and that Mystery of Iniquity that has wrought in a
Mystery, that Wickedness that has possessed the hearts of men and women, now the
Lords Power and Spirit is coming to cast him out, and take him out of the way,
and throw him out.

And Christ Jesus, that everlasting Fountain, who said, If any man be a thirst,
let him tome unto me and drink; for I am come a Light into the World, which
world is in every man's heart; And whosoever believes in Christ Jesus, the
Light, they shall not perish, but have the Light of Life: And this Light of the
Lord Jesus Christ being risen in the heart of every man and woman, turning
their minds thereunto, it becomes their Teacher; and this is that by which the
Lord teaches all his People, who has said by his Prophets, They shall be all
taught of God, John 6. Every man therefore that has heard and learned of the
Father, comes unto me, says Christ, who is that living Bread that endures
for ever.

And this is the Son of man which God the Father has sealed, that is come a
Light and a Spirit, which every one that believes in, is sealed with; therefore
it is good for all People, not to quench the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, nor to
grieve it, by which they are sealed to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4. 30. but
that every one may turn to the Spirit of the Lord Jesus, that is within them,
which preaches in a Mystery, and preaches righteousness very nigh in their
hearts, and will cleanse their inward parts, and make their hearts clean from
that mystery of Iniquity, that has been long lodged in them and held them
Captive, and led them into sin, and transgression, and wickedness. Oh that all
hearts and secret parts might be cleansed by the blood of Jesus Christ, and
that every one would walk in the Light, abide in the Light, as he is in the
Light; and here is the fellowship and unity of the Saints in Light, Jesus
Christ the Righteous ruling in their hearts; and who lives in the Unity and
Spirit of the Lord Jesus, they come to have fellowship with the Father and the
Son, as John had; and these things he wrote unto them that their joy might be
full, and that they might partake of the same Light, Life and Spirit, and have
Unity with him whose message is, That God is Light, and in him is no darkness
at all. And whosoever says he knows God and abides in darkness, is a liar, and
the Truth is not in him, 1 John 1.

And this has been the Condition and Doctrine that has been holden forth for
many hundred years; they have walked in darkness, and showed as if they had
fellowship with God, and they have loved the world, and the things of the
world, which the Apostle says, is not of the Father; And if any love the
World, the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2.

And now Reader do but consider, how these Teachers of the world live, and
after what manner, and how they do oppress people for their maintenance, and
whether there is any sort of people more covetous of the world than they are,
and how they draw people from the Unction of the holy One, that the Apostle
here turned people to, and desired them to take heed unto, and to continue and
abide in; that which they had heard from the beginning; and not to turn to
those Antichrists that were then entering into the world: but they were to
abide in the Anointing which thy had received, and it would teach them all
things, and it was truth and was no lie, 1 John 2.

But these Ministers of darkness, that have been in this night of Apostasy, all
their endeavors have been to draw people from the Light, and from the Unction
of the Holy One, after them, and after their Imaginations, dark Studies, and
brain Divination, and so have deceived poor people, and have led them captive
at their wills; and as the Prophet said, Have born rule by their means, and the
people have been so blind, that they love to have it so: And thus the
Scriptures have been fulfilled, and there has been power given to the Beast,
and people generally have said in their hearts, Who is able to make war with
the Beast? But glory to the highest Lord, his time is over, and the year of our
Redeemer is come, and the Spirit of the Lord is upon him, and the Lord has
anointed him to preach good tidings to the meek, liberty to the Captives, and
the opening the Prison doors to them that are bound, and to proclaim the
acceptable Year of the Lord, and the day of Vengeance of our God, Isa. 61. 1, 2.

Oh Reader! The time is short, the day of the Lord will come as a Thief in the
night, and all this long-suffering of the Lord that has been past, is because
he is not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. And seeing that all these things shall be dissolved, oh! what
manner of persons ought we to be in all holy conversation and godliness,
looking for that blessed hope and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, that all may
be found with him in peace, without spot or blemish, which is my desire.

And so read over this following Treatise, and weigh in the seriousness of thy
heart, and consider the Scriptures of Truth, by which thou may judge, by the
Light of the Lord Jesus Christ in thee, how all the world have been befooled,
and blinded, and led captive even at Satan's will; and how this Antichrist has
ruled in the hearts of People, and sat in the Temple of God, and has been
decked and covered over with the Scriptures and Saints words, speaking them
forth with unclean lips, and from unclean hearts, and so have deceived the
hearts of the simple; but this fine linen, and purple, and scarlet, that
Babylon has been decked with, in one day shall be taken from her. Amen, even
so Lord Jesus, come quickly.

M. F.

A Touchstone, OR, A Perfect Trial by the Scriptures, of all the Priests,
Bishops, and Ministers, etc.
ME thinks I hear the Bishops mutter, murmur, and contemn, that I should
publish it out to the world, how I desired the King to beware of their
Counsels; therefore I do hereby give them my Reasons of the Cause why I did so,
which Reasons may satisfy them and the whole world, except they can by as good
or better overturn them.

In the first place I desired, since it pleased the Lord to bring the King to
his outward Right and Propriety of the Crown of his Ancestors, that he might
have done that whereby he might Prosper, according to the words of the wise
King Solomon, who said, It is the glory of God to conceal a thing, but the
honor of a King to search out a matter. Take away the wicked from before the
King, and his Throne shall be established, Prove. 25. And again he says, The
thoughts of the Righteous are right, but the counsel of the wicked is deceit:
the words of the wicked are to lie in wait for blood, but the mouth of the
upright shall deliver them; the wicked are overthrown and are not, but the
house the righteous shall stand, Prove. 12.

Also, it was my desire that he should follow the example of the good Kings of
Israel, whose way it was to ask counsel of the Lord, or of his Prophets; as
King David enquired of the Lord, whether he should go up against the
Philistims? and the Lord said, Go up, 2 Samuel 5. and again King David called
Nathan the Prophet, and told him that he would build a House for the Ark of
God, and the Lord sent word again to David by Nathan the Prophet, 2 Samuel 7. And
when there was three years of famine in the Land, David enquired of the Lord,
and the Lord answered him, it was for Saul and his bloody house, 2 Samuel 21.

Also King Solomon, the Lord appeared unto him, and bid him ask what he would
have, and Solomon asked of the Lord an understanding heart to judge his People,
that he might discern between good and bad, for says he, Who is able to judge
this thy so great a People? And this speech pleased the Lord that Solomon asked
such a thing, 1 Kings 3. And again the Lord spoke unto Solomon the second time,
concerning the House which he was building; If thou will walk in my Statutes,
says the Lord, and execute my Judgments, and keep all my Commandments to walk
in them, then will I perform my word with thee, which I spoke unto David thy
Father. 1 Kings 6.

And Hezekiah, that good King of Judah, when he was sent to, from Sennacherib
King of Assyria, by Rabshekah and others with a great host, who came up
against Jerusalem, who threatened the King and the whole City, as you may read 2
Kings 18. And Hezekiah King of Judah sent Eliakim, and Shebna, and the Elders
of the Priests, covered with sackcloth, to Isaiah the Son of Amos; so the
servants of Hezekiah came to Isaiah, and Isaiah said unto them, Thus shall ye
say unto your Master, thus says the Lord; Be not afraid of their words, etc.
Chap. 19. And accordingly the Lord sent an Angel and cut off all the men of
Valor, and the Leaders, and the Captains of the King of Assyria; and the Lord
saved Hezekiah, and the Inhabitants of Jerusalem from the hands of the King of
Assyria, 2 Chronicles. 32.

Also Josiah, that good King, when he heard the words of the Book of the Law
read, he rent his Clothes, and commanded Hilkiah the Priest, and several of
the Elders of the People, saying, Go ye and enquire of the Lord for me, and for
all the People of Judah, concerning the words of this Book that is found; for
great is the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us because our Fathers
have not harkred to the words of this Book; and they went and enquired of the
Prophetess, to Huldah, as you may read, 2 Kings 22. 2 Chronicles. 34. This you see
was the practice of the four principal Kings of Israel and Judah.

Moreover I am clearly convinced, and am assured, that the Bishops as they are
called, and those of their Order and Coat, or indeed any that have taken upon
them that Function of the Clergy, these many hundred of years, that they are
not according unto Christ Jesus nor unto his Disciples, nor the Apostles, and
the Saints in the Primitive times, but are gone quite contrary, according to
what the Scriptures of Truth hold forth; and that in all these particular heads
following.

First, Their Titles.

Secondly, Their Estate, or Condition and Qualifications.

Thirdly, Their Call.

Fourthly, Their Doctrine and Worship.

Fifthly, Their Practice in matters of Controversy.

Sixthly, Their Maintenance.

Seventhly and lastly, Their Garb and Habit.

All which we shall prove not only not according, but quite opposite and
contrary to Christ Jesus his Example, and his Apostles and disciples.

Now they being men not only professing Christianity, but also taking upon them
to be Actors, Leaders, Teachers, Preachers, and Feeders of the Peoples Souls,
and that in and with Christianity, there can be no sound reason to the
contrary, but that they should be men principled, fitted, and furnished, yea,
and filled with the same Spirit as was in the Apostles, whose words they take
upon them to declare, and to make a Trade of, and to get their Living by; since
they make poor people believe, that they have their souls in cure, and so by
good words and fair speeches, deceive the hearts of the simple, and so keep
them ever learning, but they never come to the knowledge of the Truth.

But to proceed to the First, viz. Their Titles,

This is clear contrary to the Doctrine of Christ; for when the Mother of
Zebedees Children came unto him concerning her two Sons, that one might sit on
his right hand, and the other on his left. Jesus answered and said, ye know not
what ye ask; and when the other ten heard it, they were moved with indignation
against the two Brethren; but Jesus called them unto him, and said, ye know
that the Princes of the Gentiles exercise Dominion over them, and they that are
great exercise Authority upon them, but it shall not be so among you; but
whosoever will be great among you, let him be your Minister; and whosoever will
be chief among you, let him be your servant. Even as the Son of Man came not to
be ministered unto, but to minister; and to give his Life a ransom for many,
Matthew. 20.

Likewise again, when he told them, That one of them should betray him; they
began to enquire among themselves, which of them it was. And there was also a
strife among them which of them should be accounted the greatest (mark that,
you great Lords) And he said unto them, the Kings of the Gentiles exercise
Lordship over them; and those that exercise Authority on them are called
Benefactors, but ye shall not be First, Theit Titles, which are your Holiness,
Lord-Bishop, your Lordship, and your Gra^e; contrary to Christ and his Apostles.
so; but he that is greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and he that
is chief as he that does serve, etc.

And again, when he said unto them, Let these things sink into your ears; the
Son of Man must be delivered into the hands of men. And again they began to
reason among themselves who should be the greatest. And when he said unto them,
Behold we go up to Jerusalem, and the Son of Man shall be delivered unto the
chief Priests, and unto the Scribes, and they shall condemn him to death. Even
then did James and John come to desire to sit, one on his right hand, and the
other on his left: But Jesus again reproved them for it, and said unto them, Ye
know that they that are accounted to rule over the Gentiles, exercise Lordship
over them, and their great ones exercise Authority upon them; but it shall not
be so with you, etc. Mar. 10. Nay, he said unto his Disciples, Be not ye called
Rabbi, for one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are Brethren. Neither be
ye called Masters, but he that is greatest among you, let him be your servant:
and whosoever shall exalt himself, shall be abased; and he that humbles
himself, shall be exalted, Mat. 23.

And I do not find that the Apostles, either Timothy or Titus, who were Bishops
indeed, were ever called Lord-Bishops; but the Apostle, when he writes to the
Thessalonians, says, Wherefore when we could no longer forbear, we thought it
good to be left at Athens alone; and sent Timotheus our Brother and Minister of
God, and Fellow Laborers in the Gospel of Christ, to establish you and to
comfort you concerning your Faith. This was the Title that the Apostle gave
them, which was not, Our Reverend Father in God, Lord Bishop, etc.

And the Apostle when he writes unto Timothy, calls him, His Son in the Faith,
1 Timothy 1. And when he exhorts him, he says, If thou put the Brethren in
remembrance of these things, thou shall be a good minister of Jesus Christ,
nourished up in the word of Faith, and to good Doctrine whereunto thou have
attained, Chap. 4. And in his second Epistle that he writes to Timothy he
calls him, His dearly beloved Son; and that he greatly desires to see him:
and he says, Thou my Son, be strong in the grace that is in Christ Jesus: And
he bids him endure hardness as a good Soldier of Jesus Christ, 2 Timothy 2.

And when he writes to Titus, he says, To Titus mine own Son after the common
Faith; for this cause left I thee at Creet, that thou should set in order
the things that are wanting, Tit. 1. And again he says to Timothy, Let no man
despise thy youth, but be thou an Example of the Believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. Till I come, give
attendance to reading, and to exhortation. Neglect not the gift that is in
thee, which was given thee by prophecy, with the laying on of the hands of the
Presbytery. 1 Timothy 4. I would know which of the Bishops has received such a
Gift as this? and whether by making proof of this Gift of Prophecy that is in
them, they have attained to these Titles of Lord-Bishops, and Reverend Fathers
in God? But since we find the Scriptures so much contrary to these Titles, it
must needs follow that they have received their Titles from men. But Timothy
and Titus were made Overseers of the Church of God by the Holy Ghost (but no
Lord-Bishops) and so was the Apostle Paul, and the other Apostles.

And James the Apostle speaks expressly, My Brethren, have not the Faith of our
Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with respect of Persons: For if there
come into your assembly a man with a gold Ring or goodly Apparel, and there
come also a poor man in vile Raiment, and ye have respect to him that wears
the gay Clothing, and not to him that is Poor; Are ye not partial in your
selves, etc. But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, and are
convinced of the Law as transgressors, Jam. 2.

Here the Apostle gives perfect judgment against the respecting of men's
persons, which most men do, because of advantage; but with Christ Jesus and his
holy Apostles, you see it was not so, and therefore those that take upon them
the name of the Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, should follow their
examples, and not go quite contrary. And this I look upon to be sufficient for
the proof of the first head, which is their Titles.

The Second is their Qualifications, State and Condition.

First, Christ Jesus said to those he preached unto, Come unto me all ye that
labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest: take my yoke upon you,
learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, Mat. 11. This is contrary to
highness and haughtiness. And when he preached his first Sermon in the
Mountain, and his Disciples came unto him, He opened his mouth, and taught
them, saying, Blessed are the poor in Spirit: Blessed are they that Mourn:
Blessed are the Meek; as you may read, Mat. 5.

And likewise when he sent forth his Disciples, he said, Behold I send you as
Lambs in the midst of Wolves; be ye therefore wise as Serpents, but harmless
as Doves, Mat. 10. And when he had sent out the seventy, by two and by two, he
said unto them, Go your ways, behold I send you forth as Lambs among Wolves,
Luke 10. This was one Quality of those that Christ sent forth, they were Meek,
they were Harmless.

Secondly, They were such as were to go into Sufferings, as he said unto them
in the next verse; Beware of men, for they will deliver you up to the Counsels,
and they will scourge you in their Synagogues; and ye shall be brought before
Governors and Kings, for my Names sake, for a Testimony against them and the
Gentiles, and ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake, Mat. 10. Mark 13.
9.

And when Peter rebuked his Master, when he told them that he was to go to
Jerusalem to suffer; He turned, and said unto Peter, Secondly, Their
Qualifications, contrary to Christ and his Apostles, who were, 1st. Meek,
Lowly, and Humble, 2. Suffering and taking up the Cross. 3 Love and Charity to
all men.
Get thee behind me Satan, etc. Then said Jesus unto his Disciples, If any man
will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross, and follow me,
Mat. 16. And when he told them, that tho Son of Man must suffer many things,
and be rejected of the Elders, and Chief Priests, and Scribes, and be slain,
and raised again the third day; and he said unto them all; If any man will come
after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily and follow me, Luke
9. Mark. 8.

And according to this the Apostles of Christ went through many hardships and
sufferings, as may be read at large throughout the Book of the Acts.

And the Apostle Paul says to the Corinthians, And I brethren, when I came to
you, came not with excellency of speech, or wisdom, declaring unto you the
Mystery of God; for I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ and him Crucified: and I was with you in weakness and fear, and in much
trembling; For Christ sent me not to Baptize but to Preach the Gospel; not with
wisdom of words, least the Cross of Christ should be made of none effect; for
the preaching of the Cross is, to them that perish, foolishness, 1 Cor. 1. and
Chap. 2.

It is many ages since those that took upon them the Preaching that which they
have called the Gospel, were in this state and condition; for the Cross of
Christ which is the Power of God, which makes to tremble, as the Apostles did,
has been an offense unto them, and is mocked and scoffed at by them, to this
day.

Thirdly, They were also such as were to live in Love; and of this Christ
himself gave them an example, when he took a Towel, and girded himself, and
poured water into a Basin, and began to wash the Disciples feet, and said, Ye
call me Lord and Master, and ye say well, for so I am: If I then your Lord and
Master have washed your feet, ye ought also to wash one another feet. And a
new Commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another as I have loved you;
for I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you: By
this shall all men know that ye are my Disciples, if ye love one another, John
13. and Chap. 15.

And the Apostle says, when he wrote to the Thessalonians; but as touching
brotherly love, ye need not that I write unto you; for ye your selves are
taught of God to love one another; and indeed ye do it toward all the
Brethren. But we beseech you, that ye increase more and more, 1 These. 4.

And the Apostle John says, He that says he is in the Light and hates his
Brother, is in darkness: He that loves his brother abides in the Light, 1
John 2. And again he says, This is the Message that ye have heard from the
beginning, that we love one another: not as Cain that slew his brother, and
wherefore slew he him? because his own works were evil, and his brothers
righteous. But we know that we have passed from death to life, because we love
the brethren. He that loves not his brother, abides in death: whosoever
hates his brother is a murderer; and ye know that no murderer has eternal
Life abiding in him. Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he has laid
down his Life for us: We ought also to lay down our lives for the Brethren,
Chap. 3.

And so this is contrary to what has been the practice of those that have
taken upon them the function of the Ministers of Christ, for many hundreds of
years; for though they have professed Christ and Christianity, yet they have
been killing, and slaying, and murdering one another, as many examples might be
instanced in ages past. Those that call themselves Papists, and those that call
themselves Protestants, one killing, and slaying, and murdering another, and
yet all professing and confessing themselves to be Christians, and would
profess the Scriptures, Christ and the Apostles words; and in doing thus one to
another, they have thought they have done God good service; and so have
fulfilled Christ's words, who says, Yea the time comes, that whosoever
kills you, will think that he does God good service: and these things will
they do, because they have not known the Father and me, John 16. And this may
suffice for the second head, which is their Quallifications.

The third is their Call.

For Jesus when he came and spoke unto his Disciples, he said unto them, All
power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth; go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, baptizing them in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I commanded you, and
lo I am with you always, even to the end of the world, Mat. 28. And he said
unto them, Go ye into all the world, and preaceh unto every creature, he that
believes shall be saved, and he that believes not shall be damned. And again
he says, Behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you; but tarry ye in the
City of Jerusalem, till ye be endued with Power from on high; and he blessed
them, Thirdly, Their Call contrary to Christ and his Apostles, which was by
special command and revelation in Christ Jesus. Theirs of men and from men.
and they worshipped him, and they returned to Jerusalem, Luke 26. Which is
rehearsed again in the first of the Acts, and fulfilled in the second Chapter,
and the Spirit was poured upon them plentifully; and there were some then that
mocked and said, These men are full of new Wine; but Peter stood up with the
eleven, and said, These men are not drunken as ye suppose; but this is that
which was spoken of by the Prophet Joel, It shall come to pass in the last
days, says the Lord, I will pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your
Sons and Daughters shall prophecy: and whosoever shall call upon the name of
the Lord in that day, shall be saved.

This holy Spirit the Apostles received, when they were met together; also Paul
the Apostle, who was made an Apostle after them, he also was separated for that
work by the holy Ghost; for as the Apostles were met together with the Church
at Antioch, as they ministered to the Lord and fasted; the Holy Ghost said,
Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them: So
they being sent forth by the Holy Ghost, departed, etc. Act. 13.

And so the Apostle writes himself, when he wrote to the Romans. Paul a servant
of Jesus Christ, called to be an Apostle, separated unto the Gospel of God. And
again, when he wrote to the Galatians, he wrote thus; Paul an Apostle, not of
men, neither by man, but by Jesus Christ, and God the Father, who raised him
from the dead, and all the Brethren which are with me, unto the Churches of
Galatia. And he says further; I certify you brethren, that the Gospel which
was preached of me, is not after man; for I neither received it of man, neither
was I taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ: But when it pleased God
who separated me from my mothers womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal
his Son in me, that I might preach him among the Heathen; immediately, I
conferred not with flesh and blood, Gal. 1. And again, when he wrote to the
Ephesians, when he was a Prisoner of Jesus Christ, he wrote thus to the
Gentiles; Ye have heard of the dispensation of the grace of the Gospel of God,
which is given me to you ward; how that by Revelation he made known unto me the
Mystery, as I wrote unto you in a few words; which in other Ages was not made
known unto the Sons of men, as it is now revealed unto his holy Apostles and
Prophets by the Spirit, Ephesians. 3.

I do not know, neither have I heard, that the Ministers, and such as take upon
them to teach People, neither those that are their Lords, Bishops, and
Archbishops, that they have had their Calls after this Order; for there have
been other ways and means used for many hundred of years together; as
Schools, and Colleges, and Universities, and Nurseries of Learning, which
they call their Mothers with a heap of Stuff, which are better known by them
that exercise themselves in them, than the Revelation of Jesus Christ is: and
the Ministers they make are by men, and of men, and they will have them Fitted
and Ordained according to their Ways and Orders. But if any one have received
the Revelation of Jesus Christ and his Holy Spirit, if any such have a Word to
speak from the Lord, they must not be received nor admitted; this is not
according to their Order; this they call an Heresy, and a Sect; any that
speak, and meet together, and worship the Lord God in his Spirit, and in his
Truth, such are taken notice of, and are brought under the Whip, and the
Scourge, and are apprehended and cast into Prision, if they do but pretend the
Teachings and Leadings of the Spirit of God; and if they have not freedom in
their spirits to pay them Tithes, or to maintain their Steeple Houses,
presently they are brought into the Bishops Court, and if they cannot for
Conscience Sake swear, and take an Oath, then presently they are cast into
Prison; But of this more hereafter. And thus it is truly manifested, that the
order of their Calling is not according unto Christ, nor his Apostles; for
Christ says expressly, All things are delivered unto me of my Father; and no
man knows the Son but the Father, neither knows any man the Father save the
Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him, Mat. 11.

And again Christ says, It is written in the Prophets, They shall be all
taught of God; every man therefore that has heard and learned of the Father,
comes unto me: not that any man has seen the Father, save he that is of God,
he has seen the Father, John 6. This may be sufficient to prove the Third
head, which is their Call, which is contrary to the Apostles.

The fourth their Worship and the manner of it,

And first for the Worship it self, Christ when he spoke to the woman of
Samaria, and she told him, That their Fathers worshipped in that Mountain of
Samaria: Jesus says unto her, Woman believe me, the hour comes when ye shall
neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father; but the hour
comes and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship The true Worship it
self discovered.
the Father in Spirit and in Truth; for the Father seeks such to worship him.
God is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in
Truth, John 4. And to this purpose did Jesus speak to Nichodemus, when he came
unto him by night, when he said unto him, Verily, verily I say unto thee,
except a man be born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God. At which words,
Nichodemus wondered; but Jesus answered, Except a man be born of Water and the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. That which is born of the
Flesh, is Fesh; and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit: Marvel not that
I said unto thee, ye must be born again; the wind blows where it lists,
etc. John 3.

And to this purpose was the man whose name was John, sent of God, to bear
witness of Christ Jesus the Light, that all men through him might believe. He
was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light, which is the
true Light that lights every man that comes into the world. He was in the
world, and the world was made by him: which were born not of blood, nor of the
will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. John bare witness of him
and cried, saying, This is he of whom I spoke; he that comes after me is
preferred before me; and of his fullness we have all received grace for grace:
as may be read at large, John 1.

And to bring People to this Light and Spirit of the Lord within them, did
Christ Jesus, and all his holy Apostles endeavor, by their Preaching:
Therefore says Jesus Christ unto Nichodemus, we speak what we know, and
testify what we have seen, and ye receive ^ot our witness. This is the
condemnation, that Light is come into the world, and men love Darkness rather
than Light, because their deeds are evil. For every one that does evil hates
the Light, lest his deeds should be reproved: But he that does truth, comes to
the Light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God.
This is Christ's Doctrine and Worship. And when he was preaching among his
Disciples, and also the Scribes and Pharisees heard him, and many believed
among the chief Rulers, ^^t they did not confess him because of the Fourthly,
Their Worship, contrary to Christ's example, and all his Apostles. 1. In
Preaching. 2. In Praying. 3. In Singing.
Pharisees, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue. And Jesus cried out
among them, and said; He that believes on me, believes ^ot on me, but on him
that sent me. I am come ^ Light into the World, that whosoever believes on me
should not abide in darkness. And if any man hear my words, and believe not, I
judge him not; for I came not to judge the world, but to save the world. He
that rejects me, and receives not my words, has one that judges him, the
Word that I have spoken shall judge him at the last day: and so on, John 12.

And Christ told the Pharisees, that the Kingdom of God came not by
observation; but the Kingdom of God was within them. And when he sent forth his
Disciples, he says, As ye go, preach, saying, The Kingdom of God is at hand,
Mat. 10. Also when he sent out the seventy, he said, Heal the sick that are
therein: and say, The Kingdom of God is nigh unto you, Luke 10. 9. And we also
see by the Epistles of the Apostles, which are left upon record, after what
manner of Doctrine, and exhortation they spoke unto the People; as the Apostle
John, which was the beloved Disciple, what he has written in that, which has
been already mentioned in the 1st. 2d. 3d. and 4th. Chapters of John.

Also the Apostle Peter, in his first Epistle, says; For we have not followed
cunning devised Fables, when we made known unto you the coming of our Lord
Jesus Christ; but we are Eyewitnesses of his Majesty: For he received from God
the Father, honor, and glory, when there came such a voice to him, from the
excellent glory, saying; This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased. And
this voice which came from heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy
Mount. We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark place; until the Day dawn,
and the Day Star arise in your hearts. Here the Apostle directs them to a more
sure Word, than that which was heard in the Mount, which came from the
Excellent Glory, which they taking heed unto, might have the day to dawn, and
the day star to arise in their hearts. This was a true and a right Minister;
also he says, Knowing this first, that no Prophecy of the Scriptures is of
any private Interpretation, 2 Pet. 1. How is it then that it is kept so
private, that none must interpret it but Learned men, such as have been at
Oxford or Cambridge. But the Apostle says, That the Prophecy came not in old
time by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. But those that have had learning at Cambridge and Oxford will
hardly give a right Interpretation of that which the holy Ghost has spoken
forth.

But when the Apostle wrote to Timothy, who was a Bishop, and an Overseer made
by the holy Ghost, to him he says, Continue thou (...) the things which thou
have learned, and have been assured of, knowing ^f whom thou have learned them;
and that from a Child thou have known (...) holy Scriptures, which are able to
make thee wise unto Salvation, through faith in Christ Jesus. Here Timothy did
not go to Cambridge nor Oxford, nor no such place, to learn what he had done
from a Child. All Scripture (says he) is given by inspiration of God; and i^
profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction, that the
man of God may be perfected, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2. Tim. 3.

And when Peter speaks of his beloved Brother Paul, and of his Epistles which
he had written, and what he spoke; Some things, he says, are hard to be
understood, which they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also
the other Scriptures, unto their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. So they that have
not the Inspiration of the Almighty, and motion of the Spirit of the Lord God,
the same that gave forth the Scriptures, when they come to Interpret them, and
give meanings to them, being unlearned therein, they just wrest them to their
(...) destruction, and therefore they do not profit the People at all: These be
they who separate themselves; men that are sensual, not having the Spirit,
Judge 19.

Also the Apostle Paul, when he was sent forth to Preach the Gospel of Christ,
the voice that spoke unto him, when he was struck down unto the earth with the
sight of a Vision, said unto him, Arise, stand upon thy feet, for I have
appointed thee for this purpose; to make thee a Minister and a Witness; both of
these things thou have seen, and of those things in the which I shall appear
unto thee; delivering thee from the People and from the Gentiles, unto whom now
I send thee; to open their eyes, and to turn them from darkness to light, and
from the power of Satan unto God, Acts 26.

And according to this, the Apostle confessed himself, when he mote to the
Romans; I am a debtor both to the Greeks and to the Barbarians, both to the
wise and the unwise; so much as in me is I am ready to preach the Gospel to you
that are at Rome also: For I am not ashamed of the Gospel of Christ, for it is
the Power of God unto Salvation, to every one that believes; to the Jew first,
and also to the Greek: for therein is the Righteousness of God revealed from
faith to faith; and the wrath of God is revealed against all ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men; because that which may be known of God, is manifested
in them, for God has showed it unto them. And thus the Apostle goes on
exhorting and teaching the Romans, in the 1st, and 2d. Chapters, and tells
them, That God will render to every man according to his deeds; to them who by
patience continue in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality,
and eternal life; but unto them that are contentious, and do not obey the
Truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath. For, says he, there is
no respect of persons with God, for as many as have sinned without the Law,
shall perish without the Law: and as many as have sinned in the Law, shall be
judged by the Law, for not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the
doers of the Law shall be justified, etc.

And in the 10th of the Romans, where he is speaking of his hearts desire and
prayer to God for Israel, he tells them, That Christ is the end of the Law to
every one that believes. For (says he) the righteousness of Faith speaks on
this wise; Say not in thy heart, who shall ascend into heaven, that is to bring
Christ down from above, or who shall descend into the deep, that is to bring
Christ up again from the dead? but what says it? The Word is nigh thee, even
in thy mouth and in thy heart, that is, the Word of Faith which we preach.

And when he wrote to the Hebrews, he rehearses the New Covenant, that the
Prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah had prophesied of, and says, This is the
Covenant that I will make with them, after those days, says the Lord; I will
put my Laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them, Heb. 10.
These with many more places of Scripture might be instanced of the Apostles,
how they ministered both in Preaching and Writing.

And in the first Epistle of John, he says, That which was from the beginning,
which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes, and our hands have
handled the word of Life; This we declare unto you, that ye may have fellowship
with us; and truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus
Christ. Here was a right Minister of God, that would have had those he wrote
to, to have been in fellowship with him; who was in fellowship with the Father
and with the Son: and therefore he says unto them, These things I write unto
you, that your joy may be full: This then is the message which we have heard
from him, and declared unto you; that God is light, and in him is no darkness
at all. If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie,
and do not the truth; but if we walk in the Light as he is in the Light, we
have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his Son,
cleanses us from all sin. And again the same Apostle says, A new Commandment
I write unto you, which thing is true in him and in you; because the darkness
is past and the true Light now shines. Let that therefore abide in you which
ye have heard from the beginning: If that which ye have heard from the
beginning shall abide in you, ye shall also continue in the Son, and in the
Father. These things have I written unto you concerning them that seduce you;
but the Anointing which ye have received of him, abides in you; and ye need
not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all
things; and is the truth, and is no lie; even as he has taught you ye shall
abide in him: for ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things,
1 John 2.

Here is sound, firm, and wholesome Teaching, that these holy men of God taught
those that they taught, but contrary to their teaching, have Inventions and
Teachings of men, been for many Ages and Generations in this dark Night of
Apostasy; in which the pure, and holy, and glorious Church of Christ, has been
gone into the Wilderness, where she has had a place appointed her of God,
until the One thousand two hundred and threescore days were accomplished,
which John saw, Rev. 12. But now she is coming forth again, glory to the
Highest for ever: And the Man-child, which has been caught up to God, and to
his Throne, is coming to Rule all Nations; and now are these Ministers of
darkness, which have ministered in the night, coming to be seen, now that the
day appears. For God that has commanded Light to shine out of darkness, has
shined in our hearts, and has given us the Light of the knowledge of God in
the face of Jesus Christ, which is the Son of Righteousness, by which we see
and comprehend them all. So to proceed to the particulars.

The first thing that I except against in matter and form of their Worship:
Viz. All sorts of Preachers and Teachers that are out of Christ and his
Apostles Spirit, Doctrine and Rule, is the taking a part or portion of
Scripture for a Text, and adding thereto their own Inventions, which they study
out of their own brain, and also bringing other Authors, who have done the
like; many of them not Christians but Heathens: and thus make an Image and set
up, and deceive poor peoples souls, and keep them everlearning, but never come
to the knowledge of the Truth; and are more ignorant of God than many Heathens
that never professed Christ, nor the Scriptures; and so it is ordinary with
them to bring the Heathens words in that which they prepare for them, and stir
them up; and this is quite contrary to Christ and the Apostles practice.

It is true, Christ took the Book when it was delivered unto him, and he opened
and looked upon it, and found a place where it was written in Isaiah 61. 1. The
Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach the Gospel
to the poor; he has sent me to heal the broken hearted, to preach deliverance
to the Captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, and set at liberty them
that are bruised to preach the acceptable year of the Lord: and he closed the
Book, and gave it again to the Minister, and sat down; and he began to say
unto them, This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears: And all bear him
witness, and wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth. And
they said, Is not this Joseph's Son? Luke 4.

Now this was he that the Prophet Isaiah prophesied of, and therefore when he
began to preach, he turned to this Scripture, to let them see that this
Prophecy was fulfilled, and so closed the Book. But when he preached among
them, and taught, as ye may read through all the Evangelists; as first, in Mat.
5. and in Luke 6. He opened unto them the Law, and also told them, That
whosoever did break one of the least Commandments, should be called least in
the Kingdom. And taught the Disciples, saying, Let your Light so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in
heaven. Think not that I come to destroy the Law, or the Prophets; I am not
come to destroy but to fulfill. For verily I say unto you, till heaven and
earth pass, one jot, or one tittle, shall in no wise pass from the Law till all
be fulfilled. For I say unto you, except your righteousness shall exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case enter into the
Kingdom of God. This was the manner of his preaching and teaching: And so he
goes on, and opens unto them the Law; and tells them it had been said so in the
old time; Ye have heard it has been said in the old time, thou shall not
forswear thy self: But I say unto you, swear not at all. And it has been said
unto you in the old time, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth: but I say
unto you, resist not evil. He that smites thee on the one cheek, turn the
other. And thus he goes on in opening of the Law, of which he was to fulfill
every jot and tittle; and also opening unto them the Mysteries of the Gospel,
which is Love even to Enemies; and which the Apostle says, is the fulfilling
of the whole Law. And he told them, that so they might be the Children of their
Father which is in heaven; for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and on the
good; and sends Rain on the just, and on the unjust. Be ye therefore perfect,
as your heavenly Father is perfect.

Here is the perfect Ministry indeed, of the true Circumcision, which makes the
true Jew indeed inward, which circumciseth the heart with his holy Spirit. The
Apostle says, Now I say unto you, that Jesus Christ was a Minister of the
Circumcision, for the truth of God; to confirm the Promises unto Abraham: and
that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy, and so the blessing of
Abraham may be upon all, Jews and Gentiles: All that are in the Faith, are
blessed with faithful Abraham. And this is he of whom the Apostle to the
Hebrews says, We have such an High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the
Throne of the Majesty in Heaven: a Minister of the Sanctuary, and of the true
Tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man, Heb. 8.

And as he was a Minister of the same Sanctuary which God has pitched, so also
were his Apostles, they preached by his holy Spirit. For as God is true (says
Paul the Apostle) so our word to you-wards was not yea, and nay; for the Son of
God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among you by us, even by me, and Sylvanus,
and Timotheus, was not yea, and nay; but in him was yea: for all the Promises
of God, are in him Yea, and in him, Amen; 2 Cor. 1.

And by this Spirit and Power of the Lord Jesus, did Steven, who was full of
Faith and Power, do great wonders and miracles among the People; and when the
false witnesses came to accuse him before the high Priest, and those that sat
in Council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of
an Angel: Then said the high Priest, Are these things so? And he said, Men,
Brethren, and Fathers, hearken: And he began at Abraham, and he opened unto
them the Royal and Holy Seed, throughout the Scriptures, until he came to
Christ Jesus, whom he said they had crucified and slain. And he said, Ye
stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in heart and ears, ye do always resist the
holy Ghost; as your Fathers did, so do ye: Which of the Prophets have not your
Fathers Persecuted? and they have slain them which showed before of the coming
of the Just One of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers. When they
heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and gnashed on him with their
teeth: but he being full of the holy Ghost, looked steadfastly into heaven, and
saw the glory of God; and he said, Behold, I see heaven open, and the Son of
man standing on the right hand of God. And they cried with a loud voice, and
stopped their ears, and ran upon him, and cast him out of the City, and stoned
him: and they stoned Steven, calling upon God, and saying, Lord Jesus receive
my spirit, Acts 7.

Also Paul, when he came to Antioch, and went into the Synagogue on the Sabbath
day; after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue
sent to him and his company, and said, Men and Brethren, if ye have any
exhortation to the People, say on. Then Paul stood up, and beckoned with his
hand, and said; Men of Israel, and ye that fear God, give audience. And he
began to declare, how God brought their Fathers out of Egypt, with a high hand;
and how they were in the Wilderness; and how he destroyed the Nations of the
Land of Canaan; and how they were governed, from that time unto Christ; and how
that Christ care of the Seed of David; and likewise how the Rulers of Jerusalem
dealt with Christ, and though they found no cause of death in him; yet desired
they Pilate that he should be slain. And when they had fulfilled all that was
written of him, they took him down from the Tree, and laid him in a Sepulcher;
but God raised him from the dead, and afterward he preached unto them his
Resurrection; as may be read at large throughout Acts 13. and how the Gentiles
also should partake of his-Resurrection; but the Jews contradicted and
blasphemed against their Doctrine. Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said,
It was necessary that the word of God should first have been preached to you
Jews; but seeing ye put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of
everlasting life, lo we turn unto the Gentiles, for so has the Lord commanded
us: I have set thee to be a light to the Gentiles, that thou should be for
salvation to the ends of the earth. And when the Gentiles heard this, they were
glad, Acts 13.

Thus ye see how the Apostles opened unto them the mystery of the Resurrection
of Christ, as also Christ himself, when he met with the Disciples, after his
Resurrection; and they not knowing him, told him what things had happened
concerning Christ. He said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart; ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory. And
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself, Luke 24.

And this is the matter, and manner, and method of all Christ's Ministers, to
preach the Resurrection of Christ Jesus, in his Light and Spirit, which is a
mystery to all carnal men and carnal minds: and this is not a deal of
Imaginations, and divinations of the brain, and studyings of men, who take one
Verse of Scripture, and add unto it what they please, out of other old Authors
Writings, Heathen Philosophers, or any thing that will make up an hours talk,
till their Glass be run, which is quite contrary to the Apostles practice, and
that which they witnessed, and exhorted against. For he says unto the
Colossians, As ye have received Christ Jesus, so walk ye in him; rooted and
built in him, established in the Faith, as ye have been taught. Beware lest any
man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the Traditions of men,
after the Rudiments of the world, and not after Christ, Col. 2. Here is an
express command laid upon them, that they should not be deceived by the
teachings of men, who taught not after Christ.

And the Apostle says also, that Christ sent him, not to preach the Gospel
with wisdom of words; For, says he, It is written, I will destroy the wisdom
of the wise, and bring to nothing the understanding of the prudent. Where is
the Wise? Where is the Scribe? Where is the Disputer of this world? Has not
God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in the wisdom of God,
the world by wisdom knew not God; it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching, to save them that believe. For the Jews require a sign, and the
Greeks seek after wisdom, but we preach Christ crucified, unto the Jews a
stumbling block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them that are
called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God:
Because the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God
stronger then men: For ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise
men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; but God has
chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the wise; and God has
chosen the weak things of the world, to confound the things which are mighty;
and base-things of the world, and things which are despised, has God chosen,
yea and things which are not, to bring to naught things which are; that no
flesh should glory in his presence; but those that glory, should glory in the
Lord, 1 Cor. 1.

And the Apostle says further, And my speech and preaching was not with
enticing words of man's wisdom, but in the demonstration of the Spirit, and of
Power; that your Faith should not stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power
of God. Howbeit, we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the
wisdom of this world, nor of the Princes of this world, that come to naught,
but we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery; even the hidden wisdom which God
ordained before the world. For we have not received the Spirit of the world,
but that Spirit that is of God, that we might know the things that are freely
given us of God; which things we speak not in the words which man's wisdom
teaches, but which the holy Ghost teaches; comparing spiritual things with
spiritual.

Here the Apostle testifies clearly against the wisdom of men's teaching, which
is a clear testimony against the teachings that have been in these last Ages;
for that is all that has been taught for many generations of Teachers, since
the Apostles days; the wisdom of men, and traditions of men, and inventions,
and imaginations of men, one quoting and rehearsing what another says, quite
contrary to the Apostles practice. We do not make our selves of the number, or
compare our selves with some that commend themselves, and measuring themselves
by themselves are not wise. But we will not boast our selves, above our
measure, but according to the measure of the rule which God has distributed to
us; for we come as far as you also, in preaching the Gospel of Christ, not
boasting of things without our measure, of other men's labors, nor to boast of
another man's line made ready to our hands, 2 Cor. 10. Not that we are
sufficient of our selves, to think any thing as of our selves, but our
sufficiency is of God; who has also made us able Ministers of the New
Testament, not of the Letter but of the Spirit; for the Letter kills, but the
Spirit gives Life, 2 Cor. 3. 6. In this Chapter the Apostle gives his
Testimony, that the Life of the Ministry is in the ministration of the Spirit.
As also in Romans 7. But now we are delivered from the Law; that being dead
wherein we were held, that we should serve in newness of Spirit, and not in the
oldness of the Leter; which he calls, the Ministration of Death, in the
aforementioned Chapter.

And when he writes to his Son Timothy, who was a Bishop, he says thus; I
charge thee therefore before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall judge
the quick and the dead, at his appearing, and his kingdom; Preach the Word, be
instant in season, and out of season; reprove, rebuke, exhort with all
long-suffering and doctrine: for the time will come when they will not endure
sound doctrine; but after their own hearts lusts, shall heap to themselves
teachers, having itching ears, and they shall turn away their ears from the
Truth, and shall be turned unto Fables, 2 Timothy 4.

Here the Apostle was a true Prophet, and saw the Apostasy coming on, and
therefore he laid a hard charge upon Timothy: For, says he, watch thou in all
things; endure afflictions; do the work of an Evangelist; make full proof of
thy Ministry; for I am ready to be offered, and the time of my departure
draws nigh, 2 Timothy 4.

As also when he writes to the Thessalonians, of the Day of the Lord, and of
the Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition, and thanks God for them, who had chosen
them to Salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit, and belief of the
Truth, whereunto he called you, (says he) by our Gospel to the obtaining of
the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ; Therefore brethren, stand fast, and hold
the Traditions which ye have been taught, whether by Word, or our Epistle, 2
These. 2.

This Scripture the Papists, and many others, make a Cloak and a Covering for
teaching their Traditions; because the Apostle bids them hold fast the
Traditions that they had taught them, by their Gospel; which in the words
before, he says, was to the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ;
the which they had good reason to hold fast; for if they let that go, they were
not like to attain to such another. But there is no comparison between these,
and the Traditions of the Priests in the Apostasy, either Papists or others;
for through their teaching of their Traditions, they have done nothing but
brought people into a body of darkness, and into a heap of ignorance, keeping
them ignorant both of the Scriptures, and all that is good. For if people had
but liberty to look into the Scriptures, they would soon be wiser then their
Teachers, and see their gross darkness: But they tell them, they cannot
understand them, they must be expounded by learned men; and so will not let the
Light of Christ arise in Peoples hearts, nor never direct their minds to it,
but keep them in darkness, and make a Trade of the Scriptures for their own
advantage, and so deceive poor peoples souls. And these Scriptures may serve to
prove this Particular of the fourth Head, which is concerning their Worship,
which is, their matter and manner of Preaching.

The second particular of that head is their Prayer, which is also contrary to
Scripture-example, they having Prayars formed and made by men as all their
other Worship is, and so read their Prayers in Books; and set any fellow or
schoolboy to read it, if he have but the name of Curate or Clark, if he read
but that in the Book, they account it Praying: And if any of the greater sort,
as Bishops, Deans, Vicars, or Parsons, if they pray, they either pray in a
Book, or else they have a Prayer formed up, and made and prepared before hand,
that they pray: And many times they set wild and wanton Boys, with Priest, and
Clark, and all the People to sing their Prayers: and this they account and call
Praying.

When Christ Jesus was in his Sermon in the Mount, that he was teaching the
People several things, (as was said before) as concerning Alms, and many other
particulars, in which he bad them not to do as the Pharisees did; he also spoke
to them that they should not pray as they did, for they prayed standing in the
Synagogues: And says he, When ye pray, use not vain repetitions as the
heathens do; Be not ye therefore like unto them, for your Father knows what
things ye have need of, before ye ask. After this manner therefore pray ye: Our
Father, which art in Heaven, etc. And so he gives them several particular
heads, what they should pray for, and after he had done that, he rehearses
these words again; If ye forgive men their trespasses, your heavenly Father
will forgive you: but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will your
heavenly Father forgive you your trespasses, Mat. 6. And again he says unto
one of his Disciples, who desired him to teach them to pray, He said unto them,
When ye stand praying, forgive, if ye have ought against any, that your Father
also which is in heaven, may forgive you your trespasses: but if you do not
forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your trespasses,
Mark 11. 25.

Now how the Bishops, and all their Officers which they employ under them,
forgive those that trespass against them, is manifested by their Courts they
keep; as also all the Papists, Bishops, Priests and Jesuits, that make this
Prayer be said over so often by their People, how they forgive those that
trespass against them, is also manifested by their Inquisitions, Wracks and
Tortures; and yet this Prayer they make their ground for all their Forms, and
forming up of prayers, which is quite contrary to the Apostle's practice and
doctrine; for he says, We are saved by hope; but hope that is seen, that is
not hope, but if we hope for that we see not, then do we with patience wait for
it. Likewise the Spirit helps our infirmities, for we know not what we should
pray for as we ought, but the Spirit it self makes intercession for us, with
groanings which cannot be uttered; and he that searches the heart, knows the
mind of the Spirit, because he makes intercession for the Saints, according to
the Will of God, Romans 8.

And this Spirit is he that knows the mind of Christ, and the will of God, and
therefore the Apostle says, I will pray with the Spirit, and I will pray with
understanding also, 1 Cor. 14. For the Spirit, says he, searches all things,
even the deep things of God; for what man knows the things of a man, save the
spirit of a man that is in him; even so the things of God knows no man, save
the Spirit of God: for the natural man knows not the things of the Spirit of
God, for they are foolishness to him, because they are spiritually discerned.
So how can these natural men, that read a Prayer in a Book, pray unto God, that
know not the things of God? and what effect can such Prayers have? Indeed David
says, That the Prayers of the Righteous avail much, if they be fervent: But
can their Prayers avail that are unrighteous, and know not the things of God,
neither have any fervency in them?

But the Apostle says, We know the mind of Christ: and therefore he says, Be
kindly affectioned one toward another, with brotherly love, in honor
preferring one another, not slothful in business, fervent in Spirit, serving
the Lord: Rejoicing in hope, patient in tribulation, continuing instant in
Prayer, Romans 12. 12. And again, Peter says, As every man has received the
gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God: if any man speak, let him speak as the Oracles of God:
if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives; that God
in all things may be glorified, 1 Pet. 4.

So here is a great difference between this sort of praying that the Apostle
here mentions, and that which is called the Common Prayer; which indeed is
common, and may be common to any that have eyes and can read it; as also all
the Paternosters, and Ave-Maries of the Papists, though they call that which
Christ taught his Disciples the Paternoster, but he did not call it so; though
they patter it over, and teach all People to patter it over, but he did not so
with those he taught it, but he told them they should not use vain Repetitions,
nor vain bablings; and he taught them in the holy Spirit of the Lord, and so
directed them that they might learn it in that Spirit, or else he would not
have learned them to have prayed, That the Will of God might be done on Earth,
as it was in Heaven. Vain-bablers and Patterers over of many words, do not the
Will of God on Earth as it is in Heaven, but this Prayer is abused by them all,
as many other places of Scripture are. And this may serve for the second
particular of their Worship which is Prayer.

The third is their Singing, which indeed is more like may-gameing then
worshipping of God, playing and piping of Organs, and setting a company of
wild, ungodly, light boys to sing tunes to to them, which is such a kind of
Worship, as no Christians in the Primitive times exercised.

Its true, there was in David's and Solomon's days, such as were appointed to
minister in way of singing and giving thanks, as David when he had brought the
Ark of God and set it in the midst of his Tent, which he had made for it, he
offered burnt-offerings and peace offerings before God; and he appointed
certain of the Levites to minister before the Ark of the Lord, and to record,
thank and praise the Lord God of Israel. Asaph the chief, and next to him
Zachariah, Jaaziel, Shemiramoth, Jehiel, Mattathiah, Eliah, Benaiah, and
Obed-Edom, 1 Chronicles. 15. 16, and 27. and Jehiel, with Psalteries and with Harps;
but Asaph made a sound with Cimbals, Benaiah and also Eliezer the Priests with
Trumpets, continually before the Ark of the Covenant of God. Then on that day
David delivered first this Psalm, to thank the Lord, into the hands of Asaph
and his brethren, who were the Singers. Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon
his Name, etc. Psalm. 105. This was upon a special occasion, when the Ark of God
was brought up among them: And these that David committed this Psalm unto, were
such as were appointed of God for that Place and Office, as Asaph, and those
that were called to that office.

Also Solomen had Singing-men, and Singing-women, Eccles. 2. 8. and them of
this order came with them again out of the Captivity in Babylon, Ezra 2. 41.
Neh. 7. 67.

But these were all before Christ; and why may not Christians as well imitate
Circumcision, Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices, which were in the time of the
Law, as well as imitate Singing-Boyes? And we do not find that any of the
Apostles and Saints in the Primitive times did Sing David Psalms in Meeter and
Rhyme, and turn his Lamentations, and Groanings, and Sufferings, and Tears, and
Anguish of his Bones, being burned like a Hearth, and that he was as a Pelican
in the Wilderness, and like an Owl in the Desert; when he cried out, that his
heart was smitten and withered, and his Prayers and Cries, Psalm. 102.

We do not find that the Apostles turned this state of weeping and lamentation
of his into Rhyme and Meeter, and sang it: But Christ and his Apostles, and
Christians and Saints, when they sung, they sang with the Spirit in praises to
the Lord, and in the joy and rejoicing of the Spirit. This was not to take
another man's Sighs, and Groanings, and Lamentations, and Tears, and Cries to
turn this into a Song and sing it: This is not the Truth, neither is it the
practice of the Spirit of Truth. But when the Soul and the Spirit is joyful in
the Lord, and enjoyes his Presence, and feels his Life; then there is joy, and
honor, and praises given to the Lord God in the Truth and in the Reality, in
his own Spirit, and this glory and praises are acceptable to the Lord God: And
therefore does the Apostle say, I will Pray with the Spirit, and with the
Understanding also: I will Sing with the Spirit, and with the Understanding
also, 2 Cor. 14. Yet the Apostle did not turn his praying into singing, nor
none that have the Spirit of the Lord Jesus to pray and sing with; but when
they pray they pray unto the Lord, and when they sing they sing unto the Lord,
yet both by his own holy Spirit.

When Christ Jesus and his Disciples were at the Passover, and that he had
broken the Bread, and given them the Cup of the New Testament, he said unto
them, I will drink no more of the fruit of the Vine, until the day that I drink
it new in the Kingdom of God. And when they had sung an Hymn, they went out
into the mount of Olives, Mar. 14. 26.

And according to this, the Apostle in his Exhortation to the Ephesians, among
many other particulars, he says, Be not drunk with Wine wherein is excess: but
be filled with the Spirit, speaking to your selves in Psalms and Hymns and
spiritual Songs, singing and making melody in your hearts to the Lord; giving
thanks always for all things unto God the Father, in the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 5. 19, 20.

And again in his Epistle to the Colossians, he says, Let the Word of Christ
dwell richly in you in all wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, in
Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual songs, singing with grace in your hearts to
the Lord. Likewise the Apostle James says, Is any among you afflicted? let him
pray; is any merry? let him sing Psalms, Jam. 5.

But he says not sing those Psalms which David sung, but the Apostles sung in
the Spirit, with grace in their hearts, as before; and said, those that do
glory and rejoice, let them do it in the Lord; and in so doing, they may
worship and give thanks unto the Lord in rejoicing and singing, as well as in
other parts of worship, in the Spirit of the Lord God: But these are not wild,
wicked, ungodly people and boys, who are employed in this service in our
days; but the Lords holy Spirit, where it dwells, and rules, and lives, is the
same as ever it was, and can worshrp the Father in Spirit and in Truth; who is
a Spirit, and his Worship is in his own Spirit; and this Spirit speaking, or
praying, or singing, worships him.

More might be said concerning their Altars, and bowing, and cringing to Stocks
and Stones, and calling Wood and Stones set together by men's hands, and adorned
with Inventions, A Church; but all this trash and rubbish will fall together.
Since that Temple that Solomon built, which God commanded, Christ said, should
not be left one stone upon another of its building, but it should be all thrown
down; surely these Popish Houses have no long reign. And so this may serve for
the finishing of the third particular and fourth Head, which we except against,
which is their Worship.

The fifth is their Practice, which is so large, and indeed so contrary to all
Scripture-Rule, it is much to express the Heads of it, except it be such as are
practiced in it; for the body of darkness is deep, and is such a puddle to rake
in, that it is fit for none but those whose garments are filthy and defiled, to
meddle with: Yet for the Seed of God sake, which is kept in Bondage, and in
Captivity, in and by this Power of Darkness, that has lodged in this ^ody of
Teachers and Preachers, who have called themselves Christians, both Papists and
Protestants, in this Night of Apostasy, that the True Church of God has been
in the Wilderness, and the Witnesses prophesied in Sackcloth; this has been a
Night of Darkness, but the Day is Springing, Glory to the Lord for ever; I say,
for this Seeds sake, we shall proceed to mention some particular Heads of their
practice, and try them by the Scriptures.

And the first is that which they call their Studying, and their placing the
very Foundation of their Call, and all their practices in that Function, in
that which they call Learning; which thing we never find neither in the
Old Testament nor New, that they who were called to the Office of the
Priesthood, that obtained it by such ways and means as they use; viz. That
which they call their Studies and Fountains of Learning, which is their
Universities; and in them, so many several Orders and Degrees, to ordain and
appoint such as belong to that Function of the Ministry, which we do not find
in the Old Testament, that either Aaron or his Sons, or those that were of the
Tribe of Levi, were ordained after such a manner, and by such Orders as they
pretend to theirs; for when the Lord spoke unto Moses for the setting up of the
Tabernacle, and after what manner he should do all things about it; he said,
Thou shall set the Laver betwixt the Tent of the Congregation and the Altar,
and thou shall put water therein, and thou shall bring Aaron and his Sons unto
the door of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and wash them with water; and
thou shall put upon Aaron the holy Garments, and anoint him, and sanctify him,
that he may minister unto me in the Priests Office; and thou shall bring his
Sons and cloth them with coats, and thou shall anoint them as thou did their
Father, that they may minister unto me in the Priests Office; for their
Anointing shall surely be an everlasting Priesthood throughout their
Generations: Thus did Moses according to all that the Lord commanded him, for
he set the Laver between the Tent of the Congregation and the Altar, and Moses,
and Aaron and his Sons, washed their hands and their feet thereat, as the Lord
commanded Moses. Exodus 28, 29. chap. Levit. 8.

Moreover the Lord said unto Moses, Take the Levites from among the children of
Israel, and cleanse them, and thus shall thou do unto them to cleanse them;
sprinkle water of purifying upon them, and let them shave them, all their
flesh, and let them wash their clothes, and so make them clean; then let them
take a young Bullock, with his meat offering, even fine Flower mingled with
Oil; and another young Bullock thou shall take, for a sin offering; and thou
shall bring the Levites before the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and thou
shall gather the whole Assembly of the children of Israel together, and thou
shall bring the Levites before the Lord, and the children of Israel shall put
their hands upon the Levites, and Aaron shall offer the Levites before the
Lord, for an offering for the children of Israel, that they may execute the
service of the Lord; and the Levites shall lay their hands upon the heads of
the Bullocks, and thou shall offer the one for a sin-offering, and the other
for a burnt-offering unto the Lord, to make an atonement for the Levites; and
shall set the Levites before Aaron, and before his Sons, and offer them for an
offering to the Lord; thus shall thou separate the Levites from among the
children of Israel, and the Levites shall be mine; and after that shall the
Levites go in, to do the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and
thou shall cleanse them, and offer them for an offering; for they are wholly
given unto me from among the children of Israel, instead of such as open every
womb, even instead of the Firstborn of all the children of Israel, I have
taken them unto me; for all the firstborn of the children of Israel are mine,
both man and beast, in the day that I smote the firstborn in the Land of
Egypt, I sanctified them for my self, and I have taken the Levites for all the
firstborn of the Children of Israel, and I have given the Levites as a gift to
Aaron, and to his Sons, from among the children of Israel, to do the service of
the children of Israel in the Tabernacle of the Congregation, to make an
atonement for the children of Israel, that there be no plague among Studying
and Divining contrary to Christ and his Apostles; and contrary to the Levitical
Priesthood.
them, when they come nigh my Sanctuary.

And Moses and Aaron, and the Congregati- of Israel, did unto the Levites,
according as the Lord commanded them; and the Levites were Purified, and they
washed their Garments, and Aaron offered them as an offering before the Lord,
and Aaron made an atonement for them, to cleanse them, and after that the
Levites went in to do their service in the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
before Aaron, and before his Sons: And the Lord spoke unto Moses, saying, This
is it that belongs to the Levites, from twenty years old and upwards, they
shall go in to wait upon the service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation, and
from the age of fifty years they shall cease waiting upon the service thereof,
and shall serve no more; but shall minister with their brethen in the
Tabernacle of the Congregation, to keep the charge, and shall do no service;
thus shall thou do unto the Levites touching their charge. Numb. 8.

Now here is nothing of Studying, or going to the Universities, nor diving, nor
divinining into the Body of Darkness, which defiles and polutes; but here was
Washing, and Cleansing, and Purifying, and an Offering of two Bullocks, one for
a Sin-offering, another for a Burnt-offering, the Levites being offered with
the Offerings, and they laying their hands upon the heads of the Offerings, and
Moses making an Atonement for them, to Cleanse them, before they could be
admitted into the Service; and then they were to wait from twenty five years,
and upwards unto fifty years, before they might cease waiting, and then they
were to minister with their Brethren in the Tabernacle; but they did not wait
at the Universities, and at the Schools of Learning, but they waited upon the
Service of the Tabernacle of the Congregation; for the Lord had called them for
that end, that they might make an Atonement for the Children of Israel, that
there might be no Plague among them.

So that it is strange that Ministers that profess Christianity, and profess
themselves to be Ministers of Christ, and Ministers of the Gospel, should run
into such extravagances, being that they profess the Scriptures, and that they
should not walk in bypaths; but they go quite opposite to what the Scriptures
of Truth hold forth concerning both the First and Second Priesthood. It is true
indeed, the Lord complains by his Prophets, when Israel was gone away from
the Lord, and turned unto Idolatry and Abomination, and was in Rebellion
against him, then he complains of their Teachers, That they speak a Divination
of their own Brain, and not from the Mouth of the Lord; But the Lord says,
That he will frustrate the Tokens of the Liars, and make the Diviners mad, and
turn the Wise men backward, and make their knowledge foolish. Isa. 44.

And again he complains of the Blind Watchmen, and said, They are all Ignorant,
they are all dumb Dogs, they cannot bark, sleeping, lying down to slumber; yea,
they are greedy Dogs, which can never have enough; and they are Shepherds that
cannot understand, they all look to their own way, every one for his Gain from
his Quarter: Come ye, say they, and I will fetch Wine, and we will fill our
selves with Strong-drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more
abundant, Isa. 56.

Again, the Lord complains of them by his Prophet Jeremiah, Jeremiahs heart was
broken within him because of the Prophets, and his bones did shake like a
drunken man, because of the Lord, and the word of his Holiness: For the Land,
says he, is full of adulteries, for because of swearing the Land mourns: for
Prophet and Priest are profane; yea, in my house have I found their
wickedness, says the Lord. Wherefore their ways shall be unto them as
slippery ways, in the darkness they shall be driven on, and fall therein; I
will bring evil upon them, even the year of their visitation, says the Lord.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, Hearken not unto the words of the Prophets that
prophecy unto you; thy make you vain, they speak a Vision of their own heart,
and not out of the mouth of the Lord. They say still unto them that despise me,
The Lord has said, ye shall have peace: and they say unto every one that
walks after the Imaginations of his own heart, No evil shall come upon you.
But behold, the whirlwind of the Lord is come forth in fury, and it shall fall
grievously upon the head of the wicked: the anger of the Lord shall not return,
till he have executed, and till he has performed the thoughts of his heart. In
the latter days he shall consider it perfectly. I have not sent these
Prophets, I have not spoken unto them, yet they prophesied. I heard when the
Prophet said, that prophesied lies in my name, which cause my people to forget
my name, as their Fathers have forgotten my name for Baal. Is not my word like
a fire says the Lord and like a hammer, that breaks the rocks in pieces?
therefore behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that steal my
words every one from his neighbor: behold, I am against the Prophets, says
the Lord, that use their tongues, and say, He says; behold, I am against them
that prophecy false dreams, and tell them, and cause my people to err through
their lies, and by their lightness; and yet I sent them not, nor commanded
them: therefore they shall not profit my people at all says the Lord, Jer. 23.

And again the Lord said unto me, The Prophets prophecy lies in my name. I
sent them not neither commanded I them, neither spoke I unto them: yet they
prophesied unto you a false Vision, and a divination, and a thing of naught,
and the deceit of their heart, Chap. 14. Therefore hearken not ye to your
Prophets, nor to your Diviners, nor to your Inchanters, nor to your Sorcerers:
for I have not sent them, yet they prophecy a lie in my name; that I might
drive you out, and ye might perish, Jer. 27. For thus says the Lord of Hosts,
the God of Israel, Let not your Prophets, nor your Diviners, that be in the
midst of you, deceive you, for they prophecy falsely unto you; I have not sent
them, says the Lord, Jer. 29

And Ezekiel says, Her Prophets have daubed them with untempred mortar; seeing
vanity, divining lies unto them, saying, Thus says the Lord, when the Lord
has not spoken, Ezekiel. 22. 28.

And Zechariah says, The Idols have spoken vanity, and Diviners have seen a
lie, and have told false dreams, and have comforted in vain, Zech. 10. 2.

And Micah says, Then shall the Seers be ashamed, and Diviners confounded;
yea, they shall all cover their lips; for there is no answer from God, Micah.
3. 7.

After the children of Israel and Judah were fallen away from the Lord God, and
from his Worship and Service, into Idolatry, and worshipping of Baal, then their
Priests, and Prophets, and Teachers fell to divining, and enchanting in the
power of darkness, and fell into all manner of wickedness, and grosness, and
profaneness, and drunkeness, in so much that the Lord complains of their
drinking wine in bowls; Ye that put far the evil day, and cause the seat of
violence to come near; that lie upon the beds of Ivory, and stretch themselves
upon the Couches; and eat the Lambs out of the Flock, and the Calves out of the
midst of the Stall; that chant to the sound of the Vial, and invent to
themselves Instruments of Music like David; that drink wine in Bowls, and
anoint themselves with the chief ointment; but they are not grieved at the
afflictions of Joseph; therefore they shall go into captivity with the first,
Amos 6.

Surely the Diviners and Inchanters of these last days, in this night of
Apostasy, in which the Apostle John said that Antichrist should come, have
taken example by these false Prophets and false Teachers, that were fallen away
from the Lord, and from the Ordinances of his Law, that he gave out to those
that were to minister at the Altar, and were to minister in the Priests Office:
when they were fallen away into Idolatry, they then fell into Divination, and
digging and diving into the darkness and imagination of their wicked hearts,
and so spoke false Visions, and false Dreams, and false Prophesies, and said,
the Lord says, when the Lord had never spoken to them. So it has been with
our professed Christian Ministers, in this time of Apostasy, since the Apostles
days; they read the Prophets words and said, Thus says the Lord; and they
read Christ's words, and the holy Apostles words, who worshipped the only true
God, and spoke in and by his holy Spirit: And they themselves will confess the
Lord never spoke unto them, neither do they ever expect to know revelation, nor
hear the voice of God, as the Apostle did; for they have preached to all
people, that that is ceased.

And though it is true, that it has been ceased among them, in their dark
night of Apostasy, yet the holy Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ, which spoke in
him, and in all his holy Apostles, is alive, and lives for evermore; which he
sent and signified by his servant John, Rev. 1. Who bare record of the Word of
God, and the Testimony of Jesus Christ, and of all things that he saw. Who,
when he saw him, fell at his feet, as dead; and he laid his right hand upon
him, saying, Fear not; I am the first and the last; I am he that lives and was
dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore, and have the keys of hell and
death. Write the things which thou have seen, and the things which are, and the
things which shall be hereafter. And this Revelation which John saw of Jesus
Christ, will as surely be fulfilled, as all the other Scriptures that
prophesied formerly of his coming in the flesh; who in the fullness of time came
and fulfilled all that was written of him: so certainly will he come and fulfill
the Revelations that have been of him. And of his power and great glory, and of
his coming in his Spirit, and in his Revelation by which he reveals the Father,
as he said himself in the days of his flesh, Hereafter I will not speak unto
you in Proverbs, but I will show plainly of the Father, John 17. Howbeit, when
the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth. And this has
the Lord fulfilled, and will fulfill in his day and time appointed; For the
times and seasons are in the Fathers hand, although the night-owls, who have
been in the darkness, have striven always to put this Light out, when it would
have shined in their time, which was dark.

And therefore have they striven together, and combined together to make their
Mountain strong, and set up Schools of Learning, as they call them; and
educated youth up in that darkness, and kept them studying and divining in
their brain, till many have studied themselves out of their wits; and so they
might follow their Orders, and Ordinations, and Degrees, one above another, and
one below another, with such a rabble as is not worth mentioning; and none
might speak, nor preach, nor read, no nor teach School, but such as take
Orders, or Degrees, or Licenses from them: and all this rabble is quite
contrary to Scripture-Rule and Example.

It is true, the Apostle exhorted the Thessalonians to study to be quiet, and
to do their own business, and to work with their own hands, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 11. And
wrote to Timothy, to study to be approved to God, a workman that needs not to
be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth.

This was not studying in the power of darkness, to be approved of men, to
study all their days to invent an hours talk to please men, and so they take
the Scriptures, and garnish, and adorn, and flourish this dark muddy stuff
with it, and when they have done, sell it for money; and so bear rule by the
poor peoples means, and the poor people are kept so in darkness, and ignorance
by them, that the people love to have it so. But, as the Prophet Isaiah says,
What will they do in the end thereof?

But surely the Lord is coming to gather his flock, according as he spoke by
his Prophet Ezekiel, which Prophecy is not yet fulfilled, for it was to the
Jews: As I live, says the Lord God, because my flock is become a prey, and
because there is no Shepherd, neither did the Shepherds search for my Flock,
but they fed themselves and not my Flock: Behold, I am against the Shepherds, I
will require my Flock at their hands; neither shall the Shepherds feed
themselves any more: I will deliver my Flock from their mouths: As a Shepherd
seeks out his Flock in the day that he is among his Sheep; so will I seek out
my Sheep, and will deliver them, Ezekiel. 34. So the Lord will fulfill his
faithful Word, which changes not, however they promise themselves peace, till
sudden destruction come upon them.

For so Christ said, when he was in his flesh, when he spoke of the coming of
the Son of Man in his power and great glory, be bad them watch, and told them,
that the Son of Man would come as a thief in the night: and he told them if the
good man of the house knew at what hour the thief would come, he would not have
suffered his house to be robbed: and he said, Blessed is that servant that when
his Lord comes, is found watching.

Thus you see that the Scriptures are utterly against the practices of those
that have been in the Ministry, and Teachers of People, since the Apostles
days, in the Apostasy; for they have neither President nor Example from the
Ministers of the Lord, neither under the Law nor under the Gospel, as we shall
prove more fully hereafter. For when the Lord reproves Edom and Esau, and their
Priests, and told them they had offered polluted bread upon his Altar, and they
had offered the blind for sacrifice, and lame, and sick: and that from the
rising of the Sun to the going down of the same, his name was polluted; as ye
may read at large in Mal. 1, 2. chap. He told them that he would corrupt their
seed, and spread dung upon their faces, even the dung of their solemn feasts:
yet he told them, That his Covenant was with Levi, even of life and peace, and
I gave them to him for the fear wherewith he feared me; the Law of truth was in
his mouth, and Iniquity was not found in his lips; he walked with me in peace
and equity, and did turn away many from iniquity; for the Priests lips should
preserve knowledge, and they should seek the Law at his mouth; for he is the
messenger of the Lord of Hosts, but ye are turned away, etc.

So these are none of the Priests of our days, that come from the
Universities, and have their Orders and Degrees from thence, for they confess
themselves to be all polluted and filthy, from the Crown of the Head, to the
Soal of the foot; and they tell people they must never be free from sin and
iniquity, nor they must never look for Revelations: So these are none of
Levie's Tribe, for he turned many from iniquity, and the People were to seek
the Law at his mouth; because the Law of Truth was in his mouth.

And so by what has been spoken before concerning their attaining to the
Ministry, as also their Principles what they hold; you see that they are none
of Gods Ministers under the Law, neither did any that were ordained of God to
be Ministers under the Law, attain to it by such means, or in such a manner as
they have done to theirs, viz. by School-learning: Neither are they God's
Ministers under the Gospel; so that they are neither Gods Ministers under the
Law nor Gospel.

As also Christ, those that he chose to be Ministers, you may read what sort of
men they were. When he was on the Coast of Zebulon and Naphthali, he preached
unto them Repentance. And as Jesus was walking by the sea of Galilee, he saw
two brethren, Peter and Andrew, and he called them: They were casting their
nets into the sea, for they were fishers; and he says unto them, Follow me,
and I will make you fishers of men: And straightway they followed him, Matthew.
4. Mark 1. And when he had gone a little further thence, he saw James the son
of Zebedee, and John his brother, who also were in a ship mending their nets,
and straightway he called them: And they left their Father in the ship with the
servants, and went after him. Matthew was a Publican, Simon a Canaanite. Also
when Christ sent forth the seventy, Luke 10. there were no Universities
provided for them; nor had they Ordinations, or Degrees from thence; but ye may
read they had their Command and Commission from him.

And again when he had wrought the Miracle on the man that was sick of the
Palsy, As he passed from thence, he saw a man named Matthew, sitting at the
Receipt of Custom, and he said unto him, Follow me; and he arose and followed
him, Matthew. 9. 9.

Also. Jesus when he was going forth into Galilee, finds Philip, and says
unto him, Follow me; Philip finds Nathaniel, and says unto him, We have
found him of whom Moses in the Law, and in the Prophets did write, Jesus of
Nazareth, the Son of Joseph, John 1. Also two of John's Disciples, when they had
heard him speak, and looked upon him, followed Jesus; and one of them which
followed him was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother, and he says unto his brother,
We have found the Messiah, which by interpretation is Christ, John 1.

And thus they had the testimony of Christ Jesus in their Consciences, through
which they gave up all, and forsook all, and followed him; and he having all
Power in Heaven and in Earth given unto him, gave them power and authority over
all Spirits; insomuch, that they said, the Devils were subject unto them: And
when they came unto him, and told him, he said unto them, Rejoice not that the
Devils are subject unto you; but rather rejoice that your Names are written in
Heaven: and this was their Power, and the matter of their Joy, that they had
their Testimony and Commission from him, their Lord and Master.

So here was no Ordinations of men, nor Degrees taken from Universities; nor no
Nurturing up in Schools of Learning, as has been in these latter days; for
this has all been since this Power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus has been
lost, and gone from, and rebelled against, in this Night of Apostasy. Also
after this, when the Apostle Paul was called to be a Minister, he was called by
Vision, and by the Voice of God, and sent forth by the Command of his Word and
Power, Acts 26. 16. and yet he confessed himself, that he was brought up at the
feet of Gamaliel, and taught according to the perfect Law of the Fathers, Acts
22. 3. Yet he desires his brethren, to beware of Dogs, beware of evil-workers,
beware of the Concision; for we are the Circumcision, which worship God in the
Spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the flesh;
though I might also have a confidence in the flesh: If any other man thinks
that he has whereof he might trust in the flesh, I more. Circumcised the
eighth day, of the stock of Israel, etc. But what things were gain to me, those
I counted loss for Christ: Yea, doubtless I count all things but dross for the
excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord; for whom I have suffered
the loss of all things, and do count them but dung, that I may win Christ, and
be found in him, Phil. 3.

Here the Apostle clears himself concerning his choice, and sees the Vanity of
all transitory Things; and this was a fit Minister of the Eternal Gospel of
Christ, who forsook and laid away all his humane Knowledge, and Learning, and
filthy Wisdom, and only chose the holy Spirit of the Lord God, the Cross of
Christ, whereby he said he was crucified to the world, and the world to him;
and this is quite contrary to the ministration of men's wisdom before mentioned.
And so this may suffice for the first particular of the Fifth Head, which is
their Practice, to wit their way and means to attain to the Ministry.

The second particular of the Practice, is the limiting and binding of People
unto their way and worship, by their Laws and Courts, which they call
Ecclesiastical, with the several Degrees of Offices to get money from people,
and to bring them into bondage, and keep them in awe and continual trouble, in
tying of them up to their Inventions and Laws, which they make for their own
gain and advantage, not leaving poor people to the liberty of their
Consciences, and to the freedom of their Spirits, but bind them to such things
as pertain to their own advantage, and superiority, and in this lord it over
poor peoples Estates, Persons, and Consciences, and yet they call themselves
Gospel Ministers, and in words profess Christ and Christianity; but this is
quite contrary to the practice and example of Christ and his Apostles and
Ministers; for those that he sent forth, into whatsoever City they went, they
were to enquire who was worthy, and there to abide till they went thence. And
when you come into one house, salute it; and if the house be worthy, let your
peace come upon it; but if it be not worthy, let your peace return to you; and
whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye depart out of
that House, or City, shake off the dust of your feet, Matthew. 10. Mark says
thus, And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, shake off the dust
under your feet, for a testimony against them; verily I say unto you, it shall
be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of Judgment, then for that
City, Mark 6.

And again, when he sent out the Seventy, he said unto them, Into whatsoever
house ye The second particular of their practice, is binding and limitting
people to their Worship, by citing them to their Courts.
enter, first say, Peace be to this house; and if the Son of Peace be there,
your peace shall rest upon it; if not, it shall return to you again: But into
whatsoever City ye enter, and they receive you not, go your way into the
streets of the same, and say, Even the dust of your City, which cleaves on us,
we do wipe off against you; notwithstanding, be sure of this, that the Kingdom
of God is come nigh unto you; but I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable
in the day of Judgment, etc. Luke 10.

And according to this Command of Christ, Paul and Barnabas, who were separated
by the Holy Ghost for the work of the Ministry, when they had preached the
Gospel among the Jews, and witnessed forth Christ Jesus, and his Sufferings,
among the Jews who had Crucified him, and also preached him unto the Gentiles,
and the Jews contradicting Paul's Ministry; Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold,
and said they would turn to the Gentiles; for, say they, so has the Lood
commanded us, saying, I will set thee for a Light unto the Gentiles, that thou
should be my Salvation to the ends of the Earth: but when the Jews heard
this, they stirred up the devout and honorable women, and chief men of the
City, and raised persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled them out
of their Coasts; but they shoke of the dust of their feet against them, and
came unto Iconium. Acts 13.

This was that which the Ministers of Christ, that he sent forth, were to do
against those that would not receive them; not to hale them to Courts, and
punish their Bodies and Estates, and make them give them money, by their citing
of them; if they did not believe in their Doctrine, they did not deliver them
up to the Civil Magistrate, to lay their Laws upon them, and to Whip them, and
Scourge them, as the Christians of these Ages have done, both Papists and
Protestants; what they cannot do with their Inquisitions and Bishops Courts,
they can deliver them up to the Civil Magistrates, to their Racks and Tortures,
and Hanging, and Banishment, and Imprisonment to Death; and this is the way
that the Christians of these late Ages have used, with such as did not believe
in their Doctrine of Darkness, as many thousands of Witnesses might be
instanced, that have born their Testimony against them, even to the loss of
their Lives and Blood; and in this they have been like unto the Highpriests,
and Scribes, and Pharisees, and manifested themselves to be of that Generation,
which Christ pronounced woe upon, That upon them may come all the Righteous
Blood shed upon the Earth, from the Blood of Righteous Abel. Matthew. 23.

But this was not the way that Christ taught his Disciples to do; for he said
unto them, It is impossible but that Offenses should come, but woe be to them
by whom they come; it were better for him, that a Millstone were hanged about
his neck, and he cast into the Sea, then that he should offend one of these
little ones. Take heed to your selves; if thy brother trespass against thee,
rebuke him, and if he repent, forgive him; and if he trespass against thee
seven times in a day, and seven times in a day, and turn again unto thee,
saying, I repent, thou shall forgive him. And the Apostles said unto the Lord,
Increase our faith; and the Lord said, If ye had faith as a grain of
Mustard Seed, ye might say unto this Sycamore-tree, Be thou plucked up by the
roots, and be thou planted into the Sea, and it should be so, Luke 17. Here is
the power of their Ministry, Planting and Watering in the Faith.

Moreover, he says, If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell
him his fault, between thee and him alone: if he will hear thee, thou have
gained thy brother; but if he will not hear thee, take with thee one or two
more, that in the mouth of two or three witnesses, every word may be
established; but if he shall neglect to hear them; tell it unto the Church; but
if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an Heathen man, and a
Publican. Here is no citing to the Bishops Court, though he was to be brought
to the Church, it was but to instruct him, and exhort him, and to show him his
fault; and if he would not hear, let him be as an Heathen, or as a Publican;
not to deliver him up to the Civil Magistrate, or to be cast into Prison all
his days, or to be Tortured or Racked. And when Peter heard these Exhortations
of Christ, he came unto his Master, and said, Lord, how often shall my brother
sin against me, and I forgive him, till seven times? Jesus says unto him, I
say not unto thee till seven times, but till seventy times seven; therefore the
Kingdom of God is likened unto a certain King, which would take an account of
his Servants, etc. Matthew. 18.

I desire the Masters, and Upholders of the Courts and Inquisions, Racks and
Tortures, Imprisoners and Persecutors, to read the remaining part of this
Chapter, and see whether they be not the men that have owed much unto the Lord,
and sinned and transgressed against him, and had need to crave his Patience and
Mercy, though they have been cruel with their Fellow Servants, and have laid
violent hands on them, and have taken them by the Throat, and said, Pay me the
Debt, and would not have Patience, but cast into Prison; so that the Lord may
well say unto them, O ye wicked Servants, I forgave you because ye desired me,
and should not ye have compassion on your Fellow Servants; surely the Lord is
wrath for these things, and will deliver you unto the Tormentors.

Here ye see, to use Violence and Cruelty, is absolutely contrary to the
Doctrine and Command of Christ, though some bring that Scripture where Christ
says, Go into the Highways and Hedges, and Compel them to come in; this
Christ spoke when he was in the House of one of the chief Pharisees to eat
Bread, and he exhorted them in several particulars; one of them was, That when
they made a Dinner, or a Supper, they should not invite their Friends,
Brethren, and Kindred, and Rich Neighbors; but when they made a Feast they
should invite the poor, which could not recompense them again: and when one of
them that sat at meat heard these gracious words that proceeded from him, he
said unto him, Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the Kingdom of God; and
then he spoke a Parable unto them, and said, A certain man made a great supper,
and invited many, who made excuses and did not come; as you may read in this
14th chapter of Luke. And therefore it was that he sent into the Highways and
Hedges, because those that were bidden, were not worthy to taste of his Supper,
neither went he about to compel them. And there were great multitudes with him,
and he turned and said unto them, If any man come to me, and hate not his
Father and Mother, and Wife and Children, and Brethren and Sisters, yea, and
his own Life also; he cannot be my Disciple. And whosoever does not bear his
Cross, and come after me, cannot be my Disciple.

And this Scripture they abuse, and make it a cover for their violence and
cruelty; but what is their Supper or Dinner, that people can receive, when they
have compelled them? Is it worthy of forsaking Father and Mother, Wife and
Children, House and Lands, and ones own Life? I trow not. But this is but like
the Scribes and Pharisees, when they came to Christ, and said, Why did his
Disciples transgress the tradition of the Elders? in eating with unwashen
hands: But he answered and said, Why do ye transgress the Commandments of God
by your Traditions? In vain do they worship me teaching for Doctrine the
Traditions of men, Matthew. 15.

And this has been the Doctrine of our Ages last past, the Traditions of men,
and Imaginations and Inventions of men: By this they have holden up the
Superiority, according as the Apostle says, having men's persons in Admiration
because of advantage, and so have Lorded over God's Heritage; and so have kept
his People under the weight of Oppression, as the Scribes and Pharisees did;
binding heavy burdens grievous to be born: But this is contrary to Christ and
his Apostles Doctrine, and Example; as has been showed already.

Moreover the Apostle Paul, when he writes his second Epistle to the
Corinthins, chap. 1. and relates the sufferings and hardships that they had
passed through, how that they had the sentence of death in themselves; he
says, Now he which establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed us in
God, who has also sealed us, and given us the earnest of his Spirit in our
hearts; not that we have dominion over your Faith, but are helpers of your joy;
for by Faith ye stand. Here the Apostle did not bind them, and limit them, nor
called them to Courts, to keep them under oppression and penalty in those
things that were contary to their Faith and Principles, this was contrary to
Paul's practice; for when he called the Elders of the Church of Ephesus unto
him, he said unto them, Ye know that from the first day that I came unto you,
after what manner I have been with you at all seasons, serving the Lord with
all humility of mind; and with many tears and temptations which befell me, and
how I kept back nothing that was profitable unto you, but have showed you, and
have taught you publicly, and from house to house; testifying both to Jews and
Greeks, Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ. And
when he goes on mentioning his sufferings, he says, None of these things move
me, neither count I my self dear unto my self, so that I may finish my course
with joy, and the Ministry which I have received of the Lord Jesus, to testify
the Gospel of the Grace of God; for I have not shunned to declare unto you the
whole counsel of God. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and to the whole
Flock of God, whereof the Holy Ghost has made you Overseers: and feed the
Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood, Acts 20.

Here the Apostle gives them no Commission to oppress or bondage those that
they were Overseers over, but to feed them, and to watch over them; For, says
he, after my departure shall grievous Wolves enter among you, not sparing the
Flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things;
therefore watch and remember, etc.

This has been fulfilled and largly manifested; Wolves and Devourers have had
a large time since that day. Also the Apostle Peter says thus, The Elders
which are among you I exhort, who am also an Elder, and a Witness of the
sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed.
Feed the Flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof, not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind; neither
as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being examples to the Flock; and when
the chief Shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a Crown of glory that fades
not away, 1 Pet. 5. Here is a perfect Example and Rule for all the Overseers of
the Church of God.

Moreover, when the Apostle writes unto his Son Timothy, he says, That the end
of the Commandment is Charity, out of a Pure Heart, and a good Conscience, and
Faith unfeigned; Also he exhorts him, First of all that supplications, prayers,
and intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all men, for Kings, and for
all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty; and so he goes on, exhorting this Bishop; but never
bids him set up Courts, nor be a Lord over Gods Heritage; for he says, This
is a true saying, If any man desires the Office of a Bishop, he desires a
good work; a Bishop must be blameless, the Husband of one Wife, vigilant,
sober, of good behavior, given to hospitality, apt to teach. I believe our
Bishops are wanting here, because they Hire and Employ so many petty Teachers
under them; but he goes on, Not given to wine, no striker, not greedy of filthy
lucre, but patient, not a brawler, not covetons, (now our Laws and Courts
signify the contrary of this) not a Novice, lest being lifted up with Pride,
he fall into reproach, and the snare of the Devil; Moreover, he must have a
good report of those that are without, holding the mystery of Faith in a pure
Conscience; So the Apostle goes on, exhorting the Bishops and Deacons, that
they may know how to behave themselves in the House of God, which is the Church
of the Living God, the Ground and Pillar of Truth. 1 Timothy 2, 3, chap.

So he goes on, exhorting them what to Teach and Preach, and how to order the
Church, in the 4th and 5th chapters, concerning the Elders, Elder-men, and
Elder-women, Younger-men, and Younger-women; as also Servants; he directs him
how to go by way of Exhortation to them all; and says, If any man teach
otherwise, and consent not to wholesome words, even the Words of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the Doctrine which is according to Godliness, he is proud,
knowing nothing, doting about Questions; So he goes on, dehorting them from
those things: But thou, O man of God, says he, flee these things, and follow
after righteousness, godliness, faith, love, and patience, meekness; fight the
good fight of Faith, lay hold on Eternal Life, whereunto thou art called, and
have professed a good profession before many Witnesses: I give thee charge in
the sight of God, who quickneth all things, and before Christ Jesus, who before
Pontius Pilate witnessed a good confession, that thou keep this Commandment
without spot, unrebukeable, until the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ; O
Timothy, keep that which is committed unto thy Trust, chap. 6.

Here is a weighty, and a hard Charge laid upon Timothy, the then Bishop and
Overseer of the Church; but here is nothing of making of Laws, and setting up
Courts, and oppressing people, and keeping them in Bondage and Slavery; for
when he writes his Second Epistle to Timothy, he says, My dearly beloved Son,
Grace, Mercy, and Peace from God the Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.
When I call to remembrance the unfeigned faith that is in thee, which dwelt
first in thy grandmother Lois, and thy mother Eunice, and I am persuaded, that
in thee also: Wherefore I put thee in remembrance, that thou stir up the Gift
of God which is in thee, by the putting on of my hands; for God has not given
us the spirit of fear, but of power, and of love, and of a sound mind: That
good thing which was committed unto thee keep, by the Holy Ghost which dwells
in us: This thou know, that all they which were in Asia be turned away from
me; yet he does not bid him Arraign them, nor call them up to Courts, nor Cite
them, nor Excommunicate them, nor cast them into Prison; but he exhorts him to
be strong in the Grace that is in Christ Jesus; and he lays down how he
should teach the people; and commit those things he has heard of him unto
faithful men; And thou therefore endure hardiness, as good Soldier of Jesus
Christ: And if a man also strive for Mastery, yet he is not Crowned, except he
strive Lawfully. Consider what I say, says he, and the Lord give thee an
Understanding in all things: Study to show thy self Approved unto God, a
Workman that needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the Word of Truth; but
shun profane and vain bablings; and so he goes on exhorting him, saying, Flee
also youthful Lusts; but follow Righteousness, Faith, Charity, and Peace with
them that call on the Lord out of a Pure Heart: But foolish and unlearned
Questions avoid, knowing that they gender to Strife; and the Servant of the
Lord must not Strive; but be Gentle unto all Men, apt to Teach, Patient;
Instructing them that oppose themselves, if God peradventure will give them
Repentance to the acknowledging of the Truth; and that they may recover
themselves out of the Snare of the Devil. 2 Timothy 2.

This is contrary to the Striving and Contention, that has been by our Bishops
and Deacons, that have professed these Scriptures, both Papists and
Protestants; one Striving with Inquisitions, and Racks, and Tortures; the other
Striving and Terrifying poor people with their Courts, and Chancellors, and
Prisons, and Commissaries, and Subordinate Officers not a few; insomuch, that
there has been such a Yoke of Bondage upon the Necks of the Poor and Innocent,
that Grievous Groans have ascended, under it, from them unto the Lord: But of
this the Apostle was a true Prophet to his Son Timothy, the then Bishop and
Overseer of the Churches of God: This know also, says he, that in the Last
Days perilous Times shall come: For men shall be Lovers of their own Selves,
Covetous, Boasters, Proud, Blasphemers, without natural Affection, False
Accusers, Fierce, Despisers of those that are Good; Heady, High-minded, Lovers
of Pleasures more then Lovers of God, having a Form of Godliness, but denying
the Power thereof. See here, Is not this fulfiled? But the Apostle says unto
Timothy, From such turn away; for of this sort are they which creep into
Houses, and lead Captive silly women, laden with Sin, and diverse Lusts, ever
Learning, and never able to come to the Knowledge of the Truth.

And has not this been our State and Condition in all this Night of Apostasy?
Have they not crept into Houses, and called them Churches? And have kept people
ever Learning, but they never brought them to the Knowledge of the True Church,
nor of the True God. And the Apostle says further unto him; But thou have
known my Doctrine, manner of Life, Purpose, Faith, Long-Suffering, Patience,
Charity; Continue thou in the things that thou have Learned, and have been
assured of, knowing of whom thou have learned them, 2 Timothy 3. I charge thee
before God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, Preach the Word, be instant in Season,
and out of Season, Reprove, Rebuke, with all Long-suffering and Doctrine: this
is not to use Violence, nor Compel, as has been used for many hundreds of
years; but he bids him, Watch in all things, endure Afflictions, do the Work
of an Evangelist, make full proof of thy Ministry, 2 Timothy 4. this was not the
full proof of Gain and Advantage upon poor Peoples Estates and Livelihoods, as
has been made of in these late Days; for if that be it, they have done it to
the utmost.

Moreover, when he writes unto Titus, his own Son, he says, For this cause
left I thee at Crete, that thou should set in order the things that are
wanting, and ordain Elders in every City, as I appointed thee: If any man be
Blameless, the Husband of one Wife, having Faithful Children, not accused of
Riot, or Unruly: for a Bishop must be Blameless, as the Steward of God; not
Self-willed, not soon Angry, not given to Wine, no Striker, not given to Filthy
Lucre; but a lover of Hospitality, a lover of Good Men, Sober, Just, Holy,
Temperate, holding fast the Faithful Word, as he has been taught, that he may
be able by Sound Doctrine, both to exhort and convince the Gainsayers; for
there are many unruly and vain Talkers, etc. Tit. 1. But speak thou the things
that become Sound Doctrine: And so he directs him to exhort the Aged-men, and
Aged-women; Young Men, and Young-women, and Servants, how they ought to walk in
their Places, and Callings, that they might all Adorn the Doctrine of God: For
the Grace of God that brings Salvation has appeared unto all men, says he,
teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, we should live
Soberly, and Godly in this present World, looking for the blessed Hope, and
glorious appearing of the Great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and Purify to
himself a Peculiar People, Zealous of good Works: These things speak and
exhort. it. 2.

This is contrary to the Doctrine of the Bishops and Teachers of our Days; for
they do not turn people to the Grace of God that has appeared to all men, that
teaches to deny Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts; but they say we must never be
redeemed from Iniquity, nor never be purged nor purified from Sin while we are
upon Earth; and then how can we be Peculiar and Zealous of good Works: for the
worst of People are but Sinners: but surely this which they Preach is another
Gospel.

The Apostle goes on with his Exhortation to Titus, and bids him Put them in
mind to be subject to Principalities and Powers, and to obey Magistrates, and
to speak evil of no man, to be no Brawlers, but gentle, showing all Meekness
unto all men: For we our selves, says he, were sometimes Foolish, Disobedient,
serving diverse Lusts and Pleasures, living in Malice and Envy, Hateful, and
Hating one another: But after that the Kindness and Love of God our Savior
toward man appeared, not by Works of Righteousness that we have done, but
according to his Mercy he has saved us, by the washing of Regeneration, and
Renewing of the Holy Ghost, which he shed on us abundantly, through Jesus
Christ our Savior. These things I will that thou affirm constantly, that they
which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain Good Works; these
things are profitable unto men. Tit. 3.

Thus ye see that these Bishops Timothy and Titus, are far different both in
Doctrine, Practice, and Example, from the Bishops that have been for several
hundreds of years last past, the Night has been upon them, and come over them,
so that they have erred from the Faith and Doctine of the Apostles, neither
have they received the Holy Ghost. For Timothy, who was a Bishop, was a man
that the Apostle had much confidence in, and belief of, as he expresses in
several of his Epistles; for he says to the Corinthians in his First Epistle;
Though ye have ten thousand Instructers in Christ, yet have ye not many
Fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel: Wherefore,
I beseech you, be ye Followers of me. For this cause I have sent unto you
Timotheus, who is my beloved Son, and faithful in the Lord, who shall bring
you into remembrance of my Ways which be in Christ, as I teach every where in
every Church. 1 Cor. 4.

And again, when the Apostle Exhorts the Philippians in his Epistle, To let
nothing be done through Strife, or Vainglory, but in lowliness of Mind, let
each esteem other better then themselves. Look not every man to his own things,
but every man also to the things of others: And so he goes on opening the
Mystery of the Sufferings of Christ; But, he says, I trust in the Lord Jesus
to send Timotheus shortly unto you, that I also may be of good comfort when I
know your State: for I have no man like-minded, who will naturally care for
your State: for all seek their own, not the things that are Jesus Christ's; but
ye know the proof of him, that as a Son with a Father, he has served me in the
Gospel, him therefore I send unto you, etc. Phil. 2.

And again, when he writes to the Thessalonians, he says, We sent Timotheus
our Brother and Minister of God, and our Fellow Labourer in the Gospel of
Christ, to Establish you, and Comfort you concerning your Faith, 1 Thessalonians. 3.

Thus ye see that this Timotheus, who was the Bishop and Overseer of the Church
of God in the Apostles days, was a Faithful Labourer and Minister of Christ
Jesus, and much trusted in, and approved of by the Apostle; for he labored
with him in the Gospel, as a Son labors with his Father. And it is strange
that the Bishops that have been in these later Ages, should call themselves by
that name, since they have both derogated from their Doctrine, and Principles,
and added what their own dark minds and inventions would invent; for in that
they have erected unto themselves a supremacy and a superiority above others,
which they have practiced and Lorded over peoples Faith and Consciences for
many hundreds of years together; under which many thousands have groaned, and
suffered even until death, and shedding of their blood, and in all these
things, they have quite contradicted Christ Jesus his Doctrine, Practice and
Example; as also all his holy Apostles after him, for he and they were always
sufferers, as has been showed already, and as we shall show hereafter. But
they were never Oppressors, nor layers of Yoaks and Burdens upon the
Consciences of Men and People; but they always preached Liberty and Freedom to
others, though they suffered themselves; and there was their Cross that they
took up, when they followed Christ. And so those Church-Governors, as they call
themselves, that have been Blood-shedders, that have been Oppressors and
Persecutors, they have no Example neither from Christ, nor none of his
Apostles; and so let the Blood that they have shed for so many hundreds of
years return upon their own heads. Let Babylons Merchants have blood to drink,
for they are worthy, for they have been made drunk with the blood of the Saints
and Martyrs of Jesus: so the Cup that they have given to others, let them have
it double; for they learned none of this from Christ, nor from any of his
Apostles.

For Christ when he sent his Messengers, and they entered into a Village of the
Samaritans, and they received him not, because his face was as though he would
go to Jerusalem; and when his Disciples James and John saw this, they said,
Lord, will thou that we command fire from Heaven, and consume them, even as
Elias did? But he turned, and rebuked them, and said, Ye know not of what
manner of spirits ye are of; for the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them, Luke 9. 55, 56. And to save men's lives, he laid down
his own Life, and shed his own precious Blood; as he says himself. He has
laid down his Life for his Sheep, and they shall never perish; Yea, he has
laid down his Life for his enemies: For the Apostle says, Let every one of us
please his neighbor for his good and edification: For even Christ pleased not
himself, but as it is written, The reproaches of them that reproached thee fell
upon me. Wherefore receive ye one another, as Christ also received us, to the
glory of God. Romans 15.

And again, the Apostle says, All things are in God who has reconciled us
unto himself, by Jesus Christ; and has given to us the Ministry of
Reconciliation; to wit, That God was in Christ reconciling the world to
himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them: and has committed unto us
the Word of Reconciliation. Now then, we are Ambassadors for Christ; as though
God did beseech you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to
God. 2 Cor. 5.

Here is no violence nor cruelty used, neither bondages nor snares laid upon
men's Consciences; for the Apostle says, Give no offense in any thing, that the
Ministry be not blamed; but in all things approving our selves as the Ministers
of God: In much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in Distresses, in
Stripes and Imprisonments, in Tumults, in Labors, in Watchings, in Fastings;
by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the Holy Ghost;
by Love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by the Armor of
Righteousness, on the Right Hand, and on the Left; by Honor and Dishonor; by
Evil-report, and Good-report; as Deceivers, and yet True; as Unknown, and yet
Well-known; as Dying, and behold we Live; as Chastened, and not Killed; as
Sorrowful, and yet always Rejoicing; as Poor, and yet making many Rich; as
having Nothing, yet possessing All things; 2 Cor. 6.

Here is a Ministry of God indeed, which is quite opposite and contrary to what
has been set up, and practiced in the Christian world. Also read 2 Cor. 11.
and likewise in Chap. 4. the Apostle says, Therefore, seeing we have this
Ministry, as we have received mercy we faint not: For if our Gospel be hid, it
is hid to them that are lost; in whom the God of this world has blinded the
minds of them that believe not, lest the Light of the glorious Gospel of
Christ, who is the Image of God, should shine unto them.

And this Gospel has been hid all this time of darkness, for the god of the
World, has blinded the minds of all that have not believed in the Light of the
glorious Gospel; and so they have been lost from it, and kept from it, by the
Ministers of darkness, who have preached the divination of their own brain, and
not from the Light of the Lord. But the Apostle says, We preach not our
selves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and our selves your servants for Jesus sake,
(these are not Lord-Bishops, nor Pope-Holiness) for, says he, God who
commanded light to shine out of darkness, has shined in our hearts, to give us
the light of the knowledge of the Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.
For we have this Treasury in earthen Vessels, that the excellency of the Power
may be of God, and not of us: For we are troubled on every side, yet not
distressed; we are perplexed, but not in despair; persecuted, but not forsaken;
cast down, but not destroyed; always bearing about in our body the dying of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that the Life of Christ might be manifested in our body: for
we who live are always delivered unto death for Jesus sake, that the life of
Jesus might be made manifest in our mortal flesh; so that death works in us,
but life in you.

Thus the Apostles labored in the work of the Ministry, even under cruel
sufferings; which Gospel, it may well be said, has been hid; for the Gospel
that has been preached since the Apostasy, has laid Oppressions and
Sufferings upon others, and they themselves have Ruled and Lorded over Peoples
Consciences: but the Apostle Paul said, I Paul am made a Minister of the
Gospel, that is preached to every Creature under heaven; now rejoice in my
sufferings for you, and fill up that which is behind of the afflictions of
Christ, in my flesh, for his Bodies sake, which is the Church: whereof I am
made a Minister, according to the dispensation of God, which is given to me for
you, to fulfill the Word of God, Col. 1.

But this Ministry and Ministration has been lost, and the Church for which
the Apostle suffered, has been in the Wilderness; and if there was any small
Appearance or Testimony of Jesus Christ in any, such have suffered Oppressions,
and Hardships, and much Detriment, from such as were the Professed Ministry. So
these Scriptures, with many more, which might be mentioned, show the
contrariety between the Ministers of the Gospel in the Apostles Days, and the
Professed Ministry that has been since the Apostles Days, in the Apostasy:
And as the Supremacy, and Superiority has been contrary to the Apostles Way,
and Manner, and Order, in laying Oppressions and Burdens upon the People: so
also they have been contrary, and opposite to Christ and the Apostles Doctrine,
Practice, and Example, in not preaching Liberty and Freedom to the Spirits in
Prison; for Christ Jesus, who is the Anointing of God, Preaches Glad Tidings
to the Poor, Liberty to Captives; his Commission that he gave to his Disciples
was, to Preach the Gospel to all Nations, to every Creature.

And he said to those that believed in him, If ye continue in the Truth, the
Truth will make you free, John 8. And the Apostle confesses, That the Law of
the Spirit of Life had made him free from the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8. And
the Apostle says, when he was speaking of the Ministration of the Law, and the
Gospel; When Moses is read, the Vail is over the Heart: Nevertheless, when it
shall turn to the Lord, the Vail shall be taken away: Now the Lord is that
Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3. And so
this is that Substance the Apostle Preaches from, and Preached to the Spirit
of the Lord that takes away the Vail, and gives Liberty, and Redeemeth from
under the Power of Darkness, and from the Bondage of Corruption; and therefore
they did not set themselves to Rule over men's Faith, or to lord over their
Consciences, but they endeavor still to be made manifest unto every ones
Conscience in the sight of God; But we have, says the Apostle, Renounced the
hidden things of Dishonesty, not walking in Craftiness, nor handling the Word
of God deceitfully; but by Manifestation of the Truth, commending our selves to
every man's Conscience in the sight of God, 2 Cor. 4. Knowing therefore the
Terrors of the Lord, we persuade men, but we are made manifest unto God, and I
trust also are made manifest in your Consciences.

So here the Apostle preached to Gods Witness in Peoples Consciences, and that
answered to them again, and they were made manifest to that; and therefore did
the Apostle John say, That they needed not any man to Teach them, but as the
same Anointing teaches them, which is Truth, and is no Lie: And so this is
unlimited, neither does the Apostle limit this, when they were gathered into
the Eternal Spirit, and all drank into one Spirit, and all baptized into one
Body, by one Spirit; he told them they might all prophecy one by one; and that
though they were many Members, yet they were one Bread and one Body, and every
Member of the Body had its several Office; the Head did not say to the Feet, I
have no need of you.

Now concerning Spiritual Gifts, Brethren, I would not have you ignorant, there
are diversity of Gifts, but the same Spirit; and there are differences of
Administrations, but the same Lord; and there are diversities of Operations,
but the same God which works all in all; but the manifestation of the Spirit
is given to every man to profit withal; For to one is given by the same Spirit
the Word of Wisdom, to another the Word of Knowledge, by the same Spirit; to
another Faith, by the same Spirit; to another the Gift of Healing, by the same
Spirit; to another the working of Miracles, by the same Spirit; to another
Prophecy, to another Discerning of Spirits, to another diverse kinds of
Tongues, to another interpretation of Tongues: But all these works that one
and the self-same Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will: For as
the Body is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body,
being many are one Body; so also is Christ. For by one Spirit we are all
Baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be Bond or
Free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit; for the Body is not one
Member, but many. 1 Cor. 12. And so the Apostle goes on to the end of the
Chapter discoursing of the several Gifts, all given by one Spirit.

So here is no binding nor limiting, nor Supremacy one over another; not to sit
Judges one of another, but every one to wait in their several Gifts of the
Spirit given unto them to profit withal: For I say, says the Apostle, through
the Grace of God given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of
himself more highly then he ought to think, but to think soberly, according as
God has dealt to every man the measure of Faith: For as we are many Members in
one Body and all Members have not the same Office; so we being mary are one
Body in Christ, and every one Members one of another. Having then Gifts,
differing according to the Grace that is given us, whether Prophecy, let us
prophecy according to the proportion of Faith; or Ministy, let us wait in our
ministering; or he that teaches, on Teaching; or he that exhorts, on
Exhortation; he that gives, let him do it with simplicity; he that rules,
with diligence; he that shows Mercy, with cheerfulness; let Love be be
without dissimulation; abhor that which is evil, cleave to that which is good.
And thus the Apostle goes on with gracious Exhortations, Romans 12. to the end
of the Chapter, not preferring one before another, but every one to abide and
wait in their Gifts.

Also when he writes unto the Ephesians, he writes thus, I therefore the
Prisoner of the Lord beseech you, walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, forbearing one
another in Love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of
Peace: There is one Body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one Hope of
your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and one Father of
all, who is above all, and through all, and in you all, Ephesians. 4. And in this
Chapter he also goes on in opening of the manifestation of the Gift of the
Spirit of God, and in holy Admonitions, even to the end of the Chapter; Which
Gift, he says, is given for the Work of the Ministry, for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the edifying of the Body of Christ.

And this Doctrine and Ministry is contrary to those Ministers which have been
of late, that limit and bind under their Power; which Power is contrary to the
Power of God, and his Spirit, as they themselves will confess; for they cannot
say they have the same Power and Spirit that the Apostles had, and yet they
inflict Punishments, and lay Oppressions, and Burdens, and Bondages by their
Laws, upon those that do not follow and obey their Doctrine and Practices,
which is quite contrary to Christ and his Apostles: For there is but two Ways,
Truth and Error, Light and Darkness. So let the wise and honest in heart judge
what a condition the Saints of God are in, while this Power of Darkness Rules.
And thus much for the Second Particular of their Practice, which is Binding and
Limiting, and keeping in Bondage those that are under their Power.

The Third Particular of their Practice is, That they upbold and carry on many
of these Practices beforementioned, by causing People to Swear in their
Courts, or upon any other occasion, what they like, and preach up Swearing, and
allow of it, and hold it up in all occasions whatsoever.

And in this they are absolute Breakers of the special Command of Jesus Christ,
and also out of the Doctrine and Practice of Christ and his Apostles, and
contrary to their Testimony: For Christ Jesus when he was in his Sermon on the
Mount, and was rehearsing the Heads of the Law, as we said before, he mentioned
this also again, Ye have heard that it has been said to them of old time, Thou
shall not Forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the Lord thine Oaths; but
I say unto you, Swear not at all, Matthew. 5. Now Christ being the fulfilling of
the Law, and the end of the Law, as the Apostle says, for Righteousness; and
being that one Offering, that has been offered up once for all, in which he
said, Lo I come to do thy will O God, he has taken away the First, that he
might establish the Second, and when he had offered one Sacrifice for Sin, for
ever he sat down at the right hand of God, expecting his Enemies to become his
Footstool. And the same Apostle says, when he is speaking of his Priesthood;
And in as much as not without an Oath he was made a Priest: For, says he,
those Priests, to wit, those that were under the Law, were made without an
Oath; but this with an Oath, by him that said unto him, The Lord swear, and
will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec,
etc. Hebr. 7.

So this is he that is the Oath of God, and the Promise of God, the Substance
The Third Particular of their Practice, in causing People to Swear, contrary to
Christ's and the Apostles Commands, Practice, and Doctrine.
and Performance of all that God swore and promised unto Abraham, and unto his
Seed for ever; this the Apostle makes very clear in the foregoing Chapter;
where he says, When God made a Promise to Abraham, because he could Swear by
no greater, he Swore by Himself, saying, Surely, in blessing I will bless thee,
and in multiplying I will multiply thee: And so after he had patiently endured,
be obtained the Promise. Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the
Heirs of Promise, the Immutability of his Counsel, confirmed it by an Oath,
that by two immutable things, in which it was impossible for God to Lie, we
might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the
Hope set before us: which Hope we have as an Anchor of the Soul both sure and
steadfast, which enters into that within the Vail, whither the Forerunner is
for us entered, even Jesus, made an High Priest for ever after the Order of
Melchisedec. Hebr. 6.

Surely all will confess that this is he whom God the Father promised unto
Abraham by an Oath, as also of whom David said, The Lord has sworn, and will
not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchisedec. These
are the two Immutable things, which the Apostle says here, in which God shows
the immutability of his Counsel, which both here meet in Christ Jesus, the Sum
and Substance of all: For surely he is the Seed which God promised to Abraham,
if we will believe the Apostle, Gal. 3. 16. Also he is that Priest that is for
ever, that ever lives to make intercession for us, and this is he that the
Apostle says, At his Name every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue confess.
Then, I say, let all Mouths be stopped, in speaking against him, and opposing of
him, who has said, But I say unto you, Swear not at all, he that is the Sum
and the Substance, and the Performance of all that God has Sworn, and has put
an end to the Law, under which Oaths and Swearing was allowed; he had full
Power as well to put an end to Oaths, as he had to put an end to the Sabbath:
For, he said, the Son of Man is Lord of the Sabbath, which was one of the Ten
Words, and Swearing was none of them: And surely those that disobey Christ
Jesus his Commands, who is the Sum and Substance of Gods Oaths, and the
fulfilling and end of the whole Law; surely they blaspheme against that Holy
One. For the Apostle said, He that despise Moses Law, died without Mercy under
two ar three Witnesses; how much more sorer punishment, suppose ye, shall be
thought worthy for them who have trodden under foot the Son of God, etc. Hebr.
10.

All those that are Fighters against God, and Holders up of Swearing, against
Christ's Command, they will find It a fearful thing to fall into the Hands of
the Living God. But they have three Objections: First, That God Swore:
Secondly, That the Angel Swore: Thirdly, That the Apostle says, Men verily
Swear by the Greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an end of all
Strife.

In answer to these three; First, For what the Lord has Sworn concerning
Christ, it is already proved, and fulfilled in Christ; but it is said in Isa
45. where the Lord by his Prophet was speaking that Israel should be saved, and
he says, Look unto me and be saved all ye Ends of the Earth, for I am God, and
there is none else: I have Sworn by my self, the Word is gone out of my Mouth
in Righteousness that to me every Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall swear.

Now the Apostle Paul rehearses these words again, when he writ unto the
Philippians, where he says, If there be any Consolation in Christ, if any
Comfort of Love, if any Fellowship of the Spirit, if any Bowels and Mercies,
fulfill ye my Joy; and let the same mind be in you, which was also in Christ
Jesus, who being in the Form of God, etc. Where he rehearses the Humility of
Christ even to Death upon his Cross, in which he became a Savior, as the Lord
by his Prophet said, Even to the Ends of the Earth: Wherefore, says the
Apostle, God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above every name;
That at the Name of Jesus (that signifies a Savior) every Knee shall bow, of
things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under the Earth; and that
every Tongue shall confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of the
Father. Philip. 2.

So here the Apostle has omitted those words, Every Tongue shall Swear, and
says Every Tongue shall Confess, as a Faithful Witness, and an Obedient
Servant of Christ Jesus, whom he says is the Lord, who has said, Swear not at
all. Now since that the Apostle, as a Witness of Christianity, and an Obeyer of
Christ's Commands, has left out the word Swear, and has put in Confess,
according to Christ's own Words, who said, He that confesses me before men, him
will I confess before my Father which is in Heaven. Now since that Christ and
his Apostles have left us this Example; who says not, Swear before men, but,
Confess before men; who are they that dare Oppose and Gainsay Christ Jesus and
his Apostles, under a color of what the Law says, and what the Prophet says,
and that the Angel Swore; But, as the Apostle says, unto which of the Angels
said he at any time, Thou art my Son? Who said, Swear not at all. When he
brings his First-begotten into the World, he says, And let all the Angels
worship him; and of the Angels he says, Who makes his Angels Spirits, and his
Ministers a Flame of Fire; the Angels are his Messengers and Servants, as may
be read in the Revelations. And what has any one to do, to bring that where
the Angel Swore by him that lives for ever and ever, that Time should be no
longer, when he was upon his Message and Service, which the Lord sent him
about? What is this to men that have the Command of the Son of God upon them?
who has said, Swear not at all. Unto which of the Angels said he at any time,
Sit thou on my right hand, until I make thine Enemies thy Footstool? But unto
the Son he says, Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, a Scepter of
Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom. Let all such as contend with the
Almighty in this matter, read Hebr. 1. and see how they can answer him there.

And as for that where the Apostle says, An Oath is for an end of Strife: this
he says, when he speaks of the Assurance of the Oath of God, he brings a
Comparison of them that Swore, when Swearing was lawful under the Law; For men,
says he, Swear by the greater, and an Oath for confirmation, is to them an end
of all strife. Now there is none have the reason of a man, but they may see the
Apostle speaks of such as did use Swearing, because he said, An Oath for
confirmation, was to them an end of all strife; and so it was under the Law;
but Oaths for ending of strife were never used among the Christians, for Christ
had commanded to the contrary; and the Apostle manifested the contrary, when he
wrote to the Philippians, as is proved before.

Moreover the Apostle James, who wrote to the twelve Tribes scattered up and
down, who were they that had the Law, that enjoined Swearing, and under which
they practiced swearing, for a confirmation, and an end of strife, as the
Apostle says before, even to them the Apostle James, when he writes to them of
the suffering of affliction, that they should be as examples to endure, he
says, Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord,
that he is very pitiful and tender of mercy; but above all things says he, my
Brethren, Swear not; neither by Heaven, neither by Earth, neither by any other
Oath: but let your yea, be yea; and your nay, nay; lest ye fall into
condemnation, Jam. 5.

And into this state of condemnation, are the Teachers and Leaders of our Age
fallen, who are not only Swearers, but Teachers, Upholders, and Forcers to
Swear, and preach it up for Doctrine to Swear, and in this oppose and gainsay
Christ Jesus, and all his Apostles, and all that bear testimony to his Name,
and Truth, and Word, and obey his Command; such suffer by them, and under them,
and if they bring them into their Courts for any thing, because they cannot pay
them Tithes, or because they cannot pay them Steeple-house Dues, and Easter
Reckonings, when they have sued them, except they will Swear, they cannot put
in their Answers: and then they get out Writs, and cast them into Prison. And
thus they that profess themselves to be Ministers of Christ, and the Gospel,
make havoc of his Flock: But surely he will come and seek his Sheep, and
search them out. And thus much for the third Particular of their practice,
which is their causing People to Swear.

The fourth Particular that they practice without ground from Scripture, is
Sprinkling Infants with water, upon their heads and faces, and some plunge them
all over, which we do not find Christ or his Apostles did the like with Infants.

It is true, there was brought unto Christ Little Children, that he should put
his hands on them and pray; and he laid his hands on them, but his Disciples
rebuked them; but Jesus said, Suffer little Children, and forbid them not to
come to me, for of such is the Kingdom of Heaven, Matthew. 19. Now Mark says,
That he took them up in his Arms, and put his hands upon them, and blessed
them, Mark 10. And Luke says, They brought unto him Infants, that he might
touch them; but when his Disciples saw, they rebuked them; but Jesus was
displeased with them, and said, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and
forbid them not, for of such is the Kingdom of God. Verily I say unto you,
whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, shall in no
wise enter therein, Luke 18.

Now by all these Scriptures it does appear, that little Children were nearer
the Kingdom The fourth particular of their practice, is Sprinkling of Infants
without ground from Scripture.
of God, and readier for the Kingdom of God than any others; for Christ says
several times, Whosoever will enter into the Kingdom of God, must be as a
little Child. So by all these Scriptures we may see that he ownes little
Children above all others. Now how it comes that they throw water upon them,
to give an addition to that Innocent state while they are Infants, this is
certainly an Invention and an Imagination of their own, for there is nothing in
Scripture for it.

Indeed John the Baptist, who was sent before Christ to preach the Baptism of
repentance, he baptized those that received his Doctrine with water in Jordan,
but we do not find that he put Infants in; that was not according to his
Doctrine which was Repentance; for Infants were not capable to repent. And when
the Jews sent the Priests and Levites to enquire of John what he was; they
asked, Why he baptized, if he was not the Christ, neither Elias, nor that
Prophet? John answered them, saying, I indeed baptize with water unto
repentance; but there stands one among you, whom ye know not, he it is who
comes after me, and is preferred before me, whose shoes latchet I am not
worthy to unloose. This was beyond Jordan, where John was baptizing. Says he,
and I knew him not; but he that sent me to baptize with water, the same said
unto me, Upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending and remaining on him,
the same is he that baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, John 1. And Matthew says,
In those days came John the Baptist, preaching in the wilderness of Judea, and
said, Repent, for the Kingdom of God is at hand, etc. I indeed baptize you with
water unto Repentance; but he that comes after me is mightier than I, whose
shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall baptize you with the Holy Ghost and
with fire, Mat. 3.

It is said, in John 3. After that Christ had been preaching and speaking to
Nichodemus, and had been preaching the Light to him, that he and his Disciples
came to Judea, and there he tarried with them and baptized, and the disciples
of John and some of the Jews were at difference about Purifying, and they came
to John and said, He that thou bore witness of, baptizeth; John answered and
said, Ye your selves bear me witness, that I said, I am not the Christ, but I
am sent before him; he must increase, but I must decrease. When Jesus therefore
knew that the Pharisees heard that he baptized and made Disciples more then
John, though Jesus himself baptized not, but his Disciples; he left Judca, and
departed, John 4.

Also when John was preaching and baptizing, and preaching repentance and
remission of sins, then comes Jesus from Galilee to Jordan, unto John, to be
baptized of him, but John forbad him saying, I have more need to be baptized of
thee, and come thou to me? and Jesus answering, said, Suffer it to be so now,
for thus it becomes us to fulfill all righteousness. And Jesus when he was
baptized, went up straightway out of the water, and the heavens were opened
unto him, and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a Dove, and lighted upon
him, and a voice came from heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased, Mat. 3.

This is the main Scripture that the Baptists build upon, for their
Water Baptism; and here is a secret in this, which they never came to see: For
John says, I knew him not, but that he should be made manifest to Israel;
therefore am I come baptizing with water. And John bare record, saying, I saw
the Spirit descending from heaven, like a Dove, and it abode upon him, and I
knew him not. Now how do the Baptists know him? And the end wherefore he went
into the water, since that John did not know it, nor would not have had him to
have done so, who was a man sent of God to Baptize with water, till he said it
was to fulfill all Righteousness; which word was hid from John, as he
afterward says, but that he should be made manifest to Israel, therefore he
came baptizing with water. And so afterward when Christ was teaching
Nichodemus, when he told him, That those that were to enter into the Kingdom of
God, must be born of the water of the Spirit. These things were strange unto
him, but The Anabaptists Baptism with outward water condemned.
Jesus said, We speak what we know, and testify what we have seen, and ye
believe not our testimoony. If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe
them not, how shall ^e believe if I tell you of heavenly things?

To the same purpose the Apostle says, There are three that bear record in the
Earth; the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and these three agree in one, 1
John 5. It were good for the Baptists to know this Water, and this Baptism, and
this Spirit, by which they might he born again; and to know the washing of the
Regeneration, and Renewing of the Holy Ghost: For this was the Washing and
Water that the Saints were washed with; They were made clean through the Word,
by the washing of the water of the Word, Ephesians. 5.

Now for the Baptists to stand washing with outward Water, which John baptized
with, who was before Christ, which was a Figure of the inward washing, and
cleansing, and purging, as the Apostle Peter says, the same, when he is
speaking of Noah's preaching while he made the Ark, wherein few, that is, eight
persons were lived by Water; The like figure, says he, whereunto even Baptism
does now save us; not the putting away the filth of the flesh, but the answer
of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, 1 Pet.
3. 21. Whose Blood, and the Water, and Spirit, which he Baptizeth with, is the
true and only Baptism. For John himself says, He must decrease, and Christ
must increase; and for them to stand washing here with outward water, and their
hearts and Consciences defiled and polluted, this will be of little value to
them; for John, who was a man sent of God, and bore a true witness of Christ
Jesus, yet after he was cast into Prison, he sent his disciples to ask, Art
thou he, or do we look for another? He was ^^r beyond the Anabaptists. So it
concerns them to question their state and condition; For they that look at
the outward element of Water to be the Baptism, they are far from the real and
true washing, and from that Baptism that baptizeth into the body.

When Paul came to Ephesus, and finding certain Disciples, he said unto them,
Have ye received the Holy Ghost since ye believed? they said, We have not so
much as heard whether there be a Holy Ghost; he said unto them, Unto what then
were ye baptized? they said, Unto John's Baptism. Paul said, John Baptized with
the Baptism of Repentance, and that they should believe on him that was to come
after him, that is, in Christ Jesus. Then they were Baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus: And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came
upon them, and they spoke with Tongues, and Prophesied. Acts 19.

So here is the true and only Baptism, the Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus,
which, as John said, shall increase; who is that Living Fountain, that if any
man be athirst, they may come unto him and drink. And this was spoken of the
pourings forth of his Spirit; and with this Spirit were they Baptized, while
Peter was speaking unto them, when the Holy Ghost fell upon them, and they
spoke with Tongues. And they of the Circumcision which believed were astonished,
and came to Peter, because the Holy Ghost fell upon the Gentiles. But Peter
answered, Can any man forbid Water, that they should not be baptized, who have
received the Holy Ghost? So he commanded them to be baptized in the Name of the
Lord Jesus, and so they were united into the Body, and into the Christian
Faith; and into the Unity, as well as the Jews.

And by this Spirit did Christ send forth his Disciples, to go teach and
Baptize all Nations, Acts 2. 38, 41. And this is not an outward Element of
Water, neither is this poured only upon Infants, but upon all that are athirst.
And this is that one Baptism which the Apostle mentions, in Ephesians. 4. where
he says, There is one Body, and one Spirit; one Lord, and one Faith; one
Baptism, one God and Father of all: So as there is but one Lord, and one God,
and one Faith, and one Spirit, and one Body; so there is but one Baptism, if we
believe the Apostle; who says, By one Spirit we are all Baptized into one
Body, 1 Cor. 12. Then we cannot believe that it is outward Water: So this one
Baptism, and one Spirit, is not outward Water. So the Baptizing of Infants,
with outward Water, which both Papists and Protestants use, is contrary, and
without any ground from Scripture; for if there be but one Baptism, surely
outward Water is not it.

And whereas they say, They do it as a Sign or Signification, and call it a
Sacrament; this is nothing but their own Invention, and Imagination, to keep
People in ignorance and darkness, for they have no Scripture for it. So much
for that Particular of Baptism.

There is no Scripture that mentions a Sacrament, this word has been
invented at Rome, by the Pope, who was the first that set up the Sacrament, and
the Altar, and the Eucharist, which they call the Real-Presence; which, after
their Priests have consecrated Bread, they call it, The Real Body of Christ,
and many have lost their Lives by them, because they could not believe this.
Something of kin to this is that which our Protestants use, though it is not
altogether so gross; for they call Bread and Wine (after they have blessed it) A
Sacrament, as though the nature and property of it were changed from what it
was before; but this is not the fruit of that Vine, which Christ said, he would
drink with his Disciples new, in the Kingdom of God.

When Christ was speaking to his Disciples, that the Son of Man must be
betrayed, he said unto them, I have desired to eat this Passover with you,
before I suffer; for I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof, until it
be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God. And he took the Cup and gave thanks, and
said, Take this and divide it among your selves: For I say unto you, I will not
drink of the fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God come. And he took
Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and gave it unto them; saying, This is my
Body given for you; this do in remembrance of me. Likewise also, the Cup after
Supper, saying, This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood, which is shed for
you, Luke 22. Mat. 26. Mark 14.

Now if the Bread and the Wine had been the Real Body and Blood of Christ,
which was given and shed for them, he needed not to have said, as he says in
the next words, Behold the hand of him that betrayeth me: for he ate of the
bread that betrayed him; which words make a distinction between him and the
Bread and Wine. But he said, This do in remembrance of me. And with this the
Apostle agrees, in what he writes to the Corinthians; for he says, I
received of the Lord, that which also I deliver unto you, That the Lord Jesus,
the same night in which he was betrayed, took bread; and when he had given
thanks, he brake it, and said, Take, eat, this is my Body which is broken for
you, this do in remembrance of me. In the same manner also he took the Cup,
when he had supt, saying, This Cup is the New Testament of my Blood; this do ye
as often as ye drink in remembrance of me. For, says the Apostle to these
Corinthians, As often as ye eat this Bread, and drink this Cup, ye show the
Lords death till he come, 1 Cor. 11. So that the eating of this Bread, and
drinking of this Cup, is but the remembrance of his death, how Judas betrayed
him, and the Jews Crucified him, until he come, says the Apostle. But where
is the drinking in his Resurrection, New in his Kingdom? It is manifested these
Corinthians were not come to that, by what the Apostle was speaking to them of:
in all the foregoing part of this Chapter, he is speaking to them of the state
and condition of the Man and of the Woman, and of their Praying and Prophesying
with their heads covered, and uncovered; and of their long hair; and of their
heads being shaven, and of Nature it self teaching them, but more especially in
this particular, he says; When ye come together into one place, this is not to
eat the Lords Supper, but in eating every one takes before other; and one is
hungry, and another drunken. So any that read this Chapter may see, that these
Corinthians were not come to the Power of his Resurrection; they might well eat
in remembrance of his Death; for they were one with them in sinning, that
Crucified him, and so Crucified him by their sins afresh, as the Apostle says.
And so are our eaters and givers of Bread and Wine; for they eat it in
remembrance of his Death, and sin again as soon as they have done; and this
they call, A Communion; but it is a Communion in sin and transgression, which
was the cause of Christ's Death, in the eating of this Bread, and drinking of
this Cup: Yet in the foregoing Chapter he says, Wherefore, my dearly beloved,
fly from Idolatry: I speak as to wise men, judge ye what I say: The Cup of
Blessing which we bless (here he takes in himself) Is it not the Communion of
the Blood of Christ? the Bread which we break, Is it not the Communion of the
Body of Christ? This is not the Communion in sin and transgression: For we
being many, are one Bread and one Body, for we are all partakers of that one
Bread, 1 Cor. 10.

Here is no speaking of Remembrance, but the real partaking of the one Bread;
this is the living Bread that is come down from Heaven. Christ says, I am the
living Bread that came down from Heaven, if any man eat of this Bread, he shall
live for ever: and the Bread that I give you is my Flesh, that I will give for
the Life of the World. The Jews wondered at this, and said, Will this man give
us his Flesh to eat? Jesus said, As the Living Father has sent me, and I live
by the Father; So he that eats me, shall live by me; and except ye eat the
Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. But this
is not, except you eat Bread, and drink Wine, ye have no Life in you; for
Christ says, My Flesh is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. John 6.

These things said Jesus in the Synagogue, as he Taught. And many of his
Disciples when they heard this, said, It was a hard saying, who can hear it?
But Christ says unto them, It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh
profitteth nothing: The Words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they
are Life.

And so it is the Spirit that is the Living Bread, and those that live in the
Spirit, and feed in the Spirit, and meet in the Spirit, they eat the Flesh of
Christ, and drink his Blood; and this Spiritual Bread was that which the
Apostles broke; and they that continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine and
Fellowship, in breaking of Bread, and in Prayers, it is said, They continued
daily with one accord in the Temple, and breaking bread from house to house,
Acts 2. And this Bread was that living Bread, that Christ said came down from
Heaven. And when the Disciples met together on the First day of the week to
break Bread, Paul preached unto them until midnight; surely this was Living
Bread, else it could not have been the Communion of the Body of Christ. 1 Cor.
10.

And this was a Mystery, which Swearers and Drunkards know not; and therefore
they set up that which is outward, and temporal, as the Apostle says, because
they are blind of the Spiritual Eye; and so as the Apostle says, That which
can be seen is Temporal, but that which cannot be seen is Eternal, 1 Cor. 14.
18. But this is hid from their eyes; and thus much for this Particular, which
they call the Sacrament of the Lords Supper.

They have also several other vain Practices, which they have no Example in
Scripture for; as praying over the Dead, and for the Dead, which the Apostle
exhorted from; when he writ to the Thessalonians, he says, But I would not
have you ignorant, Brethren, concerning them which are asleep, that ye sorrow
not even as others, which have not Hope; for if we believe that Jesus died and
rose again; so they also that sleep in Jesus, will God bring with him, 1 These.
4. Here is nothing of praying for them, nor over them, after they are dead: but
they manifest by their prayers, that they have not a true Hope nor Belief in
Christ Jesus, who is risen from the dead, And become the First Fruits of them
that sleep, 1 Cor. 15.

The like may be said also of their Churching women, and Marrying people with
Rings: but it appears that the main end of these Practices, are to get money
of people; for they have no Example in the Scriptures, that the people were
married with a Priest, neither in the Old Testament nor New; ye do not read
that Abraham and Sarah were married with a Priest; and Isaac took Rebecca to
wife, and Laban gave Jacob Leah and Rachel, but not by a Priest. The Apostle
says, Marriage is honorable, and the bed undefiled; but he does not say that
they should be married by a Priest, or with a Ring: But it is manifested that
this Generation of Priests, that have set up such Imaginations and Inventions
as these, are the same that the Apostle prophesied of unto his Son Timothy,
that good and true Bishop; where he says, Now the Spirit speaks expressly,
that in the latter times, some should depart from the Faith, giving heed to
seducing Spirits, and Doctrines of Devils, speaking Lies in hypocrisy, having
their Consciences seared with a hot Iron, forbidding to Marry, and commanding
to abstain from Meats, 1 Timothy 4. Now let the Reader but seriously read this
Chapter, and consider whether these be not they, both Papists and Protestants,
who marry people, as before mentioned, and yet forbid to marry all that will
not marry according to their way, and will; though the Apostle says, They may
marry whom they will, only in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7. 39. Yet if they be not
married with a Priest, and according to their way, they account it no Marriage:
And thus they run themselves quite off from the Scriptures, as bad as they that
never heard of them; for though they profess them in words, they are utterly,
and quite out of them in their Practices. And that they abstain from Meats, and
cause people so to do, this is well known to be their common practice, all
which the Apostle says, Are the Doctrines of Devils; and so here I have found
them in their practice, and I will leave them. These with many more frivolous
things, which might be mentioned, as their keeping of Idle days, and causing
people to do so, but what has been said before, may give people a sight of
their practices, that they are quite contrary and opposite to the Rule of the
Scriptures: And thus much for the Fifth Head, which is their Practice.

The Sixth is their Maintenance, and this is as contrary to the Scriptures of
Truth, as any of the rest.

They profess themselves to be Christians, and Gospel Ministers, and yet will
not be content with Gospel-Maintenance; but their Gospel is dead, and so cold,
that they preach to People, that it will not quicken them out of their dead and
natural estate; and therefore they dare not trust themselves upon their
maintenance, nor cast themselves upon the freedom, or liberality of the people.
And so when the Power and Spirit of the Lord Jesus was lost, and the Revelation
of Jesus, by which the Apostles preached; then when the Apostasy came in, those
that got up into the Popes Chair, took upon them to find out a way, whereby
they might compel people to maintain them, however they maintained themselves;
and so they started back from Christ's Rule, and his Apostles, and stepped into
the Imitation of some part of the Levitical Priesthood under the Law, which
best suited their own ends. And that being made ready to their hands, they soon
go^ it set up, and established by a Law; and then those that were Christians,
and stood to the Principles and Faith of Christianity, who knew that the
Priesthood was changed, and the Law also, and could not pay them Tithes; then
they were ready prepared for them with Laws and Penalties, to clap upon them,
and so force them by compulsion. And thus they have laid a weight of Oppression
upon poor people, ever since the dark Night of Apostasy came on, and have taken
from them the tenth part of their Lands, and a tenth part of their Flocks, and
Herds, and the tenth part of their Labors; and thus poor people been made a
prey unto their wolvish mouths.

And in this they have not done justly, neither according to the Priesthood
under the Tithes contrary to Gospel-Maintenance.
Law, nor under the Gospel. For the Children of Israel when they were to come
into the Land of Canaan, they were utterly to destroy all the Places where they
worshipped their Gods, and they were to overthrow their Altars, and break down
their Pillars, and burn their Groves with Fire, and hew down their
Graven-Images (and these Priests, we are now speaking of, set Images up) and
they were to come unto the Place which the Lord their God was to choose out of
all the Tribes, to put his Name there; and says the Lord, Thither shall you
bring your Burnt-Offerings, and you Sacrifices, and your Tithes, and your
Heave-Offerings of your hand, Deuteronomy. 12. And at the end of three years, thou
shall bring forth all the Tithes of their increase the same year, and to lay it
up within thy Gates; and the Levite, because he has no inheritance with thee;
and the Stranger, and the Fatherless, and Widow which are within thy Gates
shall come, and shall eat, and be satisfied, that the Lord thy God may bless
thee. Deuteronomy. 14. 28, 29. and chap. 26. 12.

But these Tythe-Mongers of the Gospel Times, have neither fed Widows nor
Fatherless; but what they could get of them, they have taken from them; and
many poor Widows have been cast into Prison, because they could not for
Conscience sake pay Tithes; and many poor fatherless children have had their
goods taken away for the same: but this is none of Christ's nor his Apostles
Example. And as they have taken up ways, that have been neither according to
Law nor Gospel, so let them stand Usurpers, as they are, and Lorders over Gods
Heritage: But let them know for all this, that they must come to Judgment, and
the Lord will plead with them in his day and time.

For when Christ Jesus sent forth his Disciples; their great business was not
to look after their Bellies; for they were not to provide neither Gold, nor
Silver, nor Brass in their Purses; for they had received freely, and they were
freely to give, Matthew. 10. 8, 9. Also when he sent out the Seventy, they were
neither to have Bread, nor Money, Luke 9.

And the Apostle Paul, when he took leave of the Churches, he told them, He
knew that after his departure would come among them grievous Wolves, not
sparing the Flock: he says, I have coveted no man's Silver, or Gold, or
Apparel; Ye your selves know, that these hands have ministered unto my
necessity, and to them that were with me: I likewise showed you all things, how
that so laboring, ye ought to support the weak; and to remember the words of
the Lord Jesus, how he said, It is more Blessed to give then to Receive, Acts
20. 33, 34, 35.

But the Ministers in these days, think it more blessed to receive then give,
for they accustom the one more then the other.

And again the Apostle says, Let a man so account of us as of the Ministers of
Christ, and the Stewards of the Mysteries of God. Moreover, Its required of a
Steward, that he be found faithful: For I think God has set forth us the
Apostles, as it were appointed to death; for we are made a Spectacle unto the
World, to Angels, and to Men, We are Fools for Christ's sake, but ye are Wise;
we are Weak but ye are Strong; ye are Honorable, but we are despised: Even unto
this very hour, we both hunger, and thirst, and are naked, and are buffeted,
and have no certain dwelling place, and labor working with our own hands;
being reviled, we bless; being persecuted, we suffer it; being defamed, we
entreat; we are made as the filth of the world, and as the offscouring of all
things unto this day. 1 Cor. 4.

This is far different from those that have called themselves Gospel Ministers,
they will be sure of certain abiding places; and instead of working with their
hands, they make all people work for them: So this Scripture tries them and
their Practice.

Moreover, when the Apostle writes to the Thessalonians, he says, Your
selves, Brethren know our Exhortation was not of deceit, nor of uncleanness,
nor in guile, but as we were allowed of God, to be put in trust with the
Gospel, even so we spoke, not as pleasing men but God, which tries our hearts:
For neither at any time used we flattering words, as ye know, nor a cloak of
covetousness: God is witness; nor of men sought we glory, neither of you, nor
yet of others, when we might have been burthensom as the Apostles of Christ;
but we were gentle among you, even as a Nurse cherishes her children: So being
affectionately desirous of you, we were willing to have imparted unto you, not
the Gospel of Christ only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear unto
us. For ye remember, Brethren, our labor and travel; laboring night and day,
because we would not be chargeable to any of you, we preached unto you the
Gospel of God. Ye are Witnesses, and God also, how holily, and justy, and
unblameable we behaved our selves among you that believe: As ye know, how we
exhorted, and comforted, and charged every one of you, as a father does his
children, 1 These. 2.

Here was a dear and faithful Minister of God, that abhorred to be burthensom
or chargeable even to them that believed, as he manifests in his next
Epistle, where he says, For ye your selves know how ye ought to follow us; for
we behaved not our selves disorderly among you, neither did we eat any man's
bread for naught, but wrought with labor and travel night and day, that we
might not be chargeable to any of you: Not because we have no power, but to
make our selves an Example for you to follow us. For even when we were with
you, we commanded you, that if any would not work, neither should be eat; 2
These. 3.

This is hard Doctrine for our Lords, Deans and Deacons, who are got so high,
that many of them are almost the greatest men in our Land; so that it will be
no easy matter to bring them down into the Apostles Steps, and Paths, that
they were in: But however it may let them see, that they are gotten up to the
highest Pinnacle of the Temple, whither the Devil carried our Savior, and would
have had him to have cast himself down; but Jesus was too strong for his
Temptations, and said, It is written, Thou shall not tempt the Lord thy God,
Matthew. 4. But it is to be feared, that those who have climed so high, have been
taken with his bait; and it is much if they cast not themselves down; for it is
contrary to the Doctrine of Christ; for his Exhortation was, That they should
take the low^st Seat, that it might be said unto them, Friend, Go up higher,
but they have not taken that way.

But they have several Objections, or Colors for what they do, with which they
do a little blind some ignorant people, which is an easy matter to do, While
the Blind lead the Blind, says Christ, they both go into the Ditch. One thing
they allege for Tithes, is, That Melchisedec took Tithes when Abraham paid
them, Genesis 14. when Abraham returned from the slaughter of the Kings; and this
the Apostle clears himself, in Heb. 7. and takes away the objection of all
that can be said for Tithes. For first of all, as for Melchisedec King of
Salem, Priest of the Most High God, who met Abraham in his return from the
slaughter of the Kings, and blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave the tenth
part of all, etc. Here the Apostle describes Melchisedec, being without
descent, having neither beginning of days nor end of life. So that our
Tythe-Takers in these last days, cannot claim them by this Order; for they are
not without descent, for the furthest they can claim was Levi, and hundreds of
them have ended their days, and their days are come to an end. Besides, the
Apostle says, that this Melchisedec was greater then Abraham, and Abraham had
the Promise of God, and the Oath of God passed unto him, and unto his Seed,
which the Apostle says, is Christ, Gal. 3. But the Apostle says, He was made
like unto the Son of God, and remains a Priest continually. Now consider,
says he, how great this man was, unto whom, even the Patriarch Abraham, gave
the Tithe of the Spoils, and verily, they who are of the Sons of Levi, who
receive the Office of the Priesthood, have a Commandment to take Tithes of the
People, that are of their Brethren, though they came out of the Loins of
Abraham; but he whose descent is not counted from them, received Tithes of
Abraham, and blessed him, that had the Promises, and without all contradiction,
the less is blessed of the better.

So if our Tythe-Takers can say they are better then Abraham, then they may
claim Tithes from Melchisedec; but if they say nay, but they will claim them
from the Tribe of Levi, then they must own themselves to be of the Levitical
Priesthood, and they must take Tithes of none but their Brethren the Jews: For
so the Apostle says, That the Priesthood had a Commandment to take Tithes,
according to the Law, that is of their Brethren, Hebr. 7. 5. And he says
further, If therefore perfection were by the Levitical Priesthood, for ^^der it
the people received the Law, what further need was there that another Priest
should arise, after the order of Melchisedec, and not after the order of Aaron.
But the Priesthood being changed, there is made of necessity a change also of
the Law; For he of whom these things are spoken pertains to another Tribe, of
which no man gave attendance at the Altar. For it is evident our Lord sprang of
Judah, of which Tribe Moses spoke nothing coucerning the Priesthood. And it is
more evident, that after the similitude of Melchisedec, there arises another
Priest, who is not made after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the
power of an Endless Life: For he testifies, Thou art a Priest for ever, after
the order of Melchisedec. For there is verily a disanulling of the Commandment
going before, for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof. For the Law made
nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better Hope did, by which we draw
nigh unto God, Hebr. 7.

Here the Apostle testifies clearly of the overturning and changing of the
Priesthood of Levi, and the disanulling of the Law, by which they took Tithes,
because that made nothing perfect. And for this other Priest that remains for
ever, Who purges and purifieth the Conscience from dead Works, to serve the
Living God; for the witnessing of this Everlasting High Priest being come, has
many suffered, and do suffer by this Generation of Tythe-taking Priests, who
are neither according to Law nor Gospel; and though they take the Apostles
words here, and it may be, may read them to the people, yet do they act quite
contrary to the Apostles Testimony here, and to all his practices that he
practiced while he was upon Earth.

And so we that have a Testimony of our Lord Jesus Christ, our Everlasting
High Priest, that he is come, we cannot deny his Testimony, in paying Priests
Tithes, which was paid under the Levitical Priesthood, before he came, now we
have another Priest, that remains continually, who is not made by a Law of a
Carnal Commandment, (as they all are) but by another Law, Even the Law of the
Spirit of Life, which makes us free from the Law of Sin and Death, Romans 8. But
they set up Laws against us, and make us suffer by their Laws, and by their
Courts; and when we cannot Swear, cast us into Prison: But the Apostle taught
his Son Timothy otherwise, when He besought him to abide still at Ephesus, that
he might charge some of them, that they preach no other Doctrine: neither give
head to Fables, and endless Genealogies, which minister Questions, rather then
Godly Edifying, which is in Faith. Now the end of the Commandment is Charity
out of a pure Heart, and of a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned: from which
some having swerved, have turned again aside into Jangling, desiring to be
Teachers of the Law, understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they
affirm. But we know that the Law is good, if a man use it lawfully: Knowing
this, that the Law is not made for a Righteous man, but for the Lawless and
Disobedient, for the Ungodly, and for Sinners, for Unholy and Profane, for
Murderers of Fathers, and Murderers of Mothers, for Man-slayers, for
Whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for Men-stealers,
for Liars, for Perjured Persons, and if there be any thing further that is
contrary to Sound Doctrine, 1 Timothy 1.

Surely these late Bishops have learned another Lesson, then this Bishop
Timothy did; for they execute their Law against the Harmless, and the Innocent,
and such as abide in Sound Doctrine, and those that bring forth the Fruits of
the Spirit, which is Love, Peace, Long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith,
Meekness, Temperance, against such the Apostle says, there is no Law, Gal. 5.
And yet these are they that are made the object of their Laws, and are kept
under the Scourge of the Laws in these days; and this disorder is, because our
Leaders and Teachers have caused the people to err, from the Faith, and from
the Truth.

But to come to the particular, which is concerning Ministers Maintenance,
where they object, and say, The Apostle allows them a maintenance, by what he
holds forth, 1 Cor. 9. where he says, Have not we power to eat and drink? Who
goes a warfare at any time on his own charges? Who planteth a Vineyard, and
eats not of the fruit thereof? Who feeds a flock, and eats not of the
milk thereof? For it is written in the Law of Moses, Thou shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn. If we have sown unto you
spiritual things, is it a great thing if we reap of your carnal things? Do you
not know, that they that minister about holy things, live of the things of the
Temple? and they which wait at the Altar, are partakers with the Altar: Even so
has God ordained, that they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel.

All this we would freely allow them, and it would be joy and gladness to us,
to see them come to this, upon the same terms the Apostles did; for first of
all he says, Am I not an Apostle? Am I not free? Have I not seen Jesus Christ?
Are not you my work in the Lord? If I be not an Apostle unto others, yet
doubtless I am to you, for the seal of mine Apostleship are ye in the Lord. If
others are partakers of this power over you, are not we rather? Nevertheless we
have not used this power, but suffered all things, lest we should hinder the
Gospel of Christ. For we have used none of these things, neither have I written
these things, that it should be done unto me, for it were better for me to die,
than that in this any man should make my glorying void; for though I preach the
Gospel, I have nothing to glory of, for a necessity is laid upon me, yea, woe
is unto me if I preach not the Gospel. For if I do this willingly, I have a
reward; but if against my will, a dispensation of the Gospel is committed unto
me, what is my reward then? Verily, that when I preach the Gospel, I may make
the Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my power in the Gospel.
For though I be free from all men, yet I made my self servant unto all, that I
might gain the more, unto the Jew I became a Jew, etc.

Here the Apostle makes all clear; so that if they would come to preach the
Gospel in this Spirit and Power, they need not set up their Courts of violence,
and lay such heavy oppression upon the Consciences of men and women. For the
Apostle says, Though we walk in the flesh, we do not war after the flesh; for
the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through
God, to the pulling down of strong holds; casting down imaginations of every
high thought, that exalts it self against the knowledge of God; and brings
into captivity every thought into the obedience of Christ.

Here is no need of Courts or Prisons, where the power of God is manifested in
the Ministry of the Gospel; they need not want means nor maintenance, where
every thought is brought down into the subjection and obedience of the Lord's
Truth. But as the Apostle says, Those that sow spiritual things, ought to reap
carnal things; So he that planteth a Vineyard, ought to eat of the fruit
thereof; and whosoever feeds a flock, ought to eat the milk thereof; and
whosoever treads out the corn, ought not to have his mouth muzzeld according
to the Law; that so he that ploweth in hope, and thresheth in hope, should be
partaker of their hope.

All this is just and equal, and ought to be without force or constraint; for
the Apostle says, Nevertheless we have not used this power, but suffer all
things, lest we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. The Lord has ordained that
they which preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, but I have used none
of these things. Therefore, he says, Have I committed an offense in abasing my
self? Because I have preached to you the Gospel of God freely. And when I was
present with you and wanted, I was chargable to no man, 2 Cor. 11. Also the
Apostle says, I did not burden you; Did I make a gain of you, by any of them I
sent unto you? I desired Titus, and with him I sent a Brother. Did Titus make a
gain of you? Walked we not in the same Spirit? Walked we not in the same steps?
Think ye that we excuse our selves unto you? We speak before God in Christ,
that we do all things, dearly beloved, for your edifying. Here the Apostle
desires their growth into grace, that he preached to; not his growth into
their estates, as ours do now in these days, 2 Cor. 12.

But this has not served our late Gospel Ministers; they will not be
contented, where they have planted to eat of the fruit; nor where they have fed
the flock, to eat of the milk; nor where they have plowed or threshed, to
partake of their hope; but they will be paid of all within the compass of their
power and Lordships, whethey feed them or no; and where they never planted, nor
never plowed, nor never sowed, there they will make them to pay them, and that
by force and violence: And this all people may see, is contrary to the Apostles
Doctrine, Life and Practice. Surely the Apostle saw these things coming on,
when he wrote unto his Son Timothy, whom the Holy Ghost made Bishop and
Overseer; when he showed him how he should behave himself in the House of God,
concerning Elders, Fathers and Mothers, and concerning Children and Servants,
says he, Let the Elders that rule well, be counted worthy of double honor,
especially they who labor in the Word and Doctrine; for the Scripture says,
Thou shall not muzzle the Ox that treads out the Corn. The Labourer is
worthy of his reward. I charge thee before God, and our Lord Jesus Christ, and
the elect Angels, that thou observe these things, without preferring one before
another, doing nothing by partiality; laying hand suddenly on no man, neither
be partaker of other men's sins. Keep thy self pure. If any man teach otherwise,
and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord Jesus Christ, and
to the Doctrine which is according to godliness; he is proud, knowing nothing,
but doting about questions, and strife of words; whereof comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, perverse disputeings of men of corrupt minds, and
destitute concerning the Truth; supposing that gain is godliness; from such
withdraw thy self. But godliness with contentment is great gain; for we brought
nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out; but having
food and raiment, let us therewith be content. But they that will be rich fall
into a temptation, and a snare, and into many foolish and hurtful lusts, which
drown men in destruction and perdition. For the love of money is the root of
all evil, which while some have coveted after, they have erred from the Faith,
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. But thou, O man of God, fly
these things, 1 Timothy 5, 6 Chapters.

All that read this may see, that the blessed Apostle foresaw the state and
condition the Church was falling into, and the time that has been since, has
manifested the truth of it. And thus we see the good and wholesome Doctrine,
that the holy Apostle left with them that were Overseers in those days, that
had the Spirit of the Lord Jesus living and dwelling in their hearts, but this
Gospel has been hid from them that have been lost. And this may serve for the
Sixth Head, which is, their Maintenance.

The seventh and last is their Garb and Habit, Long Robes and Surplices, Hoods
and Tippets are contrary to Gospel Ornaments.
which they seem to place much in, in matter of their Worship, and they being
Gospel Ministers, we know no ground, nor Example, they have from Christ or any
of his Apostles, to wear such Garments.

It is true, Aaron when he was to minister in the Priests Office, there were
holy Garments to be made for him, for beauty and for glory: And these were the
Garments which they were to make; a Breast Plate, an Ephod, and a Robe, a
broidered Coat, a Mitre and a Girdle; and they were to take two Stones, two
Onix stones, and grave on them the names of the Children of Israel, and set
them in four rows; and Aaron shall bear the names of the Children of Israel in
the Breast Plate of Judgment upon his heart, when he goes in into the holy
place, for a memorial before the Lord continually: and thou shall put in the
Breast Plate of Judgment the Urim, and the Thummim (which is, Lights and
Perfections) and they shall be upon Aarons heart, when he goes in before the
Lord; and Aaron shall bear the Judgment of the Children of Israel upon his
heart before the Lord continually, Exodus 28.

Here was more than the long Gown and the Surplice, the Tippet and the hood,
here was the Urim and the Thummim, and the Judgment of the Children of Israel
upon his heart: Also Aaron had a Breast Plate of pure Gold, and graven upon it
like the engraving of a Signet, Holiness to the Lord, Verse. 36. This is far
beyond the long Robes of our days; for there is little holiness graven upon
them, neither Lights nor Perfections; and if they do take the long Robes and
Surplices, Hoods and Tippets, from Aaron, they miss the Garb and Fashion of
this, for upon the Hemme of Aarons Garment there was Bells, and Pomgranets of
gold; A golden Bell and a Pomegranet, a golden Bell and a Pomegranet round
about the hem; and this was to be upon Aaron, when he went to minister, that
his sound might be heard when he was to go in the Holy Place before the Lord.
But they set Bells upon the top of their Steepls in stead of these, to make
People hear the sound when they go to their Worship. And so in this, as in all
other things that have been showed, they differ far from Scripture-Rule.

Moreover the Lord said unto Moses, Thus shall Aaron go into the holy place,
with a young Bullock for a sin-offering, and a Ram for a burnt-offering; and he
shall put on the holy linen Coat, and he shall have the linen Breeches upon
his flesh, and shall be girded with a linen Girdle, and with the linen Mitre
shall he be attired, these are the holy Garments, therefore shall he wash his
flesh in water, and so put them on, Levit. 16.

So here we see Aaron was to bring a Bullock and a Ram, for a burnt-offering,
and a sin-offering, and to wash his flesh before he put those Garments on. It
is to be feared, that our Long-Robed and Surplice-Men miss it in this too,
except they offer a sin-offering, and a burnt-offering, and wash their flesh.
We do not hear they use this, they calling themselves Ministers of Christ, and
of the Gospel: but certainly they have not taken up the imitation of these
things from hence, from Aarons Garments, but from the Scribes and Pharisees,
for from Christ and his Apostle they had none at all, but the quite contrary:
For Christ Jesus when he spoke to the Multitude, and his Disciples, said, The
Scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses Seat, and that which they bid you
observe and do, observe; but do not ye after their works, for they say and do
not; and all their works they do to be seen of men. They make broad their
Philactaries, or Fringes, and enlarge the borders of their Garments; and love
the upermost rooms at Feasts, and the chiefest seats in the Synagogues. But he
says, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites, for ye shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against men, for ye neither go in your selves, nor suffer
them that would. Woe unto you, for ye devour Widows houses, and for a pretense
make long prayers; therefore ye shall receive the greater condemnation, Matthew.
23. And he says unto them in Mark 12. in his Doctrine, Beware of the Scribes,
which love to go in long clothing, and love salutations in the Marketplaces,
and the chief seats in the Synagogues, and uppermost rooms at Feasts; which
devour Widows houses, and for a pretense make long Prayers; these shall receive
greater damnation. And Luke says, Chap. 20. That, then, in the audience of all
the People, he said unto his Disciples, Beware of the Scribes, which desire to
walk in long Robes, and love greetings in the Markets, and the highest seats in
the Synagogues, and the chiefest rooms at Feasts; which devour Widows houses,
and for a show make long Prayers; the same shall receive greater condemnation.

Surely the Disciples and Apostles after they had heard Christ thus often to
testify against them, that went after this manner, certainly they would keep
themselves clear, for ever going in this garb. Besides, it is clearly
manifested by their practices, that they never went after this manner, in long
Robes and Surplices, for that would have been a great charge to them, that
wrought with their hands, and were not chargable to any, except those that were
raised up by the power of Almighty God, by their preaching of the Gospel of
Christ unto them, the Lord might move their hearts to give them what they
should stand in need of, which they could not want, if those had it, that were
one with them in the Spirit; for so the Apostle holds forth to the
Philippians, where he says, But I rejoice in the Lord greatly, that now at
last your care of me has flourished again, wherein ye were also careful, but
ye lacked opportunity; not that I speak in respect of want, for I have learned
in whatsoever state I am, therewith to be content. I know how to be abased, and
how to abound, every where in all things I am instructed, both to be full and
to be hungry; both to abound, and to suffer need; notwithstanding ye have done
well, that ye did communicate with mine affliction: for even in Thessalonica ye
sent once and again to my necessity; not because I desire a gift, but I desire
fruit, that that may abound to your account: But I have all, and abound, and am
full, Phil. 4. But surely they bought no long Robes, nor Surplices with this,
since that Christ Jesus had so often exhorted them, to beware of them that went
in such.

And again Peter says unto those he wrote to, Let your conversation be honest
among the Gentiles; that whereas they speak of them as evil doers, they may be
put to silence by their good works; and that they should be as free, not using
their Liberty for a Cloak of malitiousness, but as the Servants of God. And
thus much for the seventh and last Head, which is their Garb and Habit, which
all that read the Scriptures may see, that Christ nor his Apostles ever used
such.

So now, let the Reader, as he reads over this Treatise, weigh and try by the
Scriptures, their ways and actions, for Christ has left us a rule, how we
should know them by their fruits. For, says he, Beware of false Prophets,
which come unto you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly are ravening Wolves: Ye
shall know them by their fruit. Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figgs of
thistles? Even so every good tree, brings forth good fruit; but a corrupt
tree, brings forth corrupt fruit; a good tree cannot bring forth evil fruit,
neither can a corrupt tree bring forth good fruit: Wherefore by their fruits ye
shall know them, Mat. 7. Luke 6. 43.

So by this which has been showed and tried by the Scriptures, comparing their
Doctrine, Practice, and Worship with the Scriptures, let the honest in heart
judge, whether this Gospel that they have preached, and which has been holden
forth for many hundreds of years, whether this Gospel be not another Gospel,
than that the Apostles preached; and that which the Apostle feared is come to
pass, where he says, I fear lest by any means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve
through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity
which is in Christ: For if he that comes preaches another Jesus, whom we have
not preached; or if ye receive another Spirit which we have not received, or
another Gospel which ye have not accepted: I marvel ye are so soon removed from
him that called you into the grace of Christ, into another Gospel, which is not
another; but there are some that trouble you, and would pervert the Gospel of
Christ. But though we, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other Gospel unto
you, than that which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As I said
before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other Gospel unto you, than
that ye have received, let him be accursed, 1 Cor. 11. Gal. 1. And thus you may
see, that their Ministry has been neither according to Law nor Gospel; and let
the Lord judge between these two.

And now a few Queries to the Bishops, Ministry and Clergy, of what sort
soever, whether Papists or Protestants, that have been in this time of Apostasy.

First, Whether that Light, which John was sent to bear witness of, John 1. 8,
9. which is the true Light that lights every man that comes into the world;
Whether this Light be not the same as it was, and has the same Power that hver
it had? since Christ says, I am the Light of the world, John 8. 12.

Secondly, Whether the New Covenant, which the Lord promised by this Prophets,
Isaiah and Jeremiah, which was a Light of the Gentiles, and was to be God's
Salvation to the ends of the Earth, Isa. 42, and 49 Chapters. Jer. 31, and 24,
Chap. Which Prophesies Old Simeon saw fulfilled, Luke 2. 30, 31, 32. Whether
this New Covenant, which the Lord says should be an Everlasting Covenant in
the last days (which Covenant the Apostle bears testimony of in Heb. 8.)
whether this Covenant (which is the Law written in the heart) be not the same
as ever it was, yea or nay?

Thirdly, Whether the Word of Faith, which the Apostle says, is nigh in the
heart, even the Word that he preached, Romans 10. Whether this be not the same
as ever? since Christ says, Heaven and Earth shall pass away, but my Word
shall not pass away, Mat. 24. 35. Mark. 13. 31.

Fourthly, Whether the Ministration of the Spirit, which the Apostle said, was
glorious; and says, the Lord is that Spirit; and where the Spirit of the Lord
is, there is Liberty, 2 Cor. 3. 17. Whether this Spirit has not the same power
and efficacy to work in the hearts of People, as ever it had, yea or nay?

Fifthly, Whether the Revelation of Jesus Christ, that was revealed to his
Apostles by his Spirit, Ephesians. 3. 5. 1 Cor. 2. 10. Whether this Spirit has not
the same power to reveal now, as ever it had? since Christ Jesus says, All
things are delivered unto me of my Father, and no man knows the Son but the
Father, neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whomsoever
the Son will reveal him, Mat. 11. 27. John 3. 35. chap. 6. 46. Whether this
Revelation of Christ Jesus, be not of the same force and power as ever it was,
yea or nay?

Sixthly, And if so, that the Light of Christ which is the New Covenant, and
the Word of Faith which is nigh in the heart, and the Spirit that he has put
in the inward parts, by which the Revelation of Jesus Christ is known, be the
same as ever: Then why is not the ministration of the Spirit, and those that
are inspired by the Almighty, the Ministers that are allowed of, and set up by
the Powers of the Nation? And why is such a Ministry set up and allowed of by
the Powers of the Nation, who deny Revelation, and do not wait for Revelation,
but say it is ceased? And why are such Ministers allowed of, and set up by the
Powers of the Nation, who do not only deny Revelation, and so deny Christ
Jesus, but they also stir up the Magistrates, and those that have the Civil
Power, to Persecute, to Imprison, to Praemunire, and to Banish such as have the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, and are Inspired by the Almighty, with the same
Spirit and Power as the Apostles had?

Seventhly, Why is not the Church of Christ now in God, as the Church of the
Thessalonians was? 1 These. 1. 1. 2 These. 1. 1. And why is now a house made with
Wood and Stone, called the Church? since Christ says unto Peter, when he
confessed that he was the Christ, the Son of the Living God; Jesus said unto
him, Flesh and blood has not revealed this unto thee. Thou art Peter, and upon
this Rock I build my Church. But this Rock was not Peter, as the Papists say,
but it was upon that Revelation which Christ said his heavenly Father had
revealed unto Peter, and the gates of Hell shall not prevail against it, Mat.
16. 18.

Eighthly, Why is not the Worship of God performed in the Spirit, and in the
Truth, according as Christ Jesus published and declared in the Mountain at
Samaria unto the woman, which Jesus confessed unto, and said, when she spoke of
the Messiah, and of Christ, I am he; he said unto her, That the hour comes,
and now is, that the true worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and in
Truth; for such the Father seeks to worship him; God is a Spirit, and they
that worship him must worship him in Spirit and Truth, John 4. And why is not
this Spirit waited in, and for, in the Worship that is generally performed, and
allowed of in our Nation? since that the Apostle says, We are the Circumcision
which worship God in the Spirit, and have no confidence in the Flesh, Phil. 3.
3. And why is the Worship which is generally performed among people, and their
Doctrines taught from and by the Commandments of men, seeing they profess
themselves to be Christians, being Christ complained of this Worship? And
says, In vain do they worship me, teaching for Doctrine the Traditions of men;
this people draws near to me with their mouths, and honors me with their
lips, but their hearts are far from me: And he said, Let them alone, they are
Blind Leaders of the Blind: and if the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall
into the Ditch, Matthew. 15. 8, 9, 14.

Ninthly, And why is not the Worship of God performed among those that profess
themselves to be Christians, and Gospel Ministers in the Unity of the Spirit?
since the Apostle says, When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity captive,
and gave Gifts unto men, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the Work of the
Ministry, for the Edifying of the Body of Christ; till we all come into the
Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto the perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. 13.
And why is there such Difference in Religion, and Opinions, as there has been
between Papists and Protestants, and many others, even to the Killing and
Slaying one of another, since that all profess themselves to be Christians? and
the Spirit of Christ is but one; and the Apostle exhorts them here, To
endeavor to keep the Unity of the Spirit, and the Bond of Peace. And if they
have received those Gifts from on High, which are for the Work of the Ministry;
then why are there such Differences among them?

Tenthly, Why is there not that Liberty, and Order in their Meetings and
Assemblies, who profess themselves to be Christians, as was in and among the
Apostles and their Churches? For the Apostle says, If any thing be revealed to
another that sits by, let the first hold his peace, for ye may all prophecy
one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted: And the Spirit of the
Prophets is subject to the Prophets; for God is not the Author of Confusion,
but of Peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints, 1 Cor. 14. So if this was
the Order of the Churches of the Saints, how is it that always one man is set
up to Speak to all the rest of the People, it may be for many years together?
since that the Apostle says, That there is diversity of Gifts, but the same
Spirit; and there are differences of Administrations, but the same Lord; and
there are diversities of Operations, but the same God which works all in all;
but the Manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal. 1
Cor. 12. Romans 12. 4. Since that the Spirit is given to every man; how is it
that poor people have had one man set up to teach them, it may be thirty or
forty years together, and whatsoever was revealed to him that sat by, they were
not permitted to speak? but they might be haled before Magistrates; and it may
be stockt, or whipped, for doing that which the Scripture allows of; and here
are Christ words fulfilled, where he says, Ye shall be haled before
Magistrates, and persecuted for my Name sake, for a testimony against them, and
they that kill you think they do God good service, John 16. 2.

And these few Queries are for all the Clergy in the Christian World to answer,
whether they be Papists or Protestants.

Lancaster Castle, the 7th month. 1666. M. F.

Postscript.
IT has been an Old Proverb and Maxim among men, No Bishop, no King; this is
but a supposition that is got into the minds of people in these late times,
which has proceeded and risen from among those of that Function, and their
Adherents, being that their power stands only by the Kingly Power; for it
might rather be said, No King, no Bishop. But to add to their Strength and
Assistance, they have added this, and have got it into the minds of people,
that if there be No Bishop, no King; but it is otherwise: for it is by
experience known, and that by Scripture Example.

For in the Reigns of all the Kings of Israel, we do not read that there was a
Bishops Power, nor Ecclesiastical nor Spiritual Courts; neither Nebuchadnezzar
the great; neither Cyrus, unto whom the Lord said, Thou art mine Anointed,
whose right hand I have upholden to subdue Nations, I will loose the Loins of
Kings, to open before thee the Leaved Gates; I will give thee the Treasures of
darkness, and the hidden Riches of secret places, that thou may know, that I
the Lord which calls thee by thy name, am the God of Israel, Isa. 45. Neither
Darius, who set over his Kingdom one hundred and thirty Princes, and over these
were three Presidents, of whom Daniel was the first; and by the voice and word
of Daniel the man of God, who was greatly beloved of God, these Kingdoms of the
Medes and Persians were swayed and governed by the Word of the Lord through
Daniel, as may be read in the Book of Daniel: but we never heard of Bishops, or
Spiritual Courts among them.

It is true, we read, that among the Jews there was Highpriests, and
Chief-Priests that ruled and governed amongst them, when their Kings were
Heathens, as Herod, and Tiberius Caesar. In the days of Herod Christ was born,
who sent his wise men to seek for the Child, and made all the young Children be
killed, from two years old and under; and the Angel made Jesus be carried into
Egypt, till Herod was dead. Then there was Herod the Tetrarch of Galilee, which
beheaded John Baptist; this Herod and Pilate were made Friends the same day
that Christ was under Examination, for before they had been at enmity: And
Ananias and Caiaphas, being high Priests, they sought how they might kill
Jesus; And the Band of Soldiers led Jesus away to Annas first, for he was
Father-in-law to Caiaphas, which was the high Priest the same year: Now
Caiaphas was he which gave counsel to the Jews, that it was expedient that one
man should die for the people, John 18. 13, 14. And when Pilate had called
together the chief Priests, and the Rulers, and said unto them, Ye brought this
man unto me as one that perverted the people, and I have examined him before
you, and have found no fault in him, nor yet Herod; and they accused him
vehemently, Luke 23. Matthew. 26.

The chief Priests and Elders sought false witness against Jesus to put him to
death, and when they found false Witnesses that witnessed against him, Jesus
said nothing: And the high Priest arose, and said, Answerest thou nothing? And
he said, I adjure thee by the Living God that thou tell us if thou be the
Christ: Jesus said unto him, Thou have said it: Hereafter ye shall see the Son
of Man sitting at the right hand of Power. Then the high Priest rent his
clothes, and said, He has spoken Blasphemy. And when the morning was come, all
the chief Priests and Elders took counsel to put him to death; and when they
had led him away, they delivered him to Pontius Pilate, Matthew. 27. Mark 15. And
when Pilate asked of them, Will ye that I release unto you the King of the
Jews? But the chief Priests moved the people, that he should rather release
Barabbas. And Pilate said, What will ye then that I shall do unto him whom ye
call the King of the Jews? and they cried, Crucify him, crucify him.

Now Ananias sent him bound unto Caiaphas, the high Priest, and he asked him of
his Disciples, and of his Doctrine; Jesus answered, Why ask thou me? ask
them that heard me: And one of the Officers struck Jesus with the palm of his
hand, and said, Answerest thou the high Priest so? And Jesus said, If I have
spoken evil, bear witness of the evil; if well, Why smitest thou me?

Then they led Jesus from Caiaphas the high Priest, into the Hall of Judgment,
and Pilate went unto them, and said, Take ye him, and judge him according to
your Law: the Jews therefore said unto him, It is not lawful for us to put a
man to death, John 18. But they looked upon it lawful to accuse him falsely,
and vehemently to accuse him, and to cry out, Crucify him, crucify him, and
to desire Barrabbas, that was found in an Insurrection, and a Murderer, to be
released, and to cry, that Christ the Lamb of God might be Crucified; also
after the same manner did they with the Apostles.

And those Scribes and Elders that caught Stephen and brought him, and set up
False Witnesses to witness against him, the high Priest with the Council said,
Are these things so? And after Stephen opened his mouth, and spoke unto them,
and opened through the Scriptures; and when they heard those things that
Stephen spoke from the Scriptures, They gnashed on him with their teeth, Acts 7.

And as Peter and John spoke unto the people, the Priests and Captain of the
Temple, and the Sadduces came upon them; and then Ananias the high Priest, and
Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the Kindred of the
high Priest, were gathered together to take counsel against Peter and John,
after they had wrought the Miracle upon the Impotent man; and when they could
find nothing against them, they threatened them, and let them go, Acts 4.

And what ado made they with Paul, for all he was one of their own Nation, and
made his Defense before them; and called them Men, and Brethren, and Fathers,
and spoke unto them in the Hebrew Tongue, and told them how the Lord had
converted him, As also the high Priests does bear me witness, and all the
Elders, from whom also I received Letters unto the Brethren, and went to
Damascus, to bring them which were there in Prison to Jerusalem to be punished,
Acts 22.

Paul that had been one of their Servants, and had acted in the same way with
them in Persecution, after he was converted to the Christian Faith, he received
no more favor from them than others; for afterward when Paul was brought
before the Council to be Examined, wherefore he was so accused; And Paul
earnestly beholding the Council, said, Men and Brethren, I have lived in all
good conscience before God until this day: And the high Priest Ananias
commanded them that stood by him, to smite him on the mouth: Then said Paul,
God shall smite thee, thou whited wall; and they that stood by, said, Revilest
thou Gods high Priest? Then said Paul, I wist not Brethren, that he was the
high Priest; for it is written, Thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy
People. Paul acknowledged, and confessed his Transgression of that Law, where
it is said, Thou shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy People,
Exodus 22. 28. But David says, I have said ye are Gods, but ye shall die like
men: And so it appears by this high Priest; for he was far from executing of
his duty, where he sat to judge according to the Law, when he commanded to
smite the Prisoner contrary to the Law, and afterward gave consent to the
People to bind themselves in an Oath to murder Paul, but were prevented by the
chief Chaptain and Soldiers, Acts 23.

And after five days Ananias the high Priest, descended with the Elders, who
informed the Governor against Paul, and said, We have found this man a
pestilent fellow, a mover of sedition among the Jews, throughout the whole
world, a Ringleader of the Sect of the Nazarens, with much more. And when
Felix heard their Accusations of him, he deferred the examination of him, Acts
24.

Likewise, when Festus was come into the Province, then the high Priest, and
the chief of the Jews informed him also against Paul, and desired favor
against him, and besought him, that he would send for him to Jerusalem, lying
in wait by the way to kill him: but Festus answered, That Paul should be kept
at Cesarea, Acts 25.

By these places, with much more that the Scripture makes mention of, we may
see the cruelty, and bloody-mindedness of ^hese high Priests, that were then
Rulers of the Nation of the People of the Jews, under the Roman Monarchy: for
they were always worse in cruelty against the Christians then the Heathens; and
joined with the Kings, and incensed them what they could against the
Christians, as is manifested; for they joined with that Herod and Pilate that
crucified Christ.

Also when King Herod heard that Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judah, he
gathered the chief Priests, and all the Scribes of the People together, to
demand of them where he was to be born, intending to kill him, but the Lord
prevented him, who in his Rage slew all the young children.

Also Herod the King that killed James the Brother of John with the Sword; and
because that he saw it pleased the Jews; he proceeded further, and took Peter
and cast him into Prison; and when Prayer was made to the Lord for Peter, and
that the Lord delivered him out of Prison, there was no small stir among the
Soldiers, what was become of Peter: And when Herod had sought him, but found
him not, he commanded that the Keepers of the Pison should be put to death. But
when this Herod was arrayed in Royal Apparel upon his Throne, the Lord smote
him by his Angel, immediately he was eaten of worms, and gave up the ghost,
Acts 12.

This with much more might be instanced concerning this Generation of men, of
their cruelty and oppression, joining with the Heathen Monarchs in the
crucifying and persecuting of Christ Jesus, and all his holy Apostles, and all
the Primitive Christians: But we never heard of any Bishops, neither in the
time of the Kings of Israel, nor in all the four Manarchies before Christ's
time; neither in the days of the Apostles, nor in the Primitive times, there
was no such Bishops as had Courts, and Laws, to make people to Swear, and to
imprison them if they would not; such, as there could not be Kings without
there were Bishops.

For Christ Jesus, nor none of his Apostles, sought not after, neither looked
after Earthly Kingdoms; for he said, His Kingdom was not of this World, neither
could his Servants fight. And the Apostles said, The Weapons of their warfare,
were not Carnal, but Spiritual; neither did they wrestle with Flesh and Blood,
but with Spiritual Wickednesses.

And so they that are true Christians, and of the same Faith and Principle that
Christ Jesus was of, they desire not Caesar's due nor right, but give unto
Caesar that which bears his own Image, the outward earthly Image, and the money
that bears the Superscription of Caesar's Prerogative, this they can give unto
Caesar, and not wrong any man of his outward Propriety or Prerogative; for they
seek not after earthly Crowns nor Inheritances, but after heavenly. The Apostle
when he wrote to Timothy, exhorted, That first of all Supplications, Prayers,
and Intercessions, might be made for all men; for Kings, and all that are in
Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable Life, in all godliness and
honesty; for this is good and acceptable to God, who would have all men to be
saved.

This he wrote to him that was a Bishop, which if any man desires the Office
of, he desires a good work, for it is no more then to be an Overseer of the
Church of Christ, and not to look after carnal means, or carnal maintenance,
neither to be a burden or an oppression to the People, nor to be upholden by
men, or the Powers of the Earth; such Bishops and Overseers of the Church of
God as Timothy and Titus were, and all those holy Apostles the Scriptures
mention, we should be glad of, Such as are lovers of Hospitality, lovers of
Good Men, not given to Wine, not greedy of filthy Lucre, but Patient; not a
Brawler, not Covetous; for the Apostle says, The love of Money is the Root of
all Evil; which, while some have coveted after, they have erred from the Faith,
and pierced themselves through with many sorrows. Such things as these the
Apostle exhorted Timothy and Titus from, which many of the Bishops in our
days, and for the last twelve hundred years and upwards, it is to be feared,
they are fallen into Demas his way, and trodden his paths, and have forsaken
the Apostles Spirit, Doctrine and Principle, and have embraced this present
world; and here has been the misery of these Ages last past: But this is that
which Christ Jesus foresaw, which he mentions, Matthew. 24, and 25 Chap. As also
the Apostle Paul foresaw, when he told them, That grievous Wolves should enter
into the Church, not sparing the flock, Acts 20. 29. 2 Pet. 1. 2. 1 John 2. 18.
All these had a true sight of the days of darkness, and night of Apostasy that
was coming on.

As also the Revelation of Jesus Christ, which he sent and signified by his
Angel to his servant John; he saw the Beast rise out of the Sea, and out of the
Earth, and power was given to him for forty and two months-(and this power
began at Rome, which is the foundation of the Ecclesiastical and Spiritual
Power; and here was the first Bishop that was called, his Holiness, and his
Children are called as high as they can; but Timothy and Titus were not such)
who made war with the Saints, and overcame them, and power was given unto him
over all Tongues, Kindreds and Nations, and his power was to endure above
twelve hundred years. And one of the seven Angels, that had the seven vials,
showed him the judgment of the great Whore, with whom the Kings of the earth
had committed fornication, and the Inhabitants of the earth had made themselves
drunk with the wine of her fornication. And he saw a Woman sit upon a
scarlet-colored Beast, full of names of Blasphemy, having seven Heads, and
ten Horns, which Beast he had seen before, Chap. 13. And when John marvelled,
the Angel said unto him, Wherefore do thou marvel? I will tell thee the
Mystery of the Woman, and of the Beast that carries her, Chap. 17. And so, He
that has wisdom may read, and count the number of the Beast, for it is 666.

And this Proverb which has continued so long, No Bishop, no King, has risen
out of the Bottomless-pit, and must go into Perdition; for there were no such
Bishops in the times of the four Monarchies before Christ, neither among the
Primitive Christians, that had Ecclesiastical Courts, and tossed poor people up
and down, and caused them to swear, contrary to Christ's command, which they
have nothing to do with, wrangling among them for getting of money. The Apostle
says, They should be no Brawlers.

And now this usurping power is gotten up under the Profession of Christianity,
and because it is upholden by Monarchial Power, it has hatched a Cockatrice
into the minds of People, No Bishop, no King: but this we can say, That Kings
have reigned by the Power of the Lord God, and may reign as long as it pleases
him; and God sent his Prophet to anoint a King.

So can we say that this usurping Power has been always against and contrary
to the power of the Lord God, and has ever been the Oppressor of the Innocent
and the Just, and Gods Heritage and People have always been Sufferers in all
Ages by this Power, and this generation of Priests has been the cause of all
the Saints sufferings; they stoned the Prophets, and slew them before Christ,
and ye may see how they used Christ and his Apostles. And now in the Apostasy,
O the Inquisitions, the Racks, and the Tortures, the Courts, Citations, and
Imprisonments that have been, and are continually imposed upon poor People: so
that the very misery of Nations comes by these Usurpers (and their
Superiority, in having Power) and Oppressors, and Layers on of Burdens,
grievous to be born, that upon this Generation might come, all the righteous
blood shed upon the Earth, from Abel, Mat. 23. 35, 36.

But the Lord is coming to Redeem his People, and his Flock out of their
covetous mouths, and bloody hands; and the Lord has sent the Spirit of his
Son into the hearts of his People, and his Light is risen in their Consciences,
and the Lord will Teach them all Himself, and set them free from the bondage
and slavery of these Taskmasters; and he has committed all Power in Heaven and
Earth unto his Son, and he has all Times and Seasons in his hands; and it is
good for Kings that are set up by the Lord, to fear him, that by his Power they
may stand; and not uphold that power that God will throw down; for he is come
to Reign, and Teach his People himself. Read Isa. 21.

THE END.

